

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number: IA/35017/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision Promulgated          |
|On 10 January 2018                           |On 11 January 2018            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SOUTHERN

                                   Between

                               AMANPREET HEER
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z. Awan, solicitor, of Mayfair Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                                  DECISION

   1. The appellant, who is a  citizen  of  India,  arrived  in  the  United
      Kingdom in December 2010 and was admitted as the spouse of  a  British
      citizen with leave to remain that was subsequently  extended  until  6
      February 2015. On the last day of that leave he  made  an  application
      for indefinite leave to remain as the victim of domestic violence.


   2. That application was refused by a decision of the respondent made on 1
      December 2015. The respondent considered the requirements of paragraph
      289A(i)-(iii)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  but  concluded  that   the
      appellant had not met those requirements. The  respondent  noted  that
      although the appellant had  said  that  his  wife  had  made  a  false
      complaint about him to the police, it was the appellant, and  not  his
      wife, who had accepted  a  police  caution,  which  indicated  he  had
      admitted an offence and had agreed to be cautioned.  In  none  of  the
      evidence submitted,  which  included  medical  notes,  was  there  any
      mention of the appellant being a  victim  of  domestic  violence.  The
      respondent concluded:


           "In the absence of independent corroborative evidence,  such  as
           police reports, medical reports, MARAC letters or  letters  from
           domestic violence  organisations  confirming  that  you  were  a
           victim of domestic  violence,  it  is  not  accepted  that  your
           relationship was caused to permanently break down as a result of
           domestic violence.


           As such, your application does  not  meet  the  requirements  of
           Paragraph 289(iii) of the immigration rules."


   3. The appellant's appeal came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Burnett
      at a hearing at Taylor House on 16 March 2017.


   4. Having heard oral evidence from the appellant and his  father-in  law,
      the judge made clear findings of fact. He was satisfied that there had
      been no false allegation made by the appellant's wife about him to the
      police. On the contrary,  the  appellant  accepted  in  oral  evidence
      before the First-tier Tribunal that"he had seen his wife kiss  another
      person and he went out of control". He accepted that  he  had  slapped
      her which showed, said the judge, that he had been violent towards his
      estranged wife which explained why he had  been  asked  by  police  to
      accept a caution. Indeed, as can be seen from the copy of that  police
      caution reproduced at page 409 of appellant's  bundle,  the  appellant
      signed  a  declaration  admitting  having  committed  the  offence  of
      assaulting his wife by beating her on 11 April 2012, contrary  to  s39
      Criminal Justice Act 1088


   5. There was reference in the documentary evidence to police reports  but
      none that disclosed anything to support the appellant's claim to  have
      been a victim of domestic violence. The judge  noted  that  the  first
      reference in the appellant's medical notes to his asserted  experience
      of being a victim of domestic violence was in December 2015, after the
      date of the decision under challenge in these proceedings.  The  judge
      rejected as untrue the explanation advanced by the appellant for this,
      saying:


           "The appellant was asked why the first mention of  his  domestic
           violence problems in his medical records was not until  December
           2015. The appellant stated he had told  his  GP  everything  and
           when he had started on his  medication.  I  do  not  accept  the
           appellant's explanations. Given the issue of  domestic  violence
           is recorded in the medical records in December  2015  I  do  not
           accept it would not have been recorded before if  the  appellant
           had stated it to his GP. I should also note  that  it  does  not
           appear in  the  medical  records  until  after  the  appellant's
           application was refused on 1st December 2015."




   6. "Mr R", a witness who was said to be the appellant's  father  in  law,
      gave oral evidence in support of the appellant's claim  to  have  been
      the victim of domestic violence. However, the judge did not find Mr  R
      to be a credible witness and did not  feel  able  to  rely  upon  that
      evidence as being correct. Mr R claimed to have been a  guest  at  the
      appellant's wedding but was unable to confirm his address as stated on
      the wedding invitation card. His knowledge of the appellant's wife was
      scant and there was no evidence to confirm that he was, in  fact,  her
      father. He said he no longer had any contact with her


   7. Having considered  the  totality  of  the  evidence  produced  by  the
      appellant, the judge concluded that the appellant had not  established
      to the standard required that he  had  been  the  victim  of  domestic
      violence. It followed that he had  not  established  his  relationship
      with his wife was caused to permanently break  down  as  a  result  of
      domestic violence and so the appeal was dismissed.


   8. At the commencement of the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Mr  Awan
      made an application pursuant to rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal  Procedure
      (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 because he wished the  Upper  Tribunal  to
      consider evidence that was not before the First-tier Tribunal. Mr Awan
      indicated that the purpose served would be  to  demonstrate  that  the
      judge was wrong to conclude that the police reports he had  notice  of
      did not relate to  allegations  made  by  the  appellant  of  domestic
      violence. This was evidence that the appellant  had  attended  at  the
      counter of a police station on 24 December 2014 to  make  a  complaint
      that he was a victim of domestic violence. As he is recorded  also  to
      have told the police officer who completed this form that his wife had
      moved out of the matrimonial  home,  that  he  believed  she  was  "in
      another relationship" and he did not know where she was now living, it
      is not entirely clear what motivated his decision to go to the  police
      station. This report form records that the appellant  said  both  that
      "she is hitting him" and, later on, that "he has not been assaulted by
      her but is frightened of her because he feels she has used him and  no
      longer wants a relationship.  There  is  evidence  with  the  rule  15
      application of a second visit to the police  station  on  27  December
      2014 when the appellant is recorded as having said that his  wife  had
      been blackmailing him and was seeking money for his new visa.


   9. The report from 27 December 2014 includes this:


           "I have spoken to complainant at length.  He  moved  to  England
           from India four years ago and got married. His  wife  has  moved
           out of the matrimonial home 4 months ago and male party believes
           she is in a new relationship. There are cultural differences and
           male party believes that his wife should still be with  him  and
           she should be arrested for being  in  another  relationship.....
           The male party wants his estranged wife to sign the  papers  for
           his new visa so he can stay in England she  keeps  putting  this
           off and has stated it is no longer her problem..."


  10.  Also included with this new evidence was a witness statement  by  the
      appellant dated today, 10 January 2018  Rule  15(2A)  demands  that  a
      party wishing to make such  an  application  to  adduce  evidence  not
      considered by the First-tier Tribunal must explain why  that  evidence
      was not before  that  tribunal.  In  his  new  witness  statement  the
      appellant  says  this  is  because  he  had  forgotten  he  had  these
      documents.


  11. It is, frankly, hard to see how this new evidence, if admitted,  would
      assist the appellant since it indicates that his wife had moved out of
      the matrimonial home in or about August 2014 to pursue a  relationship
      with someone else and, as the appellant is clearly  saying  that  when
      this occurred, he  still  wanted  the  marriage  to  continue,  it  is
      impossible  to  see  how  that  supports  his   assertion   that   the
      relationship broke down  permanently  because  of  domestic  violence,
      rather than because his wife had chosen to form  a  relationship  with
      someone else.  However, as Ms Fijiwala (and indeed the  Tribunal)  had
      no advance notice of this application and there was no good reason why
      the evidence could not  have  been  submitted  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, I refused to admit it, making clear  that  the  question  of
      whether the judge had made an error of law material to the outcome  of
      this appeal would be resolved in the basis of the evidence the parties
      had chosen to put before him.


  12. The grounds upon which the appellant sought and was granted permission
      to appeal complain that the judge fell into error in focussing on  the
      absence of evidence of physical abuse having  been  visited  upon  the
      appellant:


           "It is important to note that the appellant's claim  has  always
           been  of  controlling  and  psychologically  abusive  behaviour,
           taking  advantage  of  his  vulnerable  immigration  status  and
           demanding money frim him. The medical notes  prior  to  December
           2015 are consistent with this account."


      In this regard, the grounds point to references in the  medical  notes
      to the fact that the appellant has been treated for depression and  to
      the fact that his low mood was due to "wife's  constant  nagging"  and
      "pressure from wife for more  money".  However,  it  is  not  remotely
      arguable that the judge misunderstood how the  case  was  put  by  the
      appellant because, at paragraph 15 of his  determination  he  recorded
      the submission made on the appellant's behalf that there need  not  be
      physical harm in order for there to be domestic violence.




  13. In Mr Awan's submission, the evidence should be accepted  to  disclose
      that the marriage broke down because of the unwarranted  demands  made
      by the appellant's wife for money, giving rise  to  the  "relationship
      difficulties" that led to the appellant's  depression,  for  which  he
      sought treatment from his GP. As this involved  the  appellant's  wife
      exploiting his vulnerability as a person who needed her cooperation to
      secure a further grant of leave to remain, that amounted  to  domestic
      violence sufficient to satisfy the  requirements  of  the  immigration
      rules.


  14. In my judgment the evidence  produced  comes  nowhere  even  close  to
      establishing that the appellant was the victim  of  domestic  violence
      and the judge was entitled to conclude  that  this  evidence  did  not
      establish what was required by the applicable rule.  It  may  well  be
      that the appellant felt depressed following a breakdown  of  marriage,
      especially as  his  immigration  status  depended  upon  the  marriage
      continuing. But that does not establish that the marriage  broke  down
      because of domestic violence. Further, and in any  event,  it  is  the
      appellant's own evidence, as set out in his  witness  statement,  that
      since December 2013 he and his wife slept in separate bedrooms and  he
      suspected that she was being unfaithful to him. From February 2014 she
      began to spend two days a week away from home, explaining that she was
      pursuing a dental course in London, but  the  appellant  had  no  idea
      where or with whom she was staying when away from home.  At  paragraph
      18 of  his  statement  the  appellant  explained  how  he  discovered,
      sometime after June 2014 that "she was going out with a guy"  and  she
      had made clear that she no longer wished to live with  the  appellant.
      It is clear from this that  whatever  relationship  may  have  existed
      previously, by then it  had  broken  down,  not  because  of  domestic
      violence but because the appellant's  wife  had  no  interest  in  the
      relationship continuing.


  15. The grounds assert next that the judge failed adequately  to  consider
      evidence in the form of text messages reproduced  in  the  appellant's
      bundle. But the judge  did  have  regard  to  this  evidence  and  was
      entitled to find that they undermined rather than supported  the  case
      being advanced by the appellant. The judge made clear what he made  of
      this evidence and why:


           "I have  considered  the  text  messages  contained  within  the
           bundles of documents but  I  give  those  little  weight  in  my
           assessment.  The  majority  of  the  messages  seem  polite  and
           cordial. The appellant responds at times stating he  would  like
           to buy things for the children and is sending the money  to  the
           recipient of the text as a result. In  December  2014  the  text
           states he wished his estranged wife a happy Diwali and hoped she
           was OK. She responded stating the  same  to  him.  There  are  a
           number where the appellant  contacts  the  person  in  the  text
           message and offers money, rather than a demand  for  money.  The
           messages are odd when one reads the totality of them. In one the
           appellant states to her that he is leaving her house and  wishes
           to return her keys. She asks him  why  as  she  thought  he  was
           waiting for his visa. I do not consider that they  provide  much
           support for the appellant's claims that  he  is  the  victim  of
           domestic violence."


  16. Mr Awan submitted that it was not reasonably  open  to  the  judge  to
      characterise the text messages as "polite and cordial" but  a  perusal
      of the messages  makes  such  a  submission  untenable.  That  was  an
      assessment plainly open on the evidence and is one that  discloses  no
      error on the part of the judge.


  17. The next ground complains that the judge  erred  in  failing  to  give
      weight to the evidence of Mr R but, for the reasons given  above,  the
      judge was plainly entitled to reach the conclusion  he  did  and  this
      ground is no more than an  expression  of  disagreement  with  clearly
      reasoned findings of fact legitimately  made  by  the  judge.  In  any
      event, as pointed out by Ms Fijiwala in her submissions, Mr R had only
      scant  knowledge  of  the  appellant's  wife,  despite  the   asserted
      relationship, and had not been in any contact with her for some time.


  18. Next, the grounds assert that the judge should have accepted the  oral
      and written evidence of the appellant and that  the  judge  fell  into
      legal error in rejecting that evidence on the basis that corroborating
      evidence was absent. But the judge did not dismiss the appeal  because
      corroborating evidence was absent. That is to  misrepresent  what  the
      judge has said. The judge has provided clear and  sustainable  reasons
      for finding wanting the evidence of the appellant and his witness  and
      in so doing he made clear that he could find nothing in  the  evidence
      as a whole that might provide support for the appellant's  account  of
      being a victim of domestic violence. Mr Awan's submission was that the
      judge erred in not properly considering the appellant's oral evidence.
      That  is  not  arguable  either.  Under  a   heading   "Findings   and
      conclusions" at paragraph 18 of the determination the judge said:


           "I start with a consideration of the appellant's evidence. "


      And set out a discussion of that evidence between paragraphs  18-  24,
      from which it is unambiguously clear that the judge did precisely that
      which the grounds complain he did not.


  19.  Therefore,  it  is  entirely  clear  that  the  judge  gave   careful
      consideration to all of the evidence the parties chose to  put  before
      him.


  20. For all of these reasons I am entirely satisfied that the  judge  made
      no error of law and that his finding of fact, that the  appellant  had
      not established  that  his  relationship  with  his  wife  was  caused
      permanently to break down as a result of domestic violence, is  simply
      unassailable.


Summary of decision:

      First-tier Tribunal Judge Burnett made no material error  of  law  and
      his decision shall stand.


      The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed


                               Signed        [pic]


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                               Date: 10 January 2018





