
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/35963/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10th June 2014                               |On 3rd July 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH

                                   Between

                         nadren mohammed daod khames
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, who is a citizen of Sudan, sought  from  the  Respondent
    the issue of a permanent residence card as confirmation of a  right  to
    reside in the United Kingdom.  She did so as  the  spouse  of  Mohammed
    Ismail ("the Sponsor") a Dutch national.  The application  was  refused
    as it was not accepted that the  Sponsor  had  resided  in  the  United
    Kingdom in accordance with the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 as amended for a continuous period of five years.   It
    was noted that the Sponsor had been a student from 24th September  2007
    until 10th June 2011 but had failed to provide  evidence  that  he  had
    comprehensive sickness insurance during that period.  A letter had been
    provided, in a scanned form, that he had been working  for  a  company,
    Templine, from February 2005, the letter being dated 14th December 2005
    but that was held not to  be  acceptable  evidence  as  documents  were
    required to be originals.  It was also stated that the Sponsor had been
    employed following university but there had been  no  evidence  of  his
    exercising treaty rights from June 2011 until May  2012.   Applications
    in respect of the Appellant's two children were refused  in  line  with
    her own.

 2. The Appellant appealed, requesting that the appeal  be  dealt  with  on
    papers.  It was determined on that basis by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  David  Charles  Clapham   SSC,   that   determination   being
    promulgated on 21st January 2014.  Judge Clapham found that  there  was
    no evidence that the Sponsor had been in  possession  of  comprehensive
    medical or sickness insurance and noted that the letter  from  Templine
    had not been an original.  He went on to comment about  the  subsequent
    employment record.  The appeal was dismissed.

 3. The Appellant  applied  for  permission  to  appeal  to  this  Tribunal
    enclosing a copy of an NHS card.  It was  said  that  the  letter  from
    Templine initially sent had been an original.  It was  also  said  that
    the Sponsor had worked from 1st March 2011.  Permission  was  initially
    refused but was then renewed through solicitors to the Upper  Tribunal.
    In the revised application it was said that the  judge  had  materially
    erred by way of a misdirection as at the  relevant  time  comprehensive
    sickness cover was not required for a student, being introduced only on
    20th June 2011.  The Sponsor was entitled to  rely  on  any  period  of
    continuous five years' residence and it was said that the  Sponsor  had
    accrued permanent  residence  in  February  2010,  which  he  had  then
    retained.

 4. Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt on 9th April  2014.
    She commented that it was correct that  the  requirement  for  sickness
    insurance for students had only been  introduced  in  June  2011.   The
    Respondent accepted that the Sponsor had been a student  from  2007  to
    June 2011 and there were some pay slips  from  another  employer.   The
    Respondent replied to that grant with a response under  Upper  Tribunal
    Procedure Rule 24.

 5. The Appellant attended the hearing in person.  She produced  a  letter,
    which she said her solicitors had helped her to  draft,  requesting  an
    adjournment.  She said that she  wanted  the  opportunity  to  instruct
    solicitors to represent her.  Asked who she would instruct she said her
    original solicitors, Genesis Law Associates.  It was pointed out to her
    that the same firm had written to the Tribunal on the day prior to  the
    hearing stating that they were no longer  acting  and  that  she  would
    attend in person. I was aware that notice of the hearing had been  sent
    out both to the Appellant and to her then representatives over a  month
    previously, on 2nd May  2014  and  there  had  been  adequate  time  to
    instruct them.  I considered the application for an adjournment but  in
    the circumstances could see no prospect of her  being  represented  nor
    any benefit for  the  Appellant  in  the  matter  being  adjourned.   I
    considered that the matter could be justly disposed of and assisted the
    Appellant to put her case as best she could.

 6. Mr Smart for his part accepted that comprehensive medical insurance had
    not in fact been required as  claimed  in  the  refusal  letter  for  a
    student until June 2011.  However he said that there was no evidence as
    to when the Sponsor had become an EEA national and there were  gaps  in
    the evidence as to when the Sponsor had been working.

 7. I considered the evidence which had been  before  the  judge.   On  the
    assumption that an original letter from Templine had  been  produced  I
    noted that the letter in question, which was dated 14th December  2005,
    merely stated that the Sponsor had been working for that  agency  since
    22nd March 2005.  Subsequent evidence as to the  Sponsor's  employment,
    prior to his becoming a student, was sparse.  There were pay slips from
    Arzoum Limited dated 30th April 2006, 30th June 2006, 31st  July  2006,
    31st May 2007 and 31st July 2007.  They are far from being  continuous.
    No P60 forms were produced and there was no  evidence  in  letter  form
    from that employer.  The Appellant fell far short of establishing  that
    the Sponsor had been exercising treaty  rights  for  the  whole  period
    between February 2005 and the time that he became a student or even  up
    to February or March 2010, which would have been  a  five  year  period
    from when he was said to have  commenced  working.  The  Appellant  had
    opted for a disposal without a hearing and the judge did not  have  the
    benefit of any oral testimony.  There was no evidence before the  judge
    which would have justified him in reaching the conclusion  that  as  at
    the date of application the Sponsor had established a  permanent  right
    of residence by having exercised treaty rights  for  five  years.   Any
    error he made was therefore not material to the outcome.  Mr Smart also
    raised the question of when it was  that  the  Sponsor  obtained  Dutch
    nationality.  The only evidence of that nationality from the  file  was
    an identity card issued in April 2012.  It is open to the Appellant  to
    make a further application if  the  requisite  supporting  material  is
    available.

Decision

 8. The original determination did not contain a material error on a  point
    of law and the appeal is dismissed.





Signed                              Dated:  01 July 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French

