
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/35509/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th August 2016                           |On 23rd August 2016           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Mr Surjit Singh
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:              Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent/Claimant:    No Representative or attendance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The claimant is an Indian national with existing leave to remain  as  a
    Tier 4 (General) Student, which was curtailed on the  grounds  that  he
    had exercised deception in order to gain leave to remain in the  United
    Kingdom.  That decision is set out in a letter dated 28th  August  2004
    and a removal decision was made in accordance with Section  10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  It was made clear within that  notice
    that although he is entitled  to  appeal  against  the  decision  under
    Section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, that
    right of appeal can only be exercised after  he  has  left  the  United
    Kingdom.  This was a decision made before May 2015 .

2.   The claimant sought to appeal against that decision in country  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal, where it seems the issue of jurisdiction  was  not
    considered.

3.   Thus the matter came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Nolan  at  a
    hearing on 19th October 2015.  The claimant was not present, as he  has
    been  classed  as  an  absconder,  but  the  Secretary  of  State   was
    represented.  Curiously the point of jurisdiction was not taken even at
    that point.

4.   Where a human rights claim has been made before the Section  10  notice
    then there exists an in country right of appeal in respect of the human
    rights claim.  That was not, however, this case.  Indeed the  Judge  at
    paragraph 1 of the determination says as follows:-

         "1.  On this basis his  existing  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4
             (General) Student was curtailed  and  he  was  served  with  a
             removal decision under Section 10(1)(b) of the Immigration and
             Asylum Act 1999.  The only decision giving rise to a right  of
             appeal was the Section 10 removal decision, which only gave an
             out of country appeal right.  Mr Singh submitted a  notice  of
             appeal dated 13th September 2014.  Pending  removal  Mr  Singh
             was granted temporary admission with  reporting  restrictions.
             He is recorded as failing to report since 15th September 2014,
             and is thus considered by the respondent to be  an  absconder.
             There is no evidence before the  Tribunal  as  to  Mr  Singh's
             current whereabouts.


         2.   Mr Singh's grounds of appeal were that the decision is not  in
             accordance with the law, and that he did not obtain his  TOEIC
             certificate through deception."

5.   Notwithstanding that the Judge set out the  law  correctly,  the  Judge
    nevertheless  proceeded  to  consider  the   merits   of   the   appeal
    substantively whether or not indeed deception  had  been  used  in  the
    taking of the TOEIC  speaking  test.   In  that  connection  the  Judge
    considered R (on the application of Gazi) v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department (ETS - judicial review) IJR [2015] UKUT 327 (IAC) which
    concludes that the evidence as relied upon by the  Secretary  of  State
    did not establish deception.

6.   It is to be noted that Mr Jones, the Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,
    sought to rely on R (on the application of Mehmood) v SSHD [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 744 which deals with Section 10 removal directions and  the  appeal
    from abroad issue.  It holds that an out of country right of appeal  is
    an adequate remedy in such cases.  That  submission  is  rather  pushed
    aside by the Judge in his consideration of the  substantive  merits  of
    the appeal.

7.   The Secretary of State in her appeal contends as follows:-

         "Any right of appeal granted by Section 82(1) is subject to Section
         92.   Section  92  of  the  2002  Act  identifies  which  types  of
         immigration decision may be appealed by a person while he is  still
         in the United Kingdom.  An immigration decision which falls  within
         Section 82(2)(g) of the 2002 Act is  only  capable  of  an  out  of
         country right of appeal  unless  Section  92(4)  of  the  2002  Act
         applies (where a human rights or asylum claim has been made and not
         certified as unfounded).  Bilal Mahmood v SSHD (continuing duty  to
         reassess) IJR [2014] UKUT 00439 (IAC)."

    As I have indicated this is an appeal solely  against  the  Section  10
    decision.

8.   In the circumstances  I  find  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  wrongly
    accepted jurisdiction to  hear  this  particular  challenge  against  a
    decision, a challenge which should be made  out  of  country.   In  the
    circumstances I find there to be a fundamental error of law  such  that
    the decision is null and void and should be set aside and quashed.

9.   That being so, I proceed to make a  fresh  decision  on  the  facts  as
    presented and conclude that the First-tier Tribunal has no jurisdiction
    to entertain this appeal in country.

Notice of Decision

The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed. There  is  no  jurisdiction
for the First Tier Tribunal to hear this appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed            [pic]                      Date 23 August 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no fee award.

Signed                 [pic]                 Date 23 August 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
