

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/35286/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                  |Decisions and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 19th July 2016                     |On 22nd July 2016                    |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                  G A BLACK

                                   Between

                               MRS FOZIA RANI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim ( Counsel instructed by Malik law )
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood ( Home office presenting officer)


                            DECISION  AND REASONS


1.   This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in the  determination  promulgated  by
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Coleman) ("FTT") on 7th January 2016  in
    which she dismissed the appeal on immigration and human rights grounds.



Background

2.   There was no dispute as to the facts in  this  matter.   The  appellant
    came to the UK in 2011 and in 2013 she married Mr Quadrat, a citizen of
    Pakistan who at that time had been granted  discretionary  leave  until
    14.4.2018.  The respondent refused her application for further leave to
    remain under Appendix FM and paragraph 276 ADE on the grounds that  the
    sponsor was not settled  in  the  UK  and  there  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances. The appellant and the sponsor had a child born  on  [  ]
    2014. The respondent was specifically requested to consider section  55
    of the 2009 Act as to the best interest of the child.  This  was  dealt
    with in a further refusal letter  and  the  respondent  maintained  the
    decision.  The appellant was an overstayer and  the  child  was  not  a
    British citizen nor a "qualified" child.  The sponsor was  not  settled
    in the UK and had not got sole responsibility for the child.  EX.1  did
    not apply.  The family could return to Pakistan  to  live  there  as  a
    family unit.

3.   The FTT considered the appeal on human rights grounds [11],  it  having
    been conceded that the appellant could not meet the Rules [10]. The FTT
    found that there was family life in the UK and that the first two tests
    under Razgar were answered in the affirmative [15].  The  FTT  accepted
    that the sponsor would not return to Pakistan as he wished to remain in
    the UK in order to obtain settlement, and  that  this  amounted  to  an
    interference with the family life.  The FTT considered that the crux of
    the matter was whether or not it would be fair to expect the  appellant
    and her daughter to return to Pakistan while her  husband  remained  in
    the UK until he had obtained  settlement,  and  for  them  to  make  an
    application  out  of  country  [16].   The  FTT  concluded   that   the
    interference was proportionate in accordance with the  public  interest
    in immigration control.  The FTT took into account  that  the  marriage
    took place when the parties were in a precarious position, and chose to
    have a child.  They both had family living in Pakistan and there was no
    reason why they could not obtain employment there [17].  There  was  no
    evidence that the appellant  met  the  financial  requirements  of  the
    Rules.  There were no real obstacles to family life  in  Pakistan.  The
    sponsor was not  settled in the UK and that it was a choice on his part
    as to whether or not he returned to Pakistan with his wife and child.

4.   The appellant argued in grounds of application for permission that  the
    FTT erred in law by failing to consider section 55 as to where the best
    interest of the child lie in the proportionality assessment.

5.   Permission was granted by FTJ  Hollingworth  on  the  grounds  that  no
    specific reference was made to  section  55  and  whilst  the  FTT  did
    consider whether or not it was fair to expect the family to  return  to
    Pakistan, this was not the same  as  a  consideration  of   section  55
    obligations.



Submissions

6.   Mr Karim expanded on the grounds and argued   that  the  FTT  erred  in
    failing to consider the impact on the child of a separation from either
    parent.   It  had  already  bee  accepted  that   it   would   not   be
    disproportionate to remove the sponsor in the light  of  his  grant  of
    discretionary leave.  He could apply for ILR and his child  would  then
    be  able  to  register  as  British  citizen.   There   had   been   no
    consideration of the circumstances in which  discretionary  leave  (DL)
    had been granted.  The  FTT  failed  to  consider  section  117B  which
    focused on unlawful status rather  than  precarious  status  re  family
    life. The test where a  child  is  concerned  is  reasonableness.   The
    failure to consider section 55 was a material error and  there  was  no
    consideration of any substance of the position of the child.

7.   Ms Isherwood advised that the sponsor had claimed asylum in 2000  which
    was refused in 2002 and that he appeared to  have been granted DL under
    the legacy provisions.   She submitted that there was no material error
    of law.  She relied on EV (Phillipines) v SSHD[2014] EWCA Civ  874  and
    AJ(India)[2011] EWCA Civ 1191. It was a  choice  on  the  part  of  the
    sponsor  not  to  leave  the  UK.   The  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    Immigration Rules.  It was accepted that no specific reference was made
    to section 55 but the FTT had  considered  it  in  substance  at  [3/4,
    8,10,12,14,15,16-18].  There was no evidence adduced to  show  how  the
    separation would impact on the child.


Discussion and conclusion

8.   I find that there was no material error  of  law  by  the  FTT.   I  am
    satisfied that taken as a whole the FTT did consider the welfare of the
    child under section 55 and that there was  specific  reference  to  the
    same at [12] in recording the submissions made by the Respondent and by
    the appellant [13]. The Respondent submitted that  there  would  be  no
    breach because the family would return as a unit and that the child was
    young enough to adapt to life in Pakistan and  to  integrate  with  the
    help of her parents. The FTT was aware that the interests of the  child
    had been specifically raised for reconsideration by the Respondent  [4]
    and set out the reasons for refusal (ii) in that context.  The FTT  was
    aware that the child was 2 years  of  age  and  in  the  decision   her
    interests were considered in alongside those of the appellant.  The FTT
    engaged in a full assessment of the family circumstances  both  in  the
    UK and in  Pakistan  and  found  no  evidence  that  would  render  the
    interference disproportionate.

9.   The FTT made it clear that the main issue was whether or not  it  would
    be fair to expect the appellant and her child  to  return  to  Pakistan
    without the sponsor. The FTT had regard to  the  failure  to  meet  the
    Immigration Rules, the decision to enter into a  marriage  and  have  a
    child at a time when the  parties  immigration  status  was  temporary.
    Essentially,  the  FTT  whilst  sympathetic  to  the  family  situation
    concluded that the issue was ultimately a  matter  of  choice  for  the
    sponsor and that  there were no insurmountable obstacles to family life
    continuing in Pakistan where there were strong ties and  the  potential
    for employment.  There was no evidence adduced before the FTT and  none
    has been relied on before me that would lead me to  conclude  that  the
    best interests of the child lie by remaining with both or one parent(s)
    in the UK.  The decision as to proportionality is  sound  and  properly
    reasoned. The sponsor does not have the required settled status and the
    child is neither a British citizen nor qualifying child.   The  failure
    to consider section 117B is not in my view material to the  outcome  of
    the decision and in  any  event  was  not  raised  in  the  grounds  of
    application.

Decision
10.  There is no material error of law  disclosed  in  the  decision,  which
    shall stand.

     The appellant's appeal is dismissed.


                               NO ANONYMITY ORDER
                               Signed                     Date 21.7.2016


                               GA BLACK
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               NO FEE AWARD

                               Signed                     Date 21.7.2016


                               GA BLACK
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

