
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/35098/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:  Manchester                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 17th August 2015                 |On: 20th August 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                              Mr Waseem Rasheed
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Hashmi, Mamoon Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan  date  of  birth  16  January
       1986. He appeals with permission[1] the decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal (Judge Lloyd-Smith) to dismiss his appeal against a decision
       to refuse to vary his leave and to remove him from the United Kingdom
       pursuant to s47 of the Immigration Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

    2. The matter in issue in the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal arose as
       a result of paragraph 245XH  (ha)  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  This
       stipulates that Tier 4  (General)  Student  migrants  may  not  spend
       longer than five years studying at or above degree level in  the  UK.
       The Appellant in this case had first been granted leave as a  Tier  4
       migrant on the 26th April 2010. He had since then been studying at or
       above degree  level,  having  attracted  various  extensions  to  his
       original visa. His last application to vary his leave had  been  made
       on the 13th August 2014. He requested further leave in order to  take
       a NQF level 7 course, due to commence on the 8th September  2014  and
       to end on the 29th October 2015.  The application was refused on  the
       basis that this would take him over the five years.

    3. On appeal the Appellant relied on a letter dated 5th  September  2014
       from his Tier 4 sponsor, the Manchester College  of  IT  &  Business.
       This stated that in view of the academic progress he had already made
       in earlier  courses,  in  particular  four  modules  studied  at  the
       Manchester City College of Technology, it was agreed that he could be
       put on the "fast track", enabling him to finish  his  course  on  the
       20th April 2015.  It was further submitted  that  the  Appellant  had
       been unable to gain from any of the earlier courses he had undertaken
       because the colleges had all had their licences revoked, and  in  one
       instance the Home Office had sent his passport to the wrong  address,
       resulting in a long delay.

    4. Judge Lloyd-Smith dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

    5. The grounds of appeal are that the determination  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal contains two errors:

          a) there had been  a  failure  to  take  relevant  evidence  into
             account, viz the letter confirming that the Appellant could be
             put on the "fast track" and finish the course early

          b) there was a material unfairness in that the Respondent had  in
             effect lost the Appellant's passport,  resulting  in  a  delay
             which took up one and half years of the Appellant's five years
             of study.

       Error of Law

    6. It is not at all apparent from  the  record  of  proceedings  or  the
       determination itself that the 'fairness' argument was ever put to the
       First-tier Tribunal.  Moreover the matter has never been put  to  the
       Secretary of State. As Ms Hashmi conceded, no  application  has  ever
       been made asking the Secretary of State to  exercise  her  discretion
       not to apply paragraph 245XH (ha). It is difficult  to  see  how  the
       First-tier Tribunal can have been expected  to  remedy,  on  fairness
       grounds,  a refusal to exercise a discretion where  there  had  never
       been a request made that the Respondent depart from the Rules.

    7. As to the suggestion that this determination overlooks the letter  of
       the 5th September 2015 this is entirely  misconceived.  It  is  clear
       from paragraph 8 of the determination that it was in the forefront of
       the Appellant's case and that Judge Lloyd-Smith understood this:

          "... in response the appellant submitted a letter from  Manchester
         College of IT and Business which states  that  given  the  academic
         progress made on his previous course he would  be  "put  onto  fast
         track" for the diploma course and complete the course by  the  20th
         April 2015"

    8. What the First-tier Tribunal does, in its evaluation,  is  to  reject
       the claim that the Appellant could be placed in the "fast  track"  at
       all. Four reasons are given.  First,  the  fact  that  the  CAS  says
       otherwise; second,  had his  academic  progress  been  sufficient  to
       place him on the "fast track" this would have been reflected  in  the
       CAS from the outset; third, the convenient timing of the "fast track"
       course ending shortly before he would  reach  the  five  year  point;
       fourthly because there would appear to be no  justification  for  him
       being able to skip half the level 7 course on the basis of  "academic
       progress":

          "[11]. The CAS that has been supplied  clearly  gives  the  course
         length to be 8th September 2014 until 29th October 2015. I  do  not
         accept that the course can be completed conveniently 2 days  before
         the 5 year period ends.  I  find  this  particularly  difficult  to
         accept given the fact that the appellant, after 4 years of studies,
         has failed to  obtain  a  single  qualification.  The  college,  on
         issuing the CAS would have known of his background and  could  have
         placed him on a fast track then if they deemed it  appropriate.  To
         reduce the length of course by effectively half  is  not  something
         that I accept as being reasonable or likely".

    9. The grounds submit that Judge Lloyd-Smith had failed at paragraph  11
       to apprehend that the college had placed him  in  the  "fast  track".
       There was no such failing. She just did not accept it to be  credible
       that it had.

       Decisions

   10. The determination contains no error of law and it is upheld.


                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                            17th August 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission granted on the 16th February 2015 by First-tier Tribunal
Judge Chohan

