
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-dh-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/35374/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th December 2016                          |On 10 January 2017            |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                                    SSAS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION CONTINUED)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Tobin instructed by S Satha & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014. I continue that order. Unless and until a Tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of   these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
family.   This  direction  applies  both  to  the  Appellant  and   to   the
Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.


 1. The Appellant, a citizen of  Sri  Lanka,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Respondent dated 18th August 2014 to
    refuse  to  grant  him  asylum.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   Herlihy
    dismissed the  appeal.   The  Appellant  now  appeals  with  permission
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Blum on 10th November 2016.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant claims that he is a
    Sri Lankan Tamil and that he had an association with an  uncle  in  the
    LTTE helping him to put up posters and  attending  demonstrations.   He
    claims that the Sri Lankan Army came looking for him  in  October  2005
    and that he was conscripted into the LTTE in  March  2007  by  the  Sri
    Lankan Police but did not participate in any fighting and left in  2007
    after training as he was released due to his size and age.   He  claims
    that he was in hiding from 2007-2009 and that he was taken by the  Army
    to Ramanthan camp where he was held until 2011.  He claims that he  was
    arrested by the army in 2012 and detained for about three or four weeks
    and released upon payment of a bribe by his father.  He claims that  he
    was again arrested in November 2013 and was taken to Colombo and beaten
    and was released from detention in  January  2014  upon  payment  of  a
    bribe.  He says that he stayed with his aunt in Colombo for  one  month
    and left Sri Lanka in February 2014 using his own passport.

 3. The case put for the Appellant in the First-tier Tribunal was that,  as
    a result of a serious psychiatric disorder  including  a  diagnosis  of
    post-traumatic stress disorder, he was not fit to give  oral  evidence.
    The Secretary of State was not represented in the First-tier  Tribunal.
    The First-tier Tribunal Judge heard evidence  from  Dr  Raj  Persaud  a
    Consultant Psychiatrist who  examined  the  Appellant  and  prepared  a
    report dated 24th  February  2015.   The  judge  rejected  the  medical
    evidence including the evidence of Dr Persaud, finding that she was not
    satisfied that the Appellant was not able to instruct his solicitors or
    to have made a  statement  dealing  with  the  inconsistencies  in  his
    account as noted by the Respondent [40].   The  judge  found  that  the
    Appellant's account was not credible and dismissed the appeal.

Error of Law

 4. The Appellant's first Ground of Appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  contends
    that the judge acted procedurally unfairly in failing to  raise  points
    of concern that she had with Counsel so that these could be  addressed.
    It is contended that the judge  drew  an  adverse  inference  from  the
    failure of the Appellant to have submitted any evidence in  support  of
    his claim which he could have obtained from his  family  in  Sri  Lanka
    without putting this to the Appellant's representative.  It was further
    contended that the judge erred in drawing an adverse inference from the
    fact that there was no report or evidence of any scarring  or  injuries
    as a result of torture said to have  been  suffered  by  the  Appellant
    without having put that to Counsel as, had it  been  raised,  it  could
    have been explained that the scarring had faded to such an extent  that
    the report would not have assisted the Tribunal.

 5. The  second  Ground  contends  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    assessment of Dr Persaud's report and the other  medical  evidence  was
    fundamentally flawed  leading  to  conclusions  not  supported  by  the
    evidence.  It is contended that the judge  erred  in  stating  that  Dr
    Persaud had  relied  entirely  on  the  Appellant's  account  from  the
    documents provided whereas in fact in the report Dr Persaud  said  that
    the Appellant was difficult to assess  because  he  was  withdrawn  and
    almost monosyllabic but that he was able to relay the symptoms  through
    the interpreter.  It is contended that the judge erred in relying on  a
    letter from Ms Matheson of 20th September 2015 which  states  that  the
    Appellant was able to  relate  his  story  coherently  yet  in  another
    version  of  that  letter  it  is  contended  that  the  Appellant  was
    distressed and crying most of the time.  It is further  contended  that
    the judge erred in failing to put to Dr Persaud  any  of  the  concerns
    that she had about his evidence.

 6. It is contended in the third Ground that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    held herself out as an expert in considering and  reaching  conclusions
    in relation to the risk of suicide.  Although the experts took the view
    that there was a high risk of suicide it is contended  that  the  judge
    erred in concluding that the Appellant's circumstances in  the  UK  are
    likely to have contributed to this and the judge should have put  these
    issues to Dr Persaud before disregarding the medical evidence.

 7. At the hearing before me Ms Tobin accepted that, although  the  grounds
    refer to two versions of the letter from Ms Matheson, it was not  clear
    that the second version  of  that  letter  was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 8. However Ms Tobin submitted that the First-tier Tribunal fell into error
    in making a factual mistake as to what  evidence  had  been  before  Dr
    Persaud.   She  submitted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal   erred   in
    concluding that there was no basis for Dr Persaud's assertion that  the
    Appellant had made two  suicide  attempts  when  the  judge  failed  to
    consider the possibility that this  must  have  been  disclosed  to  Dr
    Persaud during the assessment.  She submitted that the judge  erred  in
    failing to take account of the fact  that  Dr  Persaud  said  that  the
    Appellant did give an account of the symptoms (paragraph 3 of page 3 of
    the report). She submitted that the judge's conclusion that Dr  Persaud
    did not state that the Appellant told him of his suicide attempts  [36]
    contradicts paragraph 24 where Dr Persaud said in  oral  evidence  that
    the Appellant had mentioned to  him  about  cutting  his  wrists.   She
    submitted that the judge should have put any doubts about  this  to  Dr
    Persaud. Ms Tobin referred to  paragraph  40  and  submitted  that  the
    assessment of Dr Persaud's evidence is central to this case because  it
    is clear that it underscores the totality of the credibility assessment
    made by the judge in this case.  Because  of  the  limited  weight  the
    judge attached to Dr Persaud's report the judge did not accept that the
    Appellant was not able to instruct his solicitors or  to  have  made  a
    statement  dealing  with  the  inconsistencies  pointed  out   by   the
    Respondent.  Ms Tobin submitted that the judge held herself out  as  an
    expert in relation to the Appellant's claimed suicidal ideation instead
    of relying on the medical reports.  She submitted that the judge should
    have raised the issue of the lack of medical evidence  as  to  scarring
    with the Appellant's Counsel.

 9. Ms Isherwood submitted that there is no material error  in  this  case.
    She submitted that the decision is very well reasoned and goes  through
    the detail of the medical evidence.  She submitted that it had not been
    contended in the grounds of  appeal  that  doubts  about  Dr  Persaud's
    evidence should have been put to  him.   She  submitted  that,  in  the
    absence of  the  Secretary  of  State,  the  judge  is  there  to  seek
    clarification and not to pursue elements of the Appellant's case.   She
    referred to paragraphs 20 to 24 which sets out Dr Persaud's evidence at
    the hearing and submitted that it was significant  that  there  was  no
    statement from Counsel who had  appeared  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    clarifying whether the judge did ask any  questions  or  whether  there
    were any issues in relation to Dr Persaud's  evidence.   She  submitted
    that the judge was entitled to take adverse inferences  from  the  fact
    that there was no evidence from the Appellant's family  in  Sri  Lanka.
    She pointed out that Dr Persaud said in his report that  the  Appellant
    had not related his history but had related his symptoms. She submitted
    that it is not clear from the way the  oral  evidence  is  recorded  in
    paragraph 24 when the Appellant is said to have told Dr  Persaud  about
    cutting his wrists, it may have been in  the  most  recent  appointment
    which was just before  the  hearing.   She  submitted  that  the  judge
    reasonably concluded at paragraph 38 that Dr Persaud had  not  examined
    other reasons why the Appellant could be suffering from PTSD  or  major
    depression. She submitted that, although  the  judge  attached  limited
    weight to Dr Persaud's report, she did not ignore that  report  and  it
    was open to the judge to  deal  with  the  report  in  this  way.   She
    submitted that the judge deals  with  Dr  Persaud's  oral  evidence  at
    paragraphs 55 to 57.   She  submitted  that  the  judge  considered  Dr
    Persaud's up-to-date evidence about  the  Appellant's  active  suicidal
    ideation set out at paragraph 57.   Ms  Isherwood  submitted  that  the
    judge's assertion at paragraph 33 in relation to the absence of medical
    evidence of scarring or injuries was a comment rather than  an  adverse
    inference and she pointed out that no weight was given to  this  factor
    elsewhere.  She submitted that the focus of the  evidence  and  of  the
    judge's findings was on the Appellant's mental health and therefore any
    apparent reliance on the absence of evidence in  relation  to  physical
    symptoms was not material.

10. In response Ms Tobin submitted that it was clear from paragraphs 55  to
    57 that the judge's concerns were not put to Dr Persaud.  She submitted
    that there was significant evidence of a lot of  medical  interventions
    and referrals which were central to the assessment of this  appeal  and
    she submitted that the way the judge addressed it is that this evidence
    is flawed and material.

Error of Law

11. At paragraphs 36 and 37 the judge says that she  cannot  determine  how
    the suicide attempts were known to Dr Persaud as they are not mentioned
    in the GP's letter or notes prior to Dr  Persaud's  assessment  of  the
    Appellant.  The judge  mentions  this  matter  a  number  of  times  at
    paragraphs 36, 37 and 39.  I note in the psychiatric report Dr  Persaud
    states at page 3 that the Appellant;

         "...was difficult to assess as he appeared so  psychiatrically  ill
         as  to  me  almost  monosyllabic  during  the  interview.   He  was
         withdrawn, sitting looking down abjectly at his feet and exhibiting
         what is referred to as 'psychomotor retardation' which is  often  a
         symptom  of  extreme  depression  and  involves  hardly  moving  or
         speaking.  I had to refer to the documents provided to  me  by  his
         solicitors for his history in Sri Lanka."

    Dr Persaud went on to say in the next paragraph;

         "He was able to relay the symptoms to me  through  the  interpreter
         but answered questions only after a long delay where he appears  to
         be perplexed  and  wondering  what  to  say  and  he  also  answers
         questions briefly.  I am not convinced that  he  fully  understands
         what is going on around him.  It is my opinion that he is unable to
         assert his wishes or explain his circumstances properly due to  his
         severe mental illness."

12. The judge considered Dr Persaud's report at paragraphs 35-39. I accept,
    as the judge stated at paragraph 37 of the  decision,  that  the  chief
    difficulty with Dr Persaud's report is that it does not clearly set out
    what the Appellant told him.

13. However I take into account the record of Dr Persaud's  oral  evidence.
    Dr Persaud is recorded as having said that he did not  think  that  the
    Appellant had attempted  suicidne  since  he  last  saw  him  [21].  At
    paragraph 23 it is recorded that Dr Persaud said that the Appellant had
    said that he would take his own life if he was returned  to  Sri  Lanka
    and that he "was occupied with ideas about taking his own  life".  Also
    at paragraph 24 where Dr Persaud is recorded as having said; "that  the
    Appellant had mentioned to him about cutting his wrists."  Ms Isherwood
    submitted that  this  could  have  been  told  to  Dr  Persaud  in  his
    consultation with the Appellant prior to the hearing.   However  it  is
    recorded at paragraphs 21 and 56 that Dr Persaud "was asked if  he  was
    aware of when the Appellant's last suicide attempt was and he  said  he
    did not think the Appellant had attempted suicide  since  he  last  saw
    him..."  This indicates that Dr Persaud was not referring to  the  more
    recent consultation with the Appellant at paragraph 24.

14. At paragraph 36 the judge said "Dr Persaud  does  not  state  that  the
    Appellant told him of his suicide attempts as  he  indicates  that  the
    Appellant was monosyllabic". At paragraph 37 the judge  said  that  the
    two suicide attempts referred to by Dr Persaud at page 4 of his  report
    "are not recorded in the GP's notes at all". However,  Dr  Persaud  did
    say in the report that the Appellant  answered  questions  briefly  and
    after a long delay. Further, Dr Persaud said in oral evidence that  the
    Appellant  had  told  him  about  cutting  his  wrists  [24].  In   the
    circumstances I accept  that  it  is  possible  that,  when  the  judge
    expressed concerns about the source of Dr Persaud's  information  about
    the suicide attempts at paragraphs 36, 37 and 39, she may  have  failed
    to take into account that Dr  Persaud  said  in  his  report  that  the
    Appellant answered questions briefly and after  a  long  delay  and  Dr
    Persaud's oral evidence in particular that recorded  at  paragraph  24.
    In my view this is significant because, whilst the  judge  also  raises
    other issues in relation to Dr  Persaud's  report,  it  is  clear  from
    paragraphs 36, 37 and 39 (over half of the consideration of the report)
    that the judge attaches significant weight to this issue.

15. This is central to the determination of the appeal in light of the fact
    that the judge went on to say  that,  because  of  the  limited  weight
    attached to Dr Persaud's report, she did not accept that the  Appellant
    was not able to instruct his solicitors or to  have  made  a  statement
    dealing with the apparent inconsistencies in his account even if he was
    unable to give oral evidence [40]. As a result of this  conclusion  the
    judge went on to make  adverse  credibility  findings  in  relation  to
    matters which go to the very heart of his appeal [41-44].

16. Therefore the judge's error in failing to take account of Dr  Persaud's
    oral evidence led to her  decision  to  attach  limited  weight  to  Dr
    Persaud's report. This decision  led  significant  adverse  credibility
    findings. In these circumstances I find that the judge's error  in  her
    failure to consider Dr Persaud's oral evidence is a material error.

17. In these circumstances I conclude that I must set aside the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal.  Given that the  error  goes  to  the  central
    issue of the assessment of credibility I cannot preserve  the  findings
    of the First-tier Tribunal.

18.  The  parties  were  in  agreement  with  my  view   that,   in   these
    circumstances, the nature and extent of the judicial fact finding which
    is necessary in order for the  decision  to  be  remade  is  such  that
    (having regard to the overriding objective  in  Rule  2  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal Procedure Rules 2008) it is appropriate to remit the  case  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material error  of  law.


I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remit the appeal  to
the First-tier Tribunal to be remade.


Signed                              Date: 9th January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

There is no fee order as no fee has been paid.


Signed                              Date: 9th January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

