
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/35552/2014
     IA/35557/2014
     IA/35561/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          | Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                   |
|On 8 February 2016                            | On 17 March 2016             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                 (1) Mrs Rosiane Conceicao Gomes Albuquerque
                  (2) Mr Rangel Franca Albuquerque Carreira
                     (3) Miss Rafaela Gomes Albuquerque
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr S Canter, instructed by Proficient Immigration
Services
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1.  The  appellants  are  Brazilian  nationals.   The  first  and   second
    appellants  are  husband  and  wife  but  are  separated  although  not
    divorced; such separation occurring in 2010.  The  third  appellant  is
    their minor daughter born in December 2005.  There has been no  request
    for an anonymity direction to being given, and none is made.

 2. The second appellant entered the UK as a visitor on  7  September  1999
    with leave conferred until 7  March  2000.   On  15  February  2002  he
    submitted a student application and leave was thereafter granted  until
    31 December 2002.  He has remained unlawfully  in  the  United  Kingdom
    since that time.

 3. On 19 August 2003 the first appellant entered the UK as a visitor  with
    leave conferred until 19 February 2004. She  was  subsequently  granted
    entry clearance as a visitor on two further occasions, leave last being
    conferred upon her until 31 January 2005.   She  has  remained  in  the
    United Kingdom unlawfully since that date.

 4. On 14 December 2005 the third appellant was born in the United  Kingdom
    and she has resided here ever since.  She is  now  a  British  citizen;
    however, at the time of both the Secretary of State's,  and  First-tier
    Tribunal's, decisions she was not.

 5.  On  7  July  2012  the  second  appellant  submitted  a  human  rights
    application, naming the first  appellant  and  their  daughter  as  his
    dependants. The Secretary of State refused this on the 7  August  2013.
    This decision was the subject of an application  for  judicial  review,
    which was compromised by way of an order sealed on 23 May  2014  -  the
    Secretary of State agreeing to undertake further consideration  of  the
    appellants' claims and to make removal decisions should those claims be
    refused.

 6. On 23 August 2014 the respondent made a decision to remove each of  the
    appellants pursuant to Section 10 of the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    1999.  The appellants brought appeals against  such  decisions  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal and those appeals were heard together by First-tier
    Tribunal judge Henderson on 2 July 2015.  Each  was  dismissed  on  all
    grounds in a combined decision promulgated on  the  28th  of  the  same
    month.

 7. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal judge Baker on 20 November  2015  and  thus  the  matter  came
    before me.

Grounds of Appeal

 8. The grounds of appeal can be summarised thus:

      i) the First-tier Tribunal's consideration  of  whether  it  would  be
         reasonable to require the  third  appellant  to  leave  the  United
         Kingdom is inadequate, illogical and irrational;

     ii) the First-tier Tribunal's conclusion that  the  appellants'  family
         life would be disrupted by their removal is unclear  and  confused;



    iii) the conclusion that the consequences  of  the  appellants'  removal
         would not be of sufficient gravity to engage Article 8 is unlawful,
         in light of the decision of the Court of  Appeal  in  AG  (Eritrea)
         [2007] EWCA Civ 801;

     iv) there is an unlawfully inadequate consideration of  the  assessment
         of whether the respondent could justify interfering with the  third
         appellant's private life.

Discussion

 9. In its decision the FtT correctly set out the matrix of the appellants'
    applications and immigration histories [6  to  9],  a  summary  of  the
    respondent's refusal decision [10 to 16] and the burden and standard of
    proof [21 to 23].  At paragraph 19 the FtT said this:

         "I have also taken into account the following documents  that  have
         been placed before me:

         (a)  the  written  witness  statements  of  the  first  and  second
             appellants (dated 2 July 2015) which  they  each  adopted  as
             their evidence-in-chief;

         (b)  the appellants' bundle of documents including: a  letter  from
             [the third appellant] to the Home  Office  dated  15  December
             2014; letters from [the third appellant's] doctors  (pages  60
             to 75); [the third appellant's] school reports and a reference
             from her  school  (pages  80-108);  letters  from  [the  third
             appellant's] friends (pages 120-126) and various  photographs.
             ...

         (c)  the respondent's bundle of documents including the RFRL  dated
             23 August 2015;

         (d)  the appellants' Counsel's skeleton argument."

10. Paragraphs 24 to 40 of the FtT's decision contain a lengthy  recitation
    of the evidence provided  by  the  appellants.  Thereafter,  under  the
    heading "Conclusions", which  is  to  be  found  immediately  preceding
    paragraph 41 of the decision, the FtT engages in a consideration of the
    application of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules as applied  to
    the first and second appellants claims -  finding  that  neither  could
    make out the requirement in paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) that there would be
    "very significant  obstacles"  to  them  re-integrating  into  life  in
    Brazil.

11.  Turning  its  attention  to  the  third  appellant's  case  under  the
    Immigration Rules, the FtT said this;

         "42.     As regards [the third appellant], the  relevant  paragraph
             is 276ADE(1)(iv) and the key question is whether it 'would not
             be reasonable' to expect her to leave  the  UK.   I  heard  no
             evidence to support this assertion.  [The  third  appellant's]
             health is no longer an issue.  She receives  regular  checkups
             but according to  the  first  appellant's  evidence,  is  only
             occasionally in any pain or  discomfort  and  is  not  on  any
             medication.  She has lived all her life  in  the  UK  and  has
             received all her education here.  However, at the age  of  9�,
             she is still at a sufficiently young age to be able  to  adapt
             to a new education system and way of life, especially with the
             support of her parents.

         43.  It would, of course, be disruptive and no doubt upsetting  for
             [the third appellant] to have to leave her school and  friends
             in  the  UK,  but  this  does  not  mean  that  it  would   be
             unreasonable to require her to do so."

12. In his grounds, and  at  the  hearing,  Mr  Canter  made  much  of  the
    statement in the paragraph 42 of the FtT's decision that it  "heard  no
    evidence to support" of the claim that it would not  be  reasonable  to
    expect the third appellant to leave the United Kingdom.

13. The grounds of appeal seek to identify a  number  of  features  of  the
    appellants'  evidence  which  it  is  said  are  relevant  to  such   a
    consideration, but which were not taken account of by the FtT:

      a) the third appellant has all the traits  and  habits  of  a  British
         girl;

      b) the quality of her spoken Portuguese is poor;

      c) she is not able to read or write in Portuguese;

      d) all of her friends are in the United Kingdom;

      e) the third appellant calls the UK home;

      f) her parents' decisions to remain in the  United  Kingdom  were  not
         taken by her;

      g) the third appellant stressed in her letter that she did not want to
         leave the UK because all of her friends are here.

14. As a consequence Mr Canter maintained that the FtT had erred in law  in
    failing to take into account  material  matters  when  considering  the
    third appellant's appeal  by  reference  to  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

15. I reject this submission for the reasons which follow.

16. If paragraphs 42 and 43 of the FtT's decision  are  read  in  isolation
    there is much to be said for Mr Canter's  submission;  however,  it  is
    trite that a decision of the FtT must be read as a whole. In  my  view,
    if paragraphs 42 and 43 are read in the round and  in  the  context  of
    paragraphs 18, 19 and 24 to 40 of the decision, it is  clear  that  the
    FtT did not leave out  of  account  those  matters  identified  in  the
    grounds. Although poorly expressed, it is plain that  in  paragraph  42
    the FtT was simply articulating its conclusion that the evidence before
    it did not lead to an acceptance of the appellants' claim that it would
    not be reasonable to expect the third appellant  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom.

17. In paragraphs 18 and 19 of its decision the  FtT  set  out  in  general
    terms the evidence taken into account, which included the  evidence  of
    the 'witnesses'. At the outset  of  paragraph  24  the  FtT  finds  the
    appellants  to  be  generally  credible  and  honest.  Thereafter,   in
    paragraph 31, the FtT specifically alludes to the fact that  the  third
    appellant is doing well at school, has many  friends,  is  popular  and
    that she can speak Portuguese but cannot read or  write  the  language.
    Reference is subsequently made, in paragraph 40, to a  letter  authored
    by the third appellant, in which she states that she wishes  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom because she likes being in  a  cold  country  and
    because all of her friends are here.

18. At the hearing Mr Canter also commended to the Tribunal  that  the  FtT
    had  erred  in  its  conclusion  that  the  third  appellant  had   not
    demonstrated that it would be reasonable for her to leave the UK, given
    its finding at paragraph 43 that to  do  so  would  be  disruptive  and
    upsetting for her.  This in reality  is  an  issue  of  weight.  It  my
    conclusion it was  proper  for  the  FtT  to  take  the  aforementioned
    features of the  third  appellant's  circumstances  into  account  when
    coming to its conclusions on the issue of  the  reasonableness  of  her
    moving to Brazil; however, the fact that the FtT did not treat them  as
    determinative in the instant case comes nowhere near being irrational.

19. I find that when read as a whole the FtT's decision in relation on  the
    application of the Immigration Rules displays sufficient  reasoning  to
    enable the appellants to understand why they  were  not  successful  in
    their appeals in this regard. I do not accept that the FtT excluded any
    relevant matters from its considerations under the  Rules  and  I  find
    that its conclusions were open to it on the available evidence.

20. Turning to the second discreet ground relied upon  by  the  appellants,
    which as with the  third  and  fourth  grounds  relates  to  the  FtT's
    consideration of Article 8 ECHR outwith the regime under the Rules.

21. In order to succeed before the FtT in this limb of  their  appeals  the
    appellants were required to demonstrate  the  existence  of  compelling
    circumstances over and above those considered within  the  confines  of
    the Immigration Rules. When considering the  issue  of  proportionality
    the FtT was mandated by  s.117  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 to take account of certain matters referred to therein.



22. In paragraph 46 of its decision the FtT properly directed itself to the
    Razgar 5-stage approach and then said as follows, in paragraphs  47  to
    49:

         "47. On the basis of the evidence in this case, it  is  clear  that
         the appellants do enjoy a family life in  the  UK  which  would  be
         interfered with by their  removal  to  Brazil.   Furthermore,  even
         though the first and second appellants  are  separated,  they  both
         have sufficiently close involvement with the  third  appellant  and
         with  each  other  in  relation  to  matters  affecting  the  third
         appellant, so as to constitute a family unit.

         48. The question as to whether  the  proposed  removal  would  have
         grave consequences so as to engage the operation  Article  8  is  a
         more difficult one.  It could be  argued  that  removal  to  Brazil
         would not affect their current family life, such as they experience
         it.  The third appellant would still live with her mother  and  her
         father would still be able to  visit  her.   I  did  not  hear  any
         evidence as to where in Brazil the first or second appellants might
         live, so I do not know if it  would  be  feasible  for  the  second
         appellant to visit [the third appellant].  However, this point  was
         not raised by the appellants or their Counsel.

         49. On that basis I find that the consequences of removal would not
         have such gravity as to engage Article 8.  However, if I  am  wrong
         on that point, I will  go  on,  in  any  event,  and  consider  the
         remaining questions  in  Razgar  relating  to  the  proportionality
         assessment."

23. It is to paragraph 48 that the  second  ground  specifically  pertains.
    Whilst I see merit in Mr Canter's submission that it  is  difficult  to
    understand the rationale underpinning the  FtT's  conclusion  that  the
    appellants' family life would be interfered with by  their  removal  to
    Brazil, it does not follow that this provides reason to set  aside  the
    FtT's decision. The appellants will be removed together to Brazil  and,
    as the FtT found in paragraph 48, the third appellant would live  there
    with the first appellant and the second appellant would still  be  able
    to visit her - much as the situation is in the  UK.  It  is  worthy  of
    observation that the appellants did not seek to  suggest  the  position
    would be otherwise upon return to Brazil (see paragraph 48 of the FtT's
    decision).

24. It  is  clear  that  in  such  circumstances  there  would  not  be  an
    interference  with  the  appellants'  respective  family  lives  as   a
    consequence of their removal, and thus the FtT erred in  concluding  to
    the contrary. However, this error did not act to the detriment  of  the
    appellants and, consequently, does not lead me to set aside  the  FtT's
    decision.

25. As to  the  third  ground  I  agree  with  Mr  Canter  that  the  FtT's
    conclusion, found in paragraph 49 of its decision, that  Article  8  is
    not engaged is irrational. In AG (Eritrea) v SSHD [2007] EWCA  Civ  801
    Sedley LJ stated:

         "It follows, in our  judgment,  that  while  an  interference  with
         private or family life must be real if  it  is  to  engage  Article
         8(1), the threshold of engagement (the  minimum  level)  is  not  a
         specially high one."

26. In the instant case each of the appellants has built up a private  life
    in the United Kingdom, the third appellant having spent the entirety of
    her life here (that being nine and a half years as of the date  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision).  The extent of that  private  life  is
    such that on the evidence and information accepted  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal there was only one answer  to  the  question  of  whether  the
    consequences of removal would have sufficient gravity to engage Article
    8, that being that it would.

27. Once again, however, I am not persuaded that this is an  error  capable
    of affecting the outcome of the appeal, given that in paragraph  49  of
    its decision the FtT prefaces all that is  said  thereafter,  with  the
    following:

         "On that basis I find that the consequences of  removal  would  not
         have such gravity as to engage Article 8. However, if I am wrong on
         that point, I will go on, in any event, and consider the  remaining
         questions   in   Razgar    relating    to    the    proportionality
         assessment."(emphasis added)

28. Moving on to consider the last of the pleaded grounds,  which  pertains
    to the FtT's consideration of the issue  of  proportionality.  The  FtT
    conclusions on this issue must be viewed in  the  context  of  sections
    117B(4)(a) and (5) of the 2002 Act, which identify that  little  weight
    must be attached to private life established whilst a person is in  the
    UK unlawfully or whilst that person's leave is precarious. This  is  of
    direct application to all of the appellants in the instant appeal,  for
    reasons which are obvious.

29. Nevertheless, following the decision of the President of this  Tribunal
    in Treebhawon and Others (section 117B(6)) [2015]  UKUT  00674  if  the
    requirements of s.117B(6)  of  the  2002  Act  are  met  by  the  adult
    appellants, then it is likely they will succeed in  demonstrating  that
    their removal would be disproportionate.

30. The FtT considered the application of s.117B(6) in paragraphs 53 and 54
    of its decision. It is not in dispute that the  third  appellant  is  a
    qualifying child and, therefore, the operative question is  whether  it
    would be reasonable to expect the third appellant to leave the UK.  The
    FtT approached this issue by reference to its earlier  conclusion  made
    in relation to paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Rules, a conclusion  that
    I have found to be lawful. Such an approach is entirely consistent with
    that commended by the Vice Presidential  panel  in  AM  (Section  117B)
    Malawi [2015] UKUT 02600.

31. Looking at the FtT's consideration and  conclusions  on  the  issue  of
    proportionality as a whole it is clear to me that it had in mind all of
    the relevant features of the third appellant's claim -  including  that
    the best interests of the child must be ascertained and  treated  as  a
    primary consideration. Although  the  grounds  did  not  take  specific
    objection to how the FtT dealt with this latter consideration Mr Canter
    asserted in oral argument that the decision gave an inadequate analysis
    to such matter.  I do not accept this to be the case, if  the  decision
    is read as a whole.  The conclusion at paragraphs 54 therein, i.e. that
    the best interests of the third appellant is to remain with her  mother
    and have access to her father, was open to the First-tier Tribunal;  as
    was the conclusion that it was proportionate to require this to  be  in
    Brazil.

32. Looking at the evidence before, and the factual conclusions of, the FtT
    I find that in all the circumstances of the case it  was  open  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to conclude that removal of these three appellants'
    would be proportionate to the legitimate aim of maintaining immigration
    control. Indeed, I would go as far as to say that on the basis of  such
    factual matrix I would have come to exactly the same conclusion.

33. For all these reasons  I  dismiss  the  appellants'  appeals,  and  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal is to remain standing.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor


