
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/35518/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th October 2015                  |On 12th October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM


                                   Between

                        Mr Jatinbhai Ramanbhai Parekh
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bellara, counsel, instructed on a direct access
basis
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.   This is an appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal K W Brown, who, in a determination  promulgated  on  15th  May
    2015, dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  against  a  decision  by  the
    Secretary of State to refuse to grant him further leave to remain as  a
    Tier 4 Migrant.

2.   The appellant is a citizen  of  India.   His  date  of  birth  is  28th
    December 1981.  He was initially granted permission to enter the United
    Kingdom as a Tier 4 Student in 2009.  Further leave  was  granted,  the
    last period being until 24th June 2014. On 19th June 2014 the appellant
    made an in time application to extend his leave to remain as a  student
    of the Newcastle Academy of Business and Technology.

3.   There is a letter in the bundle from the academy dated 17th June  2014.
     It provides a CAS number and indicates that the CAS, which stands  for
    Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies, was assigned on 17th June 2014.
     The appellant made his application on 19th June 2014.

4.   The decision refusing his application  notes  that  the  CAS  had  been
    withdrawn.  The printed CAS  details  that  are  contained  within  the
    documents  before  me  indicate  that,  as  of  4th  August  2014,  the
    appellant's CAS status was 'withdrawn'.  The same printed  CAS  details
    indicated that the sponsor's licence was fully active.  This  indicates
    to me that, when the CAS  details  were  checked,  presumably  on  28th
    August 2014 when the  decision  was  made,  the  Newcastle  Academy  of
    Business and Technology still had an active sponsorship licence.

5.   The  appellant  did  not  attend  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The judge considered the document before her and noted  that
    the CAS had not been found to be valid and dismissed the appeal on that
    basis.  The judge stated that there was no evidence of any valid  human
    rights claim made before her and so any appeal on human rights  grounds
    failed as well.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal

6.   The appellant,  aggrieved  with  the  decision,  sought  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  Permission  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Osborne on 31st July 2015.  Judge Osborne  proceeded  on
    the basis that after the appellant's application was made  the  licence
    of the college was revoked and the college closed down. In his  grounds
    the appellant claimed that the respondent  should  have  contacted  him
    before making her decision and granted him  60  days  to  find  another
    college.

7.   This approach would have been consistent with the Upper  Tribunal  case
    of Patel (revocation of sponsor licence - fairness) India  [2011]  UKUT
    00211 (IAC).  In that case an applicant had applied for  further  leave
    to remain on the basis of a valid CAS issued by a college that, at  the
    time of the application, had a valid  licence.   At  no  stage  was  Mr
    Patel's CAS withdrawn. Unbeknownst to Mr Patel  his  college's  licence
    was  revoked.   The  Secretary  of  State  did  not  communicate   this
    occurrence to Mr Patel and made a decision refusing his application  on
    the basis that, as his college's licence was revoked, he could not meet
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

8.    The  Upper  Tribunal  held  that  this  was  fundamentally  unfair  in
    circumstances where Mr Patel had no knowledge  or  involvement  in  the
    revocation of his college's sponsorship licence.  Fairness required the
    Secretary of State to give him a period of time to find an  alternative
    educational institution at which to study.

Discussion

9.   Mr Bellara invited  me  to  find  that  the  striking  feature  of  the
    decision in the instant appeal was  that  the  CAS  was  withdrawn.  No
    reasons had been given for the Academy's withdrawal  of  the  CAS.   Mr
    Bellawa suggested that there was very likely to have been a  period  of
    time during which the academy was being investigated and  the  CAS  may
    have been withdrawn on this basis.  I find this submission to be wholly
    speculative.  There are number of possible  reasons  why  the  CAS  was
    withdrawn, we simply do not know.

10.  In the present case the Academy withdrew the licence.  There  has  been
    no unfair conduct on the part of the Secretary of State in  the  manner
    identified in Patel. At the date that the decision was made it  appears
    that the appellant's Academy was still functioning and the printed  CAS
    details indicate that it still had its licence.  There  was  no  reason
    given for the withdrawal of the CAS by the Academy, but  there  was  no
    provision or requirement  for  any  reasons  to  be  given.  I  am  not
    satisfied that the Secretary of State acted  in  an  unfair  manner  in
    noting that the CAS was  withdrawn  an  in  refusing  the  application.
    Given the nature of the points-based system the Secretary of State  had
    no choice but to refuse the application once there was no valid CAS.

11.  I note in the grounds that the appellant has made reference to  Article
    8 and the private life he may have established. Mr Bellara did not make
    any particular submissions in relation to Article 8 and he was entirely
    right to do so.  There  is  nothing  that  was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal,  and  certainly  nothing  before  me,  indicating  that   the
    appellant had established any  kind  of  private  life  that  would  be
    capable of resisting the decision to remove him.

12.  In these circumstances I am entirely satisfied that there has  been  no
    error of law by the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]    08 October 2015
Signed   Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Blum



I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
