

                                       [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/35630/2014
       IA/35631/2014
                                                               IA/35636/2014
                                                               IA/35638/2014
                                                               IA/35639/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |       Determination         |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 11 August 2015                             |       On 14 August 2015     |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                           UPPER TRIBUNAL CHALKLEY
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                   1) I G
                                   2) C G
                                   3) S G
                                   4) C G
                                   5) N G
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Respondent:    Mr Olawanle, Solicitor.
For the Appellant:     Mr Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This matter comes before us for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Froom ("the FTTJ") promulgated  on  30  March  2015,  in
    which he allowed the Appellants' appeals against the refusal  of  their
    applications for leave to remain on human rights grounds. He did so  to
    the limited extent that the decisions were not in accordance  with  the
    law.  The Appellants' applications had been made on 23  November  2012.
    They were refused on 27  November  2013  but  reconsidered  with  fresh
    decisions being made on 27 August 2014.


 2. For ease of reference  and  continuity,  throughout  this  decision  we
    maintain the nomenclature of the parties as Appellants and  Respondent,
    as set out in the FTTJ's decision.

 3. Whilst no anonymity direction was made in the First-tier  Tribunal,  we
    make such a direction now because three of the Appellants are minors.

 4. The Respondent considered  the  human  rights  applications  under  the
    Immigration Rules. In relation to the Third Appellant, who was born  in
    the UK on 28 September 2005, and was therefore over the age of 7 at the
    date of application, the Respondent decided that,  in  accordance  with
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv), "it would not be unreasonable to expect  [her]
    to leave the UK" within the family unit.


 5. It was agreed by the parties' representatives before us that  the  FTTJ
    had  erroneously   applied   the   incorrect   version   of   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv) which did not include that test  of  reasonableness.   We
    agree with this analysis  and  find  that  the  decision  of  the  FTTJ
    contained a material error of law in that he applied the former version
    of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) insofar as the Third Appellant was concerned
    and  allowed the appeals of all the Appellants "to the  limited  extent
    that the decision made is not in accordance with the law and  the  case
    remains outstanding before the respondent to make a lawful decision".

 6. There being no challenge to the Judge's findings of fact as regards the
    circumstances of the Appellants, we invited submissions on whether  the
    issue of reasonableness could be decided by us, particularly given  the
    significant delays with listing in the FTT. Mr Jarvis  agreed  that  it
    would be appropriate for us to do so and Mr Olawanle did not demur.  We
    therefore heard their substantive submissions on this issue.

 7.  Mr  Jarvis  submitted  that  the  reasonableness  test  in   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv) was akin to the proportionality assessment under  Article
    8; the issue was not solely the personal circumstances of the child but
    also the surrounding circumstances of other family members  in  the  UK
    and the country of return.  He referred to the facts found by the  FTTJ
    and particularly  paragraph  23  to  the  effect  that  there  were  no
    significant obstacles to the return of the First and Second  Appellants
    (the  Second  Appellants'  parents).  These  findings  had   not   been
    challenged by the Appellants.  The parents were, he said,  resourceful;
    there were no health or language issues for any of  the  family;  there
    were no nationality issues or any difficulties obtaining documents  for
    return.  He cited EV (Philippines) and Others v SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ
    874. He accepted there would be disruption  to  the  Third  Appellant's
    life but asserted she was relatively young and could adapt. Whilst  the
    poor immigration history of the parents should not be  affixed  to  the
    child, it was a factor to be considered (MK (best interests  of  child)
    India [2011] UKUT 00475 (IAC) ).  Paragraph 22 of the  FTTJ's  decision
    was also relevant in that he had found  the  parents  had  set  out  to
    mislead the Tribunal in the past and had been  unlawfully  employed  in
    the  UK.   There  was  significant  public  interest  in  removal.   He
    reiterated  that  no  blame  could  attach  to  the  children  for  the
    misdemeanours of the parents; however, the  public  interest  was  such
    that the children should be relocated with their parents.  This was not
    a situation where there were, he said,  compelling  circumstances  such
    that the matter should be considered outside the  Rules:  even  if  the
    qualifying child had had leave to remain, the Secretary of State  would
    argue that it was reasonable overall and proportionate for the child to
    be removed to Nigeria within the family unit.


 8. For his part, Mr Olawanle submitted that the Third Appellant  had  been
    born in the UK, had lived here all her life and would reach the age  of
    ten next month.  It had not been part of the FTTJ's  consideration  but
    the child would be entitled to  British  citizenship  next  month.   He
    advocated a common sense approach: it was not reasonable  to  remove  a
    child who would become British the following month.  He  also  referred
    us to paragraphs 33-35 of EV (Philippines).  He submitted  the  child's
    best interests were to be determined by reference to  the  child  alone
    but accepted her best interests included remaining  with  her  parents.
    He also relied  on  the  guidance  in  Azimi-Moayed  &  Ors  (decisions
    affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC): the  child's
    years in the UK after the age of four were significant because she  had
    integrated into UK society and had developed a life outside the  family
    unit.  He sought to distinguish the principles in Zoumbas v SSHD [2013]
    UKSC 74, but accepted  that,  in  the  present  case,  the  family  had
    benefitted from education and health provision in  the  UK.   He  noted
    that the Third Appellant spoke only English, not  her  parents'  native
    language.  Whilst he accepted that the findings of the FTTJ as  to  the
    family's circumstances had not been challenged before us, he said  that
    they were a matter of opinion and incorrect.

 9. We make the following findings with regard to the Third Appellant.  She
    is now aged nine and was born in the UK; she has  lived  here  all  her
    life, never having visited Nigeria. She is being educated here and  has
    friends in the UK outside her family.  She has her tenth birthday on 28
    September 2015 and will be entitled to apply for British citizenship as
    a result.  She cannot be  blamed  for  her  parents'  poor  immigration
    history: they have been overstayers for almost  the  entire  period  of
    their stay in the UK.

10. Mr Olawanle accepted that it was in the best  interests  of  the  Third
    Appellant to remain with her parents and we endorse that.  It  is  also
    in her best interests to remain within the family unit within which she
    has grown up, in her current school and within her  current  friendship
    group. We fully accept the Third Appellant is not to be blamed for  the
    poor immigration history of her parents or their  attempts  to  deceive
    the First-tier Tribunal and indeed the Respondent.

11. The Judge did not accept the parents had no ties to Nigeria;  he  found
    they had close family members there and that, even  if  some  of  their
    relatives had moved aboard, they could assist  the  Appellants  to  re-
    establish themselves.  He noted the Second Appellant had previously had
    a shop there and had worked unlawfully in the UK. He further noted  the
    Second Appellant was resourceful and had a range of skills which  could
    be put to good use in Nigeria. The FTTJ  considered  the  family  could
    stay with relatives in Nigeria until they got back  on  their  feet  or
    rented a new place.  None of the family has health problems.

12. The Judge found that there were no significant obstacles to  the  First
    and Second Appellant's integration into  Nigeria  (his  paragraph  23).
    The two youngest children of the family are aged 6 and  4  and  do  not
    therefore fulfil the criteria in paragraph 276ADE(1) insofar  as  their
    private lives are concerned.  Thus, insofar as the child's parents  and
    siblings are  concerned,  they  do  not  fulfil  the  criteria  in  the
    Immigration Rules insofar as their  Article  8  rights  are  concerned.
    Their removal would not be in breach  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   It
    follows that, if the Third Appellant were to be removed,  that  removal
    would be as part of the family unit and to a country where there are no
    very significant obstacles to her parents' integration.


13. We bear in mind Lady Hale's comments in ZH (Tanzania) (FC)  (Appellant)
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department (Respondent) [2011] UKSC 4
    in which she said that "Although nationality is not a "trump  card"  it
    is of particular importance in assessing  the  best  interests  of  any
    child".  In the present case, the Third  Appellant  is  not  a  British
    citizen but, that said, she would become entitled to apply for  British
    citizenship next month.  Since this was not challenged by Mr Jarvis, we
    proceed on the basis that she would be granted such citizenship in  due
    course.

14. We accept  that  the  removal  of  the  Third  Appellant  would  entail
    disruption to her education and her social life. She  would  also  lose
    the opportunity of gaining British nationality. That loss would not  be
    in her best interests.  However, given that she would be  removed  with
    her parents and siblings and that her parents would be able to  provide
    for the family in Nigeria,  her  country  of  current  nationality,  we
    consider that it would not be unreasonable to expect her to  leave  the
    UK with her family, notwithstanding the significant disruption  to  her
    private life.  The Third Appellant is a healthy child and  her  parents
    would assist her in adjusting to life in Nigeria.  She  would  continue
    her education and have access to healthcare, albeit, in both cases, not
    to the standard she might have received in the UK. She would  have  the
    support and assistance of extended family in Nigeria.  We  accept  that
    she has never been to Nigeria and that she would  find  the  transition
    difficult in the short term, particularly with  the  loss  of  personal
    contact with friends and school. However she would be able to  maintain
    some contact with friends in the UK via the internet,  telephone,  text
    and visits.  It is also relevant that she has grown up  in  a  Nigerian
    family and thus, to some extent, she is familiar with Nigerian  customs
    and culture; this will assist her in settling into life in Nigeria.

15. For these reasons we find the Respondent's decision is not in breach of
    paragraph 276(1)(iv) insofar as the Third Appellant is concerned.  Nor,
    on the findings of the FTTJ, are  the  decisions  in  relation  to  the
    remaining Appellants in breach of paragraph 276ADE(1).

16. We have also considered whether the decisions place the United  Kingdom
    in breach of Article 8.  To that end, we bear in mind the principles in
    R (Oludoyi & Ors) v SSHD (Article 8  -  MM  (Lebanon)  and  Nagre)  IJR
    [2014] UKUT 00539 (IAC).   We  consider  that  the  evidence  has  been
    considered adequately  under  the  Immigration  Rules  insofar  as  all
    Appellants are concerned. There is nothing to  suggest  that,  had  the
    appeals been considered in accordance with the Article 8 jurisprudence,
    either by the FTTJ or  this  Tribunal,  the  appeals  would  have  been
    successful.

17. We set aside the decision of the FTTJ  and  remake  it  dismissing  the
    appeals on the grounds that the Appellants do not fulfil  the  criteria
    in paragraph 276ADE(1) of the Immigration  Rules  or  on  human  rights
    grounds.

Decision

18. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  involve  an
    error on a point of law.


19. We set aside the decision.

20. We re-make the decision in the appeals by dismissing them.

Angela M Black

                                             Date 12 August 2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black


Anonymity Direction
Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) we make an anonymity order. Unless the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings. We do so in  order  to  avoid  a  likelihood  of  serious  harm
arising to the appellant from the contents of his protection claim.



Fee Award
The FTTJ did not make fee awards  and,  given  our  decision,  that  remains
appropriate.

Angela M Black

                                                                 Date     12
    August 2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black
