
[pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/35300/2014
                                                               ia/33297/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2nd December 2015                 |On 28th January 2016                 |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                        Sughra BIBI (FIRST APPELLANT)
                  Erram Mehboob Qureshi (second appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Miss L Mair of Counsel instructed by Prolegis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwncyz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellants' appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Hillis
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 12th January 2015.

Background

 2. The appellants are citizens of Pakistan born on 10th April 1939 and 1st
    January 1975 respectively.  The first appellant is a  widow.   She  has
    six children, four of whom are resident in the UK.  The eldest daughter
    is  married  and  lives  in  Pakistan.   The  youngest  is  the  second
    appellant.  She has been deaf and mute since birth.

 3. The appellants came to the UK to visit  the  family  sponsored  by  the
    second eldest son, and  last  entered  on  1st  June  2012.   They  had
    previously visited and returned within the currency of their visas  but
    on this occasion, because, it is said, of the  failing  health  of  the
    first appellant and the second appellant's disability, they decided  to
    apply for leave to remain in the UK.

 4. It was agreed  that  they  could  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 5. The judge found that  the  first  appellant  has  a  number  of  health
    conditions, which were worsening as she became older.  However  he  did
    not accept that the appellants  enjoyed  a  family  life  with  the  UK
    relatives and therefore failed to show that Article 8 was engaged.   He
    also considered the proportionality of removal and concluded  that  the
    respondent's decision was  proportionate  to  her  legitimate  aims  of
    maintaining the economic wellbeing of the UK.

The Grounds of Application

 6. The appellants sought permission to appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
    judge had cited the wrong test to be applied in Article 8  cases,  that
    he had wrongly  addressed  himself  to  the  question  of  whether  the
    appellants were dependent upon the UK family  prior  to  their  arrival
    here, that he had made material errors of fact in respect of the health
    of  both  appellants  and  had  relied  on  immaterial  considerations,
    specifically the appellants' ability to apply for entry clearance  from
    abroad.

 7. Permission to appeal was initially refused by Judge Foudy  but  granted
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins on 12th June 2015.

 8. On 26th August  2015  the  respondent  served  a  reply  defending  the
    determination.

Submissions

 9. Miss Mair submitted that if an error of law was found the  case  should
    be remitted to the First-tier for a  rehearing  in  the  light  of  the
    passage of time since the original decision was made.

10. She relied on her grounds and submitted  that  the  judge  had  plainly
    erroneously relied on the situation as it was before they came  to  the
    UK rather than focussing on circumstances as they were now.   She  also
    submitted that the judge had misconstrued the oral evidence and  failed
    to record that the witnesses had all stated that, due to the  worsening
    of the older appellant's arthritis,  she  could  no  longer  act  as  a
    conduit for her daughter and provide a link  for  her  to  the  outside
    world.

11. So far as the merits of the appeal was concerned,  she  relied  on  the
    medical evidence which showed that the  first  appellant's  health  was
    rapidly deteriorating.  She relied on the detailed statements from  her
    children who lived in the UK. The appellants were fully integrated into
    the family here.  There was  evidence  that  the  remaining  sister  in
    Pakistan had never been involved in looking after them whilst they were
    there and, whilst she acknowledged that there was no  medical  evidence
    in relation to her, she said that she was instructed to  say  that  the
    sister there suffered from hepatitis.

12. The family here were financially self-sufficient.  They  had  paid  for
    all of the healthcare of both appellants since they had been in the  UK
    and there had been no reliance on the NHS.   Whilst  neither  appellant
    spoke English this was not a matter to be taken against  them  because,
    in the case of the first appellant, she would be exempt from taking  an
    English language test under the Rules  and  the  second  appellant  was
    unable to speak.

13. Mr Diwncyz relied on the Rule 24 reply.  On the merits he  pointed  out
    that there was evidence that the second appellant could speak Urdu.

Consideration of whether there is a Material Error of Law

14. I am satisfied that the judge erred in law.

15. At paragraph 9 he wrote:

         "If  the  applicant  does  not  satisfy   the   Immigration   Rules
         applications for entry clearance or leave  to  remain  outside  the
         Rules is  pursuant  to  Article  8  where  circumstances  involving
         insurmountable obstacles preventing private or family life  in  the
         applicant's country  of  origin  have  to  be  established  to  the
         relevant standard of proof."

16. The paragraph is inherently unclear but in any event the  reference  to
    insurmountable obstacles is wrong.

17. Second, more importantly, it is apparent from  the  determination  that
    the judge was focussing his attention on  whether  the  appellants  had
    lived with their UK relatives in the past and, in  stating  that  there
    was no evidence of dependency or a relationship  beyond  normal  family
    ties prior to them coming to the UK, did not  properly  assess  whether
    family life had been established as at the date of the  hearing  before
    him.

18. Accordingly the decision will have to be remade.

19. There was no reason  to  adjourn  the  appeal  to  another  date.   The
    representatives have filed an indexed paginated bundle of documents for
    this hearing including witness statements and medical records  for  the
    appellants.  Although Miss Mair would have wished to provide further up-
    to-date medical evidence, the representatives had that opportunity when
    providing the very large bundle of documents prepared for this hearing;
    the fact that they did not do so  is  not  a  basis  for  delaying  the
    resolution of this appeal.

Findings and Conclusions

20. The starting point in my considerations is the fact that the appellants
    cannot meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules with  respect  to
    Article 8 since neither has a partner or minor  child  in  the  UK  and
    neither has been in the UK for a sufficient period of time  to  qualify
    under the private life route.  Indeed it was not argued  by  Miss  Mair
    that there could be compliance with the Immigration Rules.

21. The first question is therefore whether  the  appellants  enjoy  family
    life with the UK children/siblings.  I am satisfied that they do.

22. Both mother and daughter  suffer  from  reasonably  significant  health
    issues.  The first appellant is  75  years  old.   The  second  has  no
    communication as assessed by Bradford  Social  Services,  although  she
    does communicate with her family members using a form of sign  language
    developed by them.  She is not able to live independently.

23. There is no presumption of  family  life  between  adult  siblings  and
    parents.  Indeed family life is not established unless  something  more
    exists than normal emotional ties.  Such ties might exist  where  there
    is dependency.  Whist in the past it is apparent  that  the  appellants
    were able to live independently in Pakistan, since they came to live in
    the UK, they have become  increasingly  dependent  upon  the  UK  based
    family, and as a  consequence  there  are  now  more  than  the  normal
    emotional ties between both the adult siblings and the  adult  children
    and their mother.

24. Removal would plainly interfere with the enjoyment of family  life  but
    would be lawful since the appellants have no basis of stay here and  in
    pursuit of a legitimate public aim.

25. In considering the proportionality of removal I am  required  to  apply
    Section  117B  which  sets  out  the  public  interest   considerations
    applicable in all cases.  These are as follows:

         "(i) The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
             public interest.

         (ii) It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of the UK,  that  persons
             who seek to enter or remain  in  the  UK  are  able  to  speak
             English because persons who speak English -

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers; and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (iii)    It is in the public interest  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of the  UK  that  persons
             who seek  to  enter  or  remain  in  the  UK  are  financially
             independent because such persons -

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers; and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (iv) Little weight should be given to -

             (a)  a private life or -

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner  that  is
                  established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in
                  the UK unlawfully.

         (v)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the  person's  immigration  status  is
             precarious."

26. Miss Mair sought  to  argue  that  Sections  117B(ii)  and  (iii)  were
    neutral.  However, the fact that  the  first  appellant  would  not  be
    required to pass an English test, and the second appellant would  never
    be able to do so does not take away from the fact that,  under  Section
    117B(ii), the speaking of English is in the  public  interest  and  the
    appellants are not able to fulfil that requirement.

27. Similarly, whereas, to date, the UK family has been able to provide for
    the family financially, the appellants are not financially  independent
    and can never been financially independent.

28. The evidence before the Immigration Judge was that, whilst they were in
    Pakistan, the second  appellant  did  all  the  cooking,  cleaning  and
    ironing under the first appellant's  instructions  and  sometimes  they
    would share doing the chores.  It was said, and not challenged  in  the
    grounds, that there is another sister who lives about 600  metres  from
    the appellants' home, which sits badly with the first appellant's claim
    at paragraph 18 of the witness statement that "her daughter in Pakistan
    lives a fair distance from us".  There is also her own sister who lives
    in the same village.

29. There is extensive medical evidence in the form of patient records  for
    the first appellant but the only diagnosis which I can find is that  of
    diabetes and hypotension.  It is said that she suffers  from  arthritis
    although I cannot see any reference to that in the records.  There is a
    chest x-ray report but everything appears to be normal.  There is  also
    reference to a recommendation that  the  appellant  attend  a  diabetic
    clinic and sees the chiropodist and dietician once a year.

30. Although Miss Mair submitted that the  situation  now  is  dramatically
    different from that which pertained  when  the  appellants  arrived  on
    their visit visa, that is  not  borne  out  by  the  medical  evidence.
    Common sense suggests that a 75 year old will be in  less  good  health
    than a 72 year old, but the medical evidence does not in fact establish
    the deterioration which Miss Mair suggests.  Indeed, there  is  nothing
    in the evidence which establishes that the first appellant is suffering
    from anything other than the general privations of her age.

31. It seems from the evidence before the original judge that the appellant
    enjoyed a comfortable lifestyle in Pakistan.  Her husband  was  in  the
    army and subsequently had businesses in Pakistan.  She was a teacher at
    a local school.  The family own land which they  lease  out.   This  is
    clearly a close family unit.  There is no reason to suppose that the UK
    family would not be able to provide financial assistance  if  required.
    I am entirely satisfied that the elder daughter lives nearby and  would
    be able to provide practical assistance.

32. So far as the second appellant is concerned it is absolutely clear that
    she cannot communicate orally although there is evidence in the medical
    records that she can lip read Urdu.  If she went back to  Pakistan  she
    would be living in the place where she has grown up and where  she  has
    spent her entire life, aside from the last three years.

33. The first judge made the point that,  even  if  the  first  appellant's
    arthritis had got worse over the last three years, there was no  reason
    why she would not be able to direct the  second  appellant  within  her
    household tasks within the home as she did before.  Although it may  be
    that she will be less able to accompany the  second  appellant  outside
    the house increasingly as she gets older,  the  latter  still  has  her
    sister nearby who would be able to facilitate her interaction with  the
    outside world, and there is no  evidence  whatsoever  that  the  oldest
    daughter would be unable to help with her mother and sister because  of
    her own health conditions.

34. Accordingly, whilst I accept, unlike the first judge, that Article 8 is
    engaged and that there is family life  in  this  case,  nevertheless  I
    conclude that removal would be proportionate.

Notice of Decision

35. The original judge erred in law.  His decision is  set  aside.   It  is
    remade as follows.  The appellants' appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

