
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/35144/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 13 July 2015                     |On 15 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                           Dr MarIanne BRUGGEMAnN
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Appellant in Person
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant before the Upper Tribunal is the Secretary of State for
       the Home Department and the respondent is a citizen of  Germany  born
       on 29 July 1953.  However, for the sake of convenience, I shall refer
       to the latter as the "appellant" to the Secretary of the State as the
       "respondent", which are the designations they had in the  proceedings
       before the First-tier Tribunal.

    2. The appellant's appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  was  against  the
       decision of the respondent dated 4 September 2014 refusing  to  issue
       her with a Residence Card as confirmation of her right to live in the
       United Kingdom pursuant to the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)
       Regulations 2006 (hereinafter the 2006 regulations).

    3. Permission to appeal was at  first  refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Wellesley-Cole but was granted by the Upper Tribunal who  found
       that it was arguable that the Judge will determine the application on
       the papers did not take into account the letter on  the  file  of  12
       September 2014 which  stated  that  the  Tribunal  had  returned  the
       appellant her passport and indicating that a photocopy of it had been
       placed on the file. It is stated that the appellant must be  afforded
       the opportunity to consider the evidence and it is expected that  the
       appellant attends the forthcoming hearing with a passport.

    4. At the hearing the appellant attended the hearing  and  provided  her
       original German passport in her name.

    5. This demonstrates that the appellant is an  EEA  national.  The  only
       issue taken by the respondent was that the appellant had not produced
       her German passport. The  Judge  regrettably  did  not  consider  the
       letter of 12 September 2014 which was on file, which stated that  the
       appellant's passport had been returned to her and a photocopy  of  it
       had been placed on the file. The appellant  had  requested  that  the
       appeal be heard on the papers  and  therefore  did  not  present  her
       passport at the hearing which led to the appeal being dismissed.

    6. The respondent did not take any issue in her refusal letter that  the
       appellant was exercising her treaty rights in the United Kingdom as a
       worker. It is abundantly clear that the appellant who is a  scientist
       has been working  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a  very  long  time,
       exercising her treaty rights.

    7.  I  therefore  set  aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  and
       substitute my decision and allow the appellant's appeal  pursuant  to
       the 2006 Regulations.

  DECISION

  Appeal allowed






  Signed by a
  A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
  Mrs S Chana
                                                  This 14th day of July 2014


