
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/35051/2014
                                                               IA/35520/2014
                                                               IA/35528/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |             Decision & Reasons      |
|                                         |Promulgated                          |
|On 25 February 2016                      |             On 2 March 2016         |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                               (1)  PM (INDIA)
                               (2)  SM (INDIA)
                               (3)  TM (INDIA)
                          (anonymity direction made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms S Jagarajah, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this case is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department.  However, for the sake of clarity, I shall use  the  titles
    by which the parties were known before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  with
    the Secretary of State referred to as "the respondent" and PM  (India),
    SM (India) and TM (India) as the first,  second  and  third  appellants
    respectively.

 2. An anonymity order has already been made in  these  proceedings  and  I
    direct that it continues.

 3. The appellants are a family  from  India  with  the  first  and  second
    appellants being the parents of the third appellant who  is  their  son
    born on 8 April 1998.  The first appellant entered the  United  Kingdom
    on 16 December 2002 with entry clearance as a visitor until 5 May 2002.
     He applied on 9 July of that year for leave to remain as a work permit
    holder which was refused without right of appeal  on  19  September  of
    that year.  The second and third appellants first  entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 7 February 2006 with entry clearance as  visitors  until  5
    June of the same year.  All three appellants made a further application
    for leave to remain which was refused without a right of appeal  on  21
    June 2011.  However on 28 May 2013 the appellants applied for leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of  their  Article  8  rights
    under  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights   ("ECHR").    This
    ultimately led to a refusal dated 19 August 2014 which  the  appellants
    subsequently appealed at a  hearing  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal A M S Green in August 2015.  In a decision of 4  September  of
    the same year he allowed all three appellants' appeals on human  rights
    grounds.  At the hearing the appellants' Counsel  "suggested  that  the
    core issue to be determined" was the  third  appellant's  appeal  which
    centres on  paragraph  276ADE(iv),  Article  8  ECHR  and  whether  the
    respondent had discharged her duties under Section 55 of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.  This is central to assessing the
    proportionality of her decision.  The core evidence being  relied  upon
    was not only the third appellant's  own  oral  testimony  but  also  an
    independent social worker's report.  Counsel conceded  at  the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal that the  first  and  second  appellants
    could not rely upon Appendix FM as they had  joint  responsibility  for
    the third appellant's upbringing and because of their poor  immigration
    history.  However, the first and second appellants wished to go outside
    the  Immigration  Rules.   The  judge  was  invited  to  consider   the
    consequences of upholding the third appellant's appeal  and  the  first
    and second appellants' Article 8 ECHR rights.

 4. Following the hearing the respondent sought permission to appeal  which
    was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Grant-Hutchinson.  This
    was on 15 January 2016 and the reasons that she gave for so doing were:-



         "1.  The Respondent seeks permission in time to  appeal  against  a
             decision  of  First-tier  Judge  (Judge  A.   M.   S.   Green)
             promulgated on  4  September,  2015  whereby  it  allowed  the
             Appellants' appeals against the Secretary of State's  decision
             to refuse the Appellants leave to remain inside or outside the
             Immigration Rules on the basis of  their  private  and  family
             lives.

         2.   It is arguable that the Judge erred in law in his approach  by
             misdirecting himself in deciding for the  reasons  given  that
             under paragraph 276ADE(iv) of the Immigration Rules  it  would
             be reasonable for the child to leave the UK with  his  parents
             but allowing the appeal outside the  Immigration  Rules  under
             Article 8 of the ECHR on the basis that it was in the  child's
             best interests for him to remain in the UK which is a test  of
             reasonableness as set out in the case of EV (Philippines)  and
             Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874 which the Judge particularly
             relied upon in coming to his decision."

 5. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 6. Mr Norton urged me to re-make  the  decision  in  this  appeal  and  to
    dismiss it.  He relied upon the  grounds  considered  by  Judge  Grant-
    Hutchinson.  In particular that at the First-tier hearing the judge had
    found that the third appellant could not meet the requirements of  Rule
    276ADE(iv) of the Immigration Rules in that it would be  reasonable  to
    expect him to leave the United  Kingdom  but  then  under  the  heading
    "Family Life" allowed the appeal outside the Immigration Rules  on  the
    basis that it was in the best  interests  of  the  third  appellant  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.  He submitted this amounted to  a  flawed
    approach and drew my attention to the  authority  of  EV  (Philippines)
    [2014] EWCA Civ 874 in arguing that the issue of reasonableness was the
    wider test but the best interest of the child is a consideration albeit
    a primary one and that in approaching this appeal in the  way  that  he
    did the judge has accordingly misdirected himself in law.

 7. Ms Jagarajah submitted that the judge had carried out  a  comprehensive
    analysis of all relevant issues in this appeal which had been set  into
    the context of the ratio  of  EV  (Philippines).   The  respondent  had
    failed to challenge the independent social worker report that had  been
    in the appellants' bundle.  Not only had the judge applied  appropriate
    case law to this appeal but also Section 55 considerations and  in  all
    the circumstances had not, as asserted by the  respondent,  misdirected
    himself in law.

 8. The factual matrix is not in dispute and the judge  has  taken  account
    not only the evidence of the three appellants  but  also  that  of  the
    independent social worker, Mr Simpson whose evidence  appears  not  to
    have been  challenged  at  the  hearing  and  certainly  has  not  been
    challenged in the grounds seeking permission to appeal.  The judge  has
    considered the relevant case law including  EV  (Philippines)  and  has
    recognised (paragraph 32 of his decision) that it is not  the  duty  of
    the United Kingdom to "educate the  world".   However,  the  judge  has
    analysed the  particular  circumstances  of  the  third  appellant  and
    although in the context of his private life under paragraph 276ADE  the
    judge has found it would be reasonable to expect the third appellant to
    leave the United Kingdom that does not mean that  the  third  appellant
    was not entitled to succeed  in  his  appeal  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 9. The judge has carefully balanced the competing issues.  For example  at
    paragraph 49 when looking at the welfare and best interests of children
    he has recognised the starting point is to live with and be brought  up
    by the parents unless there are strong  contraindications.   The  judge
    has also acknowledged that a lengthy residence in a country other  than
    the state of origin can lead to development  of  social,  cultural  and
    educational ties that it would  be  inappropriate  to  disrupt  in  the
    absence of compelling reasons to the  contrary.   The  judge  has  also
    given consideration to the issue of "seven years" and whether or not it
    constitutes  a  relevant  period  in  terms   of   assessing   "lengthy
    residence".

10. The judge acknowledges that the effect  of  the  respondent's  decision
    here would be to require the appellants to leave the United Kingdom and
    return to India  but  that  the  proportionality  of  the  decision  is
    balanced on the one side by the need to maintain effective  immigration
    controls and on the other to respect the family and private life of the
    appellants.  Beyond that there is also the question of  the  assessment
    of proportionality in the best interest of the third appellant which he
    analyses, quite correctly, under Section 55 of the 2009 Act.

11. Ultimately the judge has concluded that in this appeal  the  respondent
    paid no more than "lip service" to the third appellant's long residence
    in the United Kingdom and Section 55 of 2009 Act.  The judge has  taken
    on board his own assessment of the best interest of the third appellant
    and cannot be criticised for so doing.  He has  come  to  a  conclusion
    that the third appellant's best interest is to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom with his parents.  This is notwithstanding the public  interest
    in the maintenance of effective immigration control  and  the  economic
    wellbeing of the country.

12. Effectively the judge has found that  there  were  arguably  compelling
    circumstances not sufficiently recognised under the  Immigration  Rules
    for  allowing  the  appeal  at  the  second  stage  of  the  Article  8
    consideration.

13. The judge was entitled to accept that  removing  the  appellants  would
    interfere with their rights to respect for family life of such  gravity
    as to potentially engage Article 8.  The judge  was  also  entitled  to
    conclude that the interference would be in accordance with the  law  in
    the interest of maintaining immigration control but that ultimately the
    issue of proportionality was  core  and  that  even  when  taking  into
    account the  adverse  immigration  history  of  the  first  and  second
    appellants this was an appeal where the decision  to  allow  the  third
    appellant to remain in the  United  Kingdom  with  his  parents  was  a
    justified one taking into account the third appellant's best interests.

14. The judge has given cogent reasons for coming to the  conclusions  that
    he has and the challenge to the decision does not identify  a  material
    error of law but is a dispute with reasoning  and  findings  which  are
    legally adequate resulting in the conclusion of the judge to allow that
    appellants' appeals.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date: 29 February 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard



