
   [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/35607/2014
     IA/35610/2014
     IA/35615/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 February 2016                           |                              |
|Prepared 22 February 2016                     |29 March 2016                 |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                            O a (first appellant)
                           a a (second appellant)
                            o a (third appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Blundell, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellants, nationals of Nigeria, dates of birth 17 April 1959,  25
    July  1979  and  31  May  1995  respectively,  appealed   against   the
    Respondent's decisions dated 22 August 2014 to make removal directions,
    forms, IS151A having been served on 22 August 2014.

2.   Their appeals came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  P  J  Holmes  (the
    judge) who, on 7 April 2015, dismissed their  appeals  both  under  the
    Immigration Rules and in respect of  claims  based  on  Article  3  and
    Article 8.

3.   Permission to appeal those decisions was given by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Osborne on 9 June 2015.

4.    It  is  regrettable  that  so  much  time  has  passed  before   their
    applications came for hearing on 22 February 2016.

5.   Mr Blundell on behalf of the Appellants submitted,  with  reference  to
    grounds settled  by  other  Counsel,  that  the  judge  had  failed  to
    generally  and  properly  address  the  medical  evidence  as  to   the
    availability of psychiatric treatment in Nigeria and the issues  raised
    with the judge concerning the stigma that  would  be  attached  to  the
    Appellants not least arising from the second Appellant's mental  health
    problems.

6.   Further, in respect of the third Appellant it was said that  the  judge
    had failed in the analysis of the Article 8 claim  to  have  considered
    the time and progress  made  by  the  third  Appellant  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The first Appellant, the  mother  of  the  second  and  third
    Appellants, was part of that family unit and as such remained the carer
    of  the  second  Appellant  and  in  practical  terms  was  still   the
    controlling influence in the life of the third Appellant.

7.   Mr Mills having heard the submissions and indeed the references to  the
    background evidence that had  been provided to the judge but  were  not
    addressed, accepted that anxious scrutiny could not have been  properly
    given to relevant material; properly sourced and  available  concerning
    both the availability of mental health facilities in  urban  areas  let
    alone rural ones in Nigeria.  In  addition  evidence  was  provided  by
    different sources on the marginalisation and stigmatisation of  persons
    with mental health issues as well as its impact in  terms  of  societal
    views on their relatives and family.

8.  I  was  satisfied  that  the  judge  failed  to  properly  address  that
    background evidence, misunderstood or  ignored  the  material  evidence
    that was drawn to his attention concerning the availability  of  mental
    health  treatment  and  facilities,  let  alone  the  availability   of
    psychiatrists, and had not properly reasoned the claim  in  respect  of
    the third Appellant or the impact of removal upon him now in the  light
    of his age and length of time in the United Kingdom.

9.   I was also satisfied that those errors impacted  upon  the  outcome  of
    the consideration of the first Appellant's case.  Thus I was  satisfied
    that the correct course was  that  the  original  Tribunal's  decisions
    cannot stand. The appeals will have to  be  remade  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

10.  I have considered Mr Mills' submission that there was  an  unchallenged
    adverse finding of fact raised concerning the first Appellant  and  her
    motives for or leading to the Appellants overstaying.  I note that  the
    first Appellant's credibility was affected by the judge  findings  that
    the first Appellant was not a reliable witness of fact.  It  seemed  to
    me that the relevance of that might have some weight in the  assessment
    of the public interest and in proportionality and it plainly will be  a
    matter for the Respondent to raise in  submissions,   on  remaking  the
    decisions a that stage, on the  relevance  and  weight  to  the   first
    appellant's credibility to the outcomes of the appeals.

11.  In the circumstances  it  did  not  seem  to  me  that  there  was  any
    practical purpose served in trying to retain that finding  of  fact  so
    much as it, that is the first Appellant's reliability and truthfulness,
    would be a relevant consideration when assessing an Article 8 claim  or
    an Article 3 claim in the  context  of  Sections  117A-C  of  the  2002
    Nationality and Immigration Act as amended.

Decision
12.  The appeals are allowed to the extent the matters are returned  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to await decisions in accordance with the law.

DIRECTIONS

    (1)  Relist in the First-tier Tribunal not before  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Osborne or First-tier Tribunal Judge P J Holmes.
    (2)  Relist two hours.
    (3)  No interpreter required.
    (4)  Bundles of any documents relied upon by the parties to  be  served
         on the other party and the IAC not  later  than  ten  working  days
         before the appeals are heard for the purposes of remaking it.

ANONYMITY ORDER

13.  An anonymity order was previously  made  on  31  March  2015  and  that
    anonymity order is continued in respect of each of the Appellants.

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

        Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
    Appellants are granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall
    directly or indirectly identify them or any  member  of  their  family.
    This direction applies both to the Appellants and  to  the  Respondent.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 14 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
