
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/35611/2013
     IA/35623/2013
     IA/35629/2013
     IA/35640/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |       Decision and Reasons          |
|                                     |Promulgated                          |
|On 10 November 2014                  |             On 18 November 2014     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M LEWIS


                                   Between

                                     OJ
                                     JSJ
                                     JJ
                                     JTJ
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Miss B Asanovic, Counsel, instructed by Fisher
Meredith Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


The History of the Appeal

1.   The Appellants,  OJ  and  her  three  children,  who  are  citizens  of
    Nigeria, appealed against  the  refusal  of  the  Respondent  to  issue
    registration certificates as confirmation of a right residence  in  the
    United  Kingdom  under  the  Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006.  Their appeals were heard by Judge  Abebrese  sitting
    at Hatton Cross on 31  July  2014  and  dismissed  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 18 August 2014 under those Regulations, the  Immigration
    Rules and Article 8 of the ECHR.

2.    Permission  to  appeal,  subsequently   supplemented   by   procedural
    directions, was granted on 7 October 2014 by  Judge  Nicholson  in  the
    following terms:

         "1.  First-tier Tribunal Abebrese dismissed these  appeals  against
             refusal of a registration certificate  /residence  card  under
             the EEA Regulations  in  a  determination  promulgated  on  18
             August 2014.


         2.   The judge found that the  fourth Appellant, an Irish national,
             lacked the necessary comprehensive  sickness  insurance  cover
             because the family's BUPA policy did not cover GP or emergency
             treatment.


         3.   Ground 1 contends that the respondent had not  challenged  the
             adequacy of the BUPA policy in the refusal letters,  that  the
             issue was not raised with the parties at the hearing and  that
             the judge should in any event have accepted that  BUPA  policy
             provided was comprehensive, because it accorded with the terms
             of the Home Office's published policy on the issue  which  was
             referred to in the Appellant's skeleton argument.


         4.   According to the Home Office published policy referred  to  in
             the grounds, a comprehensive sickness insurance  policy  is  a
             valid document confirming that a person has  provided  medical
             insurance  covering  medical  treatment  in  the  majority  of
             circumstances in the UK but such a document  will not normally
             cover visiting a GP or emergency treatment.  It  appears  from
             the judge's findings that the terms of  the  BUPA  policy  met
             those essential conditions.


         5.   Although I note that back in October  2010  Immigration  Judge
             Kekic (now an Upper  Tribunal  Judge)  refused  permission  to
             appeal an earlier decision  and  stated  that  the  First-tier
             Tribunal on that occasion had been entitled  to  find  that  a
             policy  excluding  cover  on  general  practitioner  fees  and
             emergency treatment was not comprehensive, given  the  wording
             of the Home policy referred to in  on  this  occasion,  it  is
             arguable that the judge should have accepted that the  medical
             insurance available met the requirements of the Regulations.


         6.   Permission to appeal is accordingly granted on this ground.  I
             do not refuse permission on the remaining grounds."

3.   On 16 October  the  respondent  submitted  a  response  under  Rule  24
    accepting that under the Regulations the sickness insurance  should  be
    considered to be "comprehensive" and so suggesting that the  matter  be
    resolved without the need  for  a  hearing.   Correspondence  from  the
    Appellant's solicitors of 24 October suggested that this letter had not
    been received.  In readiness for the hearing Miss Asanovic submitted  a
    full skeleton argument.

4.   At the hearing Mr Wilding accepted that the determination  contained  a
    material error of law and invited  me  to  allow  the  appeal,  without
    needing to consider the treatment of  Article  8,  which  was  also  in
    issue.  Without needing to call on Miss Asanovic I said that I would do
    so.  Miss Asanovic made brief submissions going to the issue of costs.

Determination

5.   The point is single and discrete.  For various reasons set out  in  the
    skeleton argument of Miss  Asanovic,  the  sickness  insurance  policy,
    whilst excluding general practitioner  fees  and  emergency  treatment,
    should be regarded as comprehensive.  The judge erred in not so  doing.
    He would otherwise inevitably have allowed the appeal.  Preserving  the
    remainder of his findings, other than those going to Article 8  of  the
    ECHR, I remake the decision and allowed the appeal.

6.   It is not necessary therefore for me  to  consider  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR.  Nor do I consider it appropriate to make any award of costs.

Decision

7.   The original determination contained a material error of  law  relating
    to the treatment of sickness insurance.   To  that  extent  I  set  its
    findings aside.

8.   The appeal is allowed under the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006.



Signed        Date 18 November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Lewis

