
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/35032/2014
                                                               IA/35037/2014
                                                               IA/35040/2014
                                                               IA/35046/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 4 August 2015                     |On 26 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                SAQIB SHAHZAD
                                 HAJRA SAQIB
                                 ZERAK SAQIB
                                RAYNAH SAQIB
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Abbas, of Imperium Group Immigration Specialists
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood a Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. This appeal is against the decision promulgated on 13 April 2015 of
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Bowler ("the Judge")  which  allowed  the
         respondents'  appeals  under  a  second  stage   Article   8   ECHR
         assessment.

      2. The applicant at this hearing is the Secretary of  State.  For  the
         sake of consistency with the decision in the First-tier Tribunal we
         shall refer to her as the respondent  and  to  the  family  as  the
         appellants.

Background

      3. The 1st and 2nd appellants are spouses, born  (respectively)  on  7
         April 1978 and 14 October 1977. They are the parents of  the  other
         minor appellants who were born on 20 August 2005 and 11 April  2007
         respectively. They are all citizens of Pakistan. The 1st  appellant
         came to the UK on 25 July 2004 to  study  with  leave  extended  on
         various occasions until 28 February 2009. The 2nd appellant came to
         the UK on 25 October 2004 to study with leave extended  on  various
         occasions  until  18  February  2009.   They   became   overstayers
         thereafter as various applications  were  rejected  as  invalid  or
         refused. The 3rd  and  4th  appellants  were  born  in  the  United
         Kingdom. As at the date of the Judge's determination, they  were  9
         years 7 months and 7 years 11 months old, respectively.

      4. On 16 March 2012 they applied for leave to remain on the  basis  of
         their  family  life.  The  respondent  refused  the   applications.
         Judicial review proceedings against the refusal were  settled  with
         the respondent agreeing to reconsider the appellants'  applications
         within three months. On 14 July 2014,  the  respondent  decided  to
         remove the appellants. This is the decision that was the subject of
         the appeal before the Judge. The respondent's reasons for  refusing
         the applications were set out in a letter dated 14 July 2014.

      5. The Judge dismissed the appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules.  In
         relation to para 276, she dismissed the appeals of the 3rd and  4th
         appellants on the basis that, as at the date of their  applications
         (16  March  2012),  neither  had  lived  in  the   United   Kingdom
         continuously for at least seven years.  However,  she  allowed  the
         appeals outside the Immigration Rules, having assessed the  Article
         8 ECHR private life claims under jurisprudence relating to  Article
         8. She did not consider the right to family life.

      6. The Judge's assessment is set out  at  paragraphs  45  to  66.  For
         reasons which we will give shortly, we decided  to  set  aside  the
         Judge's decision and re-make the decision on the  appeals.  In  re-
         making the decision, we preserved the Judge's findings of fact,  to
         the extent not vitiated by the errors of law found. It is therefore
         appropriate to set out paragraphs 45 to 66  of  the  determination.
         The preserved findings in relation to the 3rd  and  4th  appellants
         are underlined. Since the Judge's findings in relation to  the  1st
         and 2nd  appellants  were  not  challenged,  all  of  her  findings
         regarding them, i.e. the findings at 46 to 48, stand.

             45. The Appellants each have a private life in the UK and  the
                  decision would  be  an  interference  with  those  private
                  lives.

             46. Turning to question (2), considering Appellants  1  and  2
                  alone initially, their private life  will  have  developed
                  from their studies and Appellant 1's work, although little
                  evidence  was  produced  regarding  the  extent  of  their
                  private life.  If Appellants 1 and 2 went back to Pakistan
                  there is no reason why they could not use their skills  to
                  obtain employment there.   The  qualifications  they  have
                  gained here could be used by them in  Pakistan.   I  apply
                  the reasoning in the case of  MG  (assessing  interference
                  with private life)  Serbia  and  Montenegro  [2005]  UKAIT
                  00113 where it was stated that "a person's job and precise
                  programme of studies may be different in  the  country  to
                  which he is to be returned and his network of  friendships
                  and other acquaintances is likely to be different too, but
                  his private life will  continue  in  respect  of  all  its
                  essential elements".  Appellant 1 and 2's work, network of
                  friendships and  other  acquaintances  are  likely  to  be
                  different in Pakistan, but in a similar way their  private
                  life would  continue  in  respect  of  all  its  essential
                  elements.   Applying  the  MG  case   referred   to,   the
                  Respondent's decision would not be  an  interference  with
                  that private life of such gravity as potentially to engage
                  Article 8.

             47. The mental health problems Appellant 2 has suffered and is
                  being treated  for  do  not  alter  this  conclusion.   No
                  evidence was put to me to show that she would be unable to
                  access mental health treatment in Pakistan.

             48. The fact that Appellants 1 and 2 have their money tied  up
                  in a house which they  bought  also  does  not  affect  my
                  decision.   The  house  could  be  sold  (and  it  is  now
                  fortunate that a sale would produce a profit rather than a
                  loss).

             49. However,  the  situation  is  different  when  I  consider
                  Appellants 3 and 4.  Their private life results from their
                  school life and friendships they have developed inside and
                  outside school.  They have known no other life than  their
                  life in the UK and are immersed in UK society and culture.
                   I therefore find that  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
                  would have consequences of such gravity as to  potentially
                  engage Article 8 in respect of Appellants 3 and 4.

             50. The answer to question (3) is yes: the interference is  in
                  accordance with the law.  It arises from  the  application
                  of the Immigration Rules.

             51. Turning to question (4), it would be in furtherance  of  a
                  permitted aim under Article 8.2, namely  the  preservation
                  of the rights and freedoms of others by the maintenance of
                  a system of immigration control and the interests  of  the
                  economic  well-being  of  the  UK  by  the  imposition  of
                  requirements for qualifying  for  leave  to  remain.   The
                  remaining question is whether it  would  be  proportionate
                  having regard to that aim.

             52. This is question (5).  The crux of the  issue  is  whether
                  the Respondent's decision was proportionate having  regard
                  to  the  importance  of  the  public   interest   in   the
                  maintenance of an effective system of immigration  control
                  primarily through the Immigration Rules.

             53. In  assessing  the  proportionality  of  the  Respondent's
                  decision I must have regard to Section 55 BIA 2009 and the
                  relevant case law.  Mr Abbas has referred me to the  cases
                  of R (on the application of TS) v SSHD  [2010]  EWHC  2614
                  and ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 04.  I also refer  to
                  the cases  of  Zoumbas  v  SSHD  [2013]  UKSC  74  and  EV
                  (Philippines) and Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874  where
                  the approach to be taken was set out.

             54. It is clear from the jurisprudence that the best interests
                  of a child are in an integral part of the  proportionality
                  assessment under  Article  8  ECHR  and,  in  making  that
                  assessment, the best  interests  of  a  child  must  be  a
                  primary  consideration,  although  not  always  the   only
                  primary consideration.  The child's best interests do  not
                  of  themselves  have   the   status   of   the   paramount
                  consideration.  Although the best interests of a child can
                  be  outweighed  by  the   cumulative   effect   of   other
                  considerations, no other consideration can be  treated  as
                  inherently more significant.

             55. I must also have regard to Section 117B  NIAA  which  sets
                  out  specific  public  interest  considerations   I   must
                  consider in carrying out the proportionality assessment.

             56. Recognising those requirements I find  that  the  decision
                  taken by the Respondent  was  not  proportionate  for  the
                  following reasons.

             57. It is clearly in the best interests of Appellant 3  and  4
                  to be with Appellant 1 and 2 as their  parents.   However,
                  that is not the only element  of  the  best  interests  of
                  Appellant 3 and 4 that I should consider.  I note the case
                  of LD (Article 8  -  best  interests  of  child)  Zimbabwe
                  [2010] UKUT 278 (IAC).  Appellant 3  and  4's  educational
                  welfare, as part of the UK education system where they are
                  clearly thriving (as shown by the various school papers in
                  pages 150-163 of the Appellant' bundle),  points  strongly
                  to their continued residence here as necessary to  promote
                  those interests.  They only speak  English  although  they
                  can understand a few words in Urdu.  I note that in the LD
                  case it was stated that very weighty reasons are needed to
                  justify separating a child from a community in which he or
                  she had grown up and lived for most of his or her life.

             58. I also refer  to  the  case  of  E-A  (Article  8  -  best
                  interests of child) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 315  (IAC)  and  I
                  take account of the statements  regarding  the  impact  of
                  residence at different times in a child's  life.   I  note
                  the statement in that judgement that "During the period of
                  residence from birth to the age of about four,  the  child
                  will be primarily focused on self and the  caring  parents
                  or guardian.   Long residence after this age is likely  to
                  have greater impact  on  the  well-being  of  the  child."
                  Appellants 3 and 4 have spent all their lives  in  the  UK
                  and all their education has been in the UK.   Those  years
                  have been formative years for them  when  they  will  have
                  started to make relationships outside  their  relationship
                  with their parents.  While I recognise that  Appellants  3
                  and 4 are bright and industrious children who may be  able
                  to adapt to a new life in Pakistan and that Pakistan has a
                  functioning education system, that does not mean  that  it
                  is in their best interests to move to Pakistan.

             59. I have considered to what extent Appellants 3 and  4  have
                  become distanced from Pakistan  and  how  renewable  their
                  connection with Pakistan may be.  They have  very  limited
                  contact with family in Pakistan.  Appellant 1's family  in
                  Pakistan has issues with Appellants 2, 3 and 4 because  of
                  the love marriage.  Appellant 2's mother cannot speak with
                  them as  she  does  not  speak  English.   The  family  in
                  Pakistan are remote to Appellants 3 and 4 as they have had
                  no meaningful contact with them.  They have never had more
                  than a  limited  and  indirect  connection  with  Pakistan
                  through their parents.

             60. Considering all these factors I therefore find that it  is
                  in the best interests of Appellant 3 and 4  to  remain  in
                  the UK with their parents, Appellants 1 and 2.

             61. In relation to section 117B NIAA 2002 I find that all  the
                  Appellants  speak  English.   They  are  and   have   been
                  financially independent and have not been a burden on  the
                  taxpayer: Appellant 1 has taken on some  casual  work  and
                  they have taken in lodgers to provide income.

             62. However, the private lives of all the Appellants have been
                  established by  them  primarily  while  their  immigration
                  status has been precarious since 18 and 28 February  2009.
                  Section 117B NIAA 2002 directs that little  weight  should
                  be given to a private life  established  when  a  person's
                  immigration status is precarious.  However, it also states
                  that the public interest does not require removal where  a
                  person has a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  a
                  "qualifying child" and  it  would  not  be  reasonable  to
                  expect the child to leave the UK.  Both Appellants 3 and 4
                  are "qualifying children" as they are under 18  years  old
                  and have lived in the UK for  a  continuous  period  of  7
                  years or more.  For this purpose I may take  into  account
                  the length of time they have lived in the  UK  as  at  the
                  date of the hearing.  Appellant 3 has lived in the UK  for
                  9 years 7 months.  Appellant 4 has lived in the UK  for  7
                  years 11 months.  I find that Appellants 1 and  2  are  in
                  genuine and subsisting relationships with Appellants 3 and
                  4.

             63. This leaves  the  question  as  to  whether  it  would  be
                  reasonable to expect Appellants 3 and 4 to leave  the  UK.
                  I  find  that  it  would  not  be  reasonable  to   expect
                  Appellants 3 and 4 to  leave  the  UK  for  the  following
                  reasons.  They have spent all their lives in  the  UK  and
                  all their education has been in the UK.  They  only  speak
                  English.  They are nearly 8  and  10  years  old  and  are
                  therefore at ages when they have formed strong social  and
                  cultural links to the UK, which is the only  country  they
                  know.  If they left the UK they would be going to Pakistan
                  where they would  have  to  deal  with  a  very  different
                  society and culture of  which  they  have  no  experience,
                  Appellant 3 only having visited as a baby and Appellant  4
                  never having visited.

             64. I have also considered the impact of other factors in  the
                  proportionality  exercise.   I  take  into  account   that
                  although their  immigration  status  was  precarious  from
                  2009,  they  have  never  hidden  from   the   immigration
                  authorities and have  never  been  deceitful  about  their
                  status.  They made numerous unsuccessful attempts to apply
                  for leave to remain in 2009 and then wrote claiming  their
                  Article 8 rights.  After a  paid  application  system  for
                  Article 8 claims was introduced they applied on that basis
                  in March 2012.

             65. The only countervailing  factor  which  Section  117B  set
                  against the factors identified above  including  the  best
                  interests of Appellants 3 and  4  is  the  maintenance  of
                  effective immigration controls, but for the reasons stated
                  above Section 117B provides that it is not in  the  public
                  interest to remove the Appellants.

             66. Therefore considering all the factors  which  are  in  the
                  Appellants' favour under Section 117B NIAA 2002, the  best
                  interests of the children and the fact that it is  not  in
                  the public interest to remove Appellants 1 and 2,  I  find
                  that  the  decision  taken  by  the  Respondent  was   not
                  necessary and proportionate.  The appeal on  human  rights
                  grounds under Article 8 ECHR is allowed.

      7. First-tier Tribunal Judge Davies granted permission  to  appeal  on
         the basis that it was arguable that;

          1) "The Judge has not given the correct weight to the  fact  that
             the Appellants did not have leave  to  remain  in  the  United
             Kingdom",

          2) "The Judge has given undue weight to both the minor Appellants
             educational requirements and  the  length  of  time  they  had
             resided in the United Kingdom", and

          3) "The Judges [sic] findings as to the ability of the Appellants
             to reintegrate into Pakistani society  do  not  appear  to  be
             based on the evidence and appear to have given  little  regard
             to the fact that the Appellants will be returned as  a  family
             unit."

      8. We note here that no application for permission to  appeal  against
         the dismissal of the appeal by  the  Judge  under  the  Immigration
         Rules was made  by  the  appellants.  That  part  of  the  decision
         therefore stands.

Error of law

      9. Ms Isherwood submitted that the family's leave had ceased  in  2009
         and that they had no basis to remain in the UK.  The  reasons  they
         wanted to stay were because the children were at school,  and  they
         wanted to start a business. The 2nd Appellant had obtained  medical
         treatment. The Judge had  not  properly  considered  the  case  law
         principles and in particular those identified in  EV  (Philippines)
         and Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874. Reliance was also placed  on
         AM (S 117B) Malawi  [2015]  UKUT  0260  (IAC),  Forman  (ss  117A-C
         considerations) [2015] UKUT 00412 (IAC) and Zoumbas v  SSHD  [2013]
         UKSC 74. They would be returned as a family and had no  entitlement
         to remain here. They have always  only  had  a  temporary  capacity
         here. The length of the residence was not determinative.  They  had
         no  legitimate  expectation  of  living  here.   The   Judge   when
         considering private life must look at the situation of  the  family
         as a whole. S 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
         2002 ("NIAA 2002") was stated but not applied.

     10. Mr Abbas submitted that the judgment was well reasoned.  The  Judge
         correctly applied the guidance in EV (Philippines). The facts  here
         can be distinguished from EV (Philippines)  as  in  that  case  the
         children were not born here, were younger, and had lived  here  for
         less time.  The  3rd  Appellant  here  is  almost  eligible  to  be
         registered as  a  British  citizen.  The  children  are  qualifying
         children  within  the  meaning  of  Appendix  FM  EX(1)(a)  of  the
         Immigration Rules and accordingly the family do not  need  to  meet
         certain eligibility requirements for leave to remain as it  is  not
         reasonable to expect them to leave the UK. The Judge was  aware  of
         the need to apply little weight to their private lives and did  not
         need to explicitly mention everything. There was no material  error
         of law as the Judge was entitled to make the findings she  did.  It
         is for the Judge to determine the facts  and  weight  to  apply  to
         individual facts. It would be disproportionate to require  them  to
         leave given the children's integration

Case law

     11. We were specifically referred to EV (Philippines) (paragraphs 34 to
         37 and 58 to 60), AM (Malawi) (head note 4  and  6),  Forman  (head
         note 1), Zoumbas (paragraph 24), and Green (Article 8 - new  rules)
         [2013] UKUT 00254 (IAC) (paragraph 38). We will  not  set  out  the
         relevant extracts but  have  considered  them  all  and  apply  the
         principles derived from them.

Discussion and decision on error of law

     12. We are satisfied that the Judge made a material error of law in her
         failure to properly apply s117B of the 2002 Act. The following  are
         our reasons:

     13.  At  paragraph  65,  the  Judge  said  that   only   factor   which
         countervailed the  factors  in  favour  of  the  children  was  the
         maintenance  of  immigration  control.  It  is  therefore   readily
         apparent that she completely failed to consider the fact  that  the
         children are at state school and the 2nd Appellant has accessed the
         NHS for medical  treatment.  They  are  not  and  never  have  been
         financially independent and are and  have  been  a  burden  on  the
         taxpayer. The failure to  have  regard  to  that  statutory  factor
         rendered that assessment fatally flawed. This is entirely  separate
         to the need to maintain an effective immigration control.

     14. This is not just a disagreement with the weight given to  a  factor
         (Green) but completely ignoring a statutorily relevant factor.  She
         ignored the financial burden on the taxpayer in  paragraph  62  and
         despite saying in paragraph 55 that she had regard to s117B of  the
         20002 Act she failed to apply all of it.

     15. At paragraph 64, the Judge said that the immigration status of  the
         appellants was precarious from 2009.  Leaving  aside,  for  present
         purposes, the immigration status of the 3rd and 4th appellants, the
         Judge erred in stating that the immigration status of the  1st  and
         2nd appellants was precarious from 2009. Their  immigration  status
         was precarious from the start, as they arrived  as  students.  From
         2009, they have been in the United Kingdom unlawfully. Section 117B
         distinguishes between immigration  status  that  is  unlawful  (see
         s.117B(4)  and  immigration  status   that   is   precarious   (see
         s.117B(5)). This  misunderstanding  as  to  the  true  position  in
         relation to the 1st and 2nd appellants led the Judge to err in  her
         approach to the balancing exercise, as it led her  to  accord  less
         weight to the state's interests, given that the greater period  for
         which the immigration status of the  1st  and  2nd  appellants  was
         precarious or unlawful.

     16. If the Judge had not erred in leaving out of account an  aspect  of
         the state's interests (whether the  appellants  were  a  burden  on
         taxpayers) and in misunderstanding the true immigration  status  of
         the 1st and 2nd appellants, she may well have reached  a  different
         conclusion  when  balancing  the  state's  interests  against   the
         circumstances of the appellants, in particular,  the  3rd  and  4th
         appellants.

     17. We therefore find that there is a material error of law,  announced
         that to the parties, and set the Article 8 ECHR decision aside.

Re-making the decision

     18. Mr Abbas submitted that the circumstances had  changed  over  time.
         The 3rd appellant was due to start High  School  in  September  and
         would soon be eligible for British nationality. The family had been
         here lawfully until 2009. The adults had studied, worked, and  made
         contributions. It was accepted that they are now a  burden  on  the
         state but previously  they  were  entitled  to  access  educational
         services. The children's position has to be looked at independently
         of the  immigration  status  of  the  adults  as  explained  in  EV
         (Philippines). They have been here for more than 7 years and are at
         a crucial stage of their education. The 3rd appellant has only been
         to Pakistan for 1 month whilst an infant, and the 4th appellant has
         never been to Pakistan. It will be hard  to  adapt  linguistically.
         The  best  interest  of  the  children  outweighs  the   needs   of
         immigration control given the depth of the attachment. This is  not
         trumped by the contention that they would return as a  family  unit
         as, if so, the rules and legislation would not take  account  of  a
         qualifying child as a child has attachments.

     19. Ms Isherwood submitted that the family  have  not  lost  ties  with
         family in Pakistan. The 1st appellant was sponsored by  his  father
         to study here and they still have contact, and the 2nd  appellant's
         father helped them purchase their house. They said that  they  want
         to stay to run a business and for the  children's  education.  They
         always intended to stay permanently. They are and will be a  burden
         on the state as the children are at state  school  and  the  family
         have received NHS treatment. The facts here are  in  some  respects
         worse  for  these  appellants  than  in  EV  (Philippines)  and  AM
         (Malawi), as in those cases the children each arrived  with  leave.
         It is clear from AM (Malawi) that the mere presence of the children
         in the UK, and their academic success, was not a trump  card.  They
         would return to Pakistan as a family unit and it is  reasonable  to
         expect them to do so where the children can be educated in Pakistan
         and they would have the assistance of immediate family to help with
         integration. Little weight is to be attached to their private  life
         as it was all developed while their leave was precarious.

     20. Mr Abbas submitted  that  the  children  here  are  in  a  stronger
         position than those in EV (Philippines) as in this case  they  have
         been here for far longer and they do not share the culture of their
         parent's  home  country.  The  children's  circumstances  must   be
         considered  away  from  their  parent's  circumstances.  They   are
         attached to the community here. The 3rd appellant is going to a new
         school here with the same peer group. In Pakistan he would struggle
         to relate to his new circumstances. Mr Abbas accepted that they can
         be housed and educated in Pakistan.

Case Law

     21. We note here the guidance contained in MM and Others v Secretary of
         State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA  Civ  985  that,  if  the
         relevant rule does not provide a complete code, then the Article  8
         proportionality exercise should be undertaken. There will generally
         be no or only a relatively small gap between the new rules and  the
         requirements of Article 8 in individual  cases.  The  position  was
         further clarified in Secretary of State for the Home  Department  v
         SS (Congo)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387  where  it  was  confirmed  that
         compelling circumstances would need to be identified to  support  a
         claim for a grant of leave to remain outside  the  new  Immigration
         Rules in Appendix FM.

Discussion

     22. The appellants did not apply for permission to appeal  against  the
         Judge's decision to dismiss the appeal under the Immigration Rules.
         As we have stated (paragraph 8 above) that decision stands. We  are
         not therefore required to decide for the purpose of Appendix  FM  -
         EX.1. (a) (ii)  whether  it  would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
         children to leave the UK and return to Pakistan. However, we  shall
         consider that issue below in relation to the assessment of  Article
         8 outside the Immigration Rules.

     23. As we have stated above, we have underlined the preserved  findings
         of the Judge at paragraph 7  above  as  well  as  the  unchallenged
         findings in relation to the 1st and 2nd appellants. We informed the
         parties of the preserved findings in paragraphs 57 to 64 before  we
         proceeded  to  re-make  the  decision  and  that  the  unchallenged
         findings in relation to the 1st and 2nd appellants at paragraphs 46
         to 48 stand. Given these findings, it is not necessary  for  us  to
         conduct a full five-step analysis of the Article 8  claims  of  the
         appellants outside the Immigration Rules.

     24. We turn first to consider whether it is reasonable for the 3rd  and
         4th appellants to leave the United Kingdom.  We  find  that  it  is
         reasonable for them to leave the UK for the following reasons.

     25. In relation to EV (Philippines), in their favour the children  have
         both been here for over 7 years and have spent their  entire  lives
         here. The 3rd appellant has lived in the  United  Kingdom  for  ten
         years and the 4th for 8 years 3 months. They speak English and only
         a little Urdu. They go to school and inevitably have friends.  They
         are used to the English style of  education  and  curriculum.  They
         have been in education here for 6 and 4 years respectively. The 3rd
         appellant has just left Primary School. The 4th appellant has  left
         year 3 in Primary School. The Judge found at paragraph 49 that they
         are immersed in  UK  society  and  culture.  This  is  a  preserved
         finding. Nevertheless, this fact does not, of itself, mean that  it
         is unreasonable to expect them to  leave  the  UK.  In  the  modern
         world, there are many  examples  of  children  leaving  their  home
         countries and travelling across the world to live in a country with
         a culture to which they have had no exposure at all. There are many
         examples of children who have travelled to the United Kingdom  from
         all  parts  of   the   world   and   settled   here   successfully,
         notwithstanding the lack of  any  prior  exposure  to  society  and
         culture in the United Kingdom and often with little or no knowledge
         of the English language.

     26. The 3rd and 4th appellants have a connection with Pakistan  through
         their parents, grandparents, and extended family. They  would  form
         part of the majority religion and culture.  We  take  into  account
         that the 1st and 2nd appellants  have  very  limited  contact  with
         their  family  in  Pakistan  (see  paragraph  59  of  the   Judge's
         determination). However, the reality is that there is  no  evidence
         that the  3rd and 4th   appellants  would  lose  contact  with  any
         extended family in the United  Kingdom.  Thus,  little  though  the
         contact with extended family in Pakistan may be, it will  still  be
         more that they benefit from in the United Kingdom.

     27. We take into account that the culture and system  of  education  in
         Pakistan will be unfamiliar  to  the  3rd  and  4th  appellants.  A
         preserved finding of  the  Judge  was  that  they  are  bright  and
         industrious children who may be able to adapt  to  a  new  life  in
         Pakistan. Given the support of their parents , there is  no  reason
         why they would  be  unable  to  settle  into  life  and  school  in
         Pakistan. The 3rd appellant has to start a new school in the United
         Kingdom in any event, although we  acknowledge  that  he  would  be
         starting a new school in the United Kingdom in the company  of  his
         peer group, making the  experience  in   the  United  Kingdom  more
         familiar than would be the case in attending school in Pakistan for
         the first time. As the children are bright and  industrious,  there
         is no reason why they would be unable to learn Urdu.

     28. The 1st and 2nd appellants' oral evidence at the  previous  hearing
         (see paragraph 26 of that determination) was "that  the  bank  loan
         has  now  been  paid  off  and  the  house  now  had  a  value   of
         approximately �400,000", that being in keeping  with  the  evidence
         they submitted at that hearing where evidence  was  produced  (page
         136 of their  bundle)  that  a  house  sold  in  their  street  for
         �398,099. This should stand all of the appellants in good stead, in
         that, the funds will be available for them to have a new  home  and
         for the 3rd and  4th  appellants  to  be  educated  in  an  English
         speaking school in Pakistan.

     29. We accept that it is in the best  interests  of  the  3rd  and  4th
         appellants to continue their education in the  United  Kingdom,  if
         only because the system of education here is one they are  familiar
         with, they speak English  and  only  know  a  few  words  of  Urdu.
         However, any disadvantages are ameliorated to a large extent, given
         the financial position of their parents, the possibility  of  their
         being financed to study in an English speaking school  whilst  they
         learn Urdu prior to entering mainstream education in  Pakistan.  We
         recognise that they will have better education opportunities in the
         United Kingdom. However, it is always open to  them  to  return  to
         undertake further studies in the United Kingdom at  an  appropriate
         stage in their lives.

     30. In all of the circumstances and having given  weight  to  the  best
         interests of the children as a primary consideration, we find  that
         the 3rd and 4th appellants  will  be  able  to  adapt  to  life  in
         Pakistan. We find that it would be reasonable for them to leave the
         United Kingdom and live in Pakistan.

     31. With this finding in mind, we turn to the balancing exercise we are
         required to carry out in relation to proportionality.  Although  Mr
         Abbas informed us that the 3rd appellant  is  now  eligible  to  be
         naturalised as a British citizen, we cannot determine the Article 8
         claim on the basis that he is a British citizen until he  has  made
         his application and had his application accepted. Naturalisation is
         always at the Secretary of State's discretion.

     32. We find that the immigration status of the 1st and  2nd  appellants
         was precarious from the date of  their  respective  arrivals  until
         February 2009, from which time they have been in the United Kingdom
         unlawfully.

     33. However, in relation to the 3rd and 4th appellants, the position is
         a little more complicated. In  ZH  (Tanzania),  the  Supreme  Court
         considered that the immigration status of  parents  should  not  be
         attributed to minors who have had no control over their  situation.
         There is an issue as to whether this  survives  s.117B(4)  and  (5)
         under which it is directed that little weight should  be  given  to
         private life established at a time when a person is in  the  United
         Kingdom unlawfully or at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration
         status is precarious. The subsections do not make an exception  for
         children. We are inclined to  the  view  that  this  aspect  of  ZH
         (Tanzania) does not survive s.117B(4) and  (5).  However,  we  have
         decided to err on the side of caution and not take into account  in
         the balancing exercise the precarious immigration status of the 3rd
         and 4th appellants since birth as they have never had any  form  of
         leave.

     34. We take into account that the appellants have never hidden from the
         immigration authorities and have never been deceitful  about  their
         status. We also take into account that the Judge found at paragraph
         46 that there is no reason why the 1st and 2nd appellants could not
         use their skills to obtain employment in Pakistan. We find that all
         of the appellants will be able to continue their private  lives  in
         all its essential elements in Pakistan, albeit that the 3rd and 4th
         appellants will be doing so, with the help  and  support  of  their
         parents,  in a country they do not know.

     35.  We  take  all  of  these  considerations  in   relation   to   the
         circumstances of the appellants and weigh them against the  state's
         interests. As we have explained, there are two  dimensions  to  the
         state's interests. There is the  state's  interest  in  immigration
         control. There is also the fact that the  3rd  and  4th  appellants
         attend school in the United Kingdom and that the 2nd appellant  has
         obtained medical treatment on the NHS. The  family  have  therefore
         been an economic burden on the UK.

     36. We give such weight as we  consider  appropriate  to  each  of  the
         considerations we have discussed, applying  s.117B(4)  and  (5)  in
         relation to the 1st and 2nd appellants as we have explained. In all
         of the circumstances and having taken  all  relevant  matters  into
         account (whether or not  expressly  referred  to  above),  we  have
         concluded that removal would be proportionate and not in breach  of
         the rights of any of the appellants under Article 8.  The  decision
         to remove the appellants is a proportionate response to the need to
         retain the integrity of immigration control and  for  the  economic
         well being of the country.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of a material error on a point of law.

    We set aside the decision.

    We dismiss the appeals on immigration grounds.

    We dismiss the appeals on human rights grounds (Article 8).


Signed:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
24 August 2015

