
[pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/35859/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 June 2015                      |On 15 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                            Hope Ewere Odjadjare
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Onokwu, Arndale, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Hope Ewere Odjadjare, was born on 12 March 1978 and is a
    female citizen of Nigeria.  She has appealed to the First-tier Tribunal
    (Judge Henderson) against a decision of the respondent to refuse her  a
    residence card  as  a  family  member  of  an  EEA  national  (Krystian
    Glowacki, a citizen of Poland).  She now appeals, with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Judge Henderson, referring to TA (Kareem explained) Ghana  [2014]  UKUT
    00316, noted that she had not been provided with any evidence  to  show
    that the appellant's proxy marriage was valid in Polish law [17].  That
    element of the decision of the  judge  has  not  been  challenged;  the
    grounds appear to rely only on Article 8 ECHR.  However, before me,  Mr
    Onokwu, for the appellant, submitted that, because  the  appellant  and
    sponsor were "married," this proved they had a durable relationship for
    the purposes of Regulation 8 of the 2006 Regulations.  That  submission
    has no merit.  As the judge found [17] the appellant  and  sponsor  are
    not legally married for the  purposes  of  the  2006  Regulations.   As
    regards "durable relationship" the judge dealt with this at [18 -  20].
    She found that there was no "adequate evidence  to  show  there  was  a
    durable relationship."  She noted much of the "documentary evidence was
    very recent - April 2014 being  the  earliest  date  of  the  documents
    provided.  Three photographs of the  couple  together  does  little  to
    assist in showing evidence of  durability."   I  consider  that  was  a
    finding plainly open to the judge on the  evidence  and,  although  the
    judge did not go on to deal with Article 8 ECHR, having found that  the
    couple were not married and were not in a durable  relationship  it  is
    impossible to see how she may have allowed the appeal on Article 8 ECHR
    family life where she had dismissed it under the 2006 Regulations.  The
    judge did err in law by failing to deal with Article 8, but  her  error
    was not material and I decline to set aside her decision.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 10 July 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

There is no fee payable.


Signed   Date 10 July 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
