
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/35753/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |   Decision & Reasons          |
|                                              |Promulgated                    |
|On 21 September 2015                          |   On 20 January 2016          |
|                                              |                               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                 Rayan Khan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Blundell, instructed by Makka, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Rayan Khan, was born on 12 February 1970 and is  a  male
    citizen of Bangladesh.   He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge
    E M Simpson) against a decision of the respondent dated 13 August  2013
    to refuse his application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom  as
    a victim of domestic violence (paragraph 289C of HC 395  (as  amended))
    and a decision to remove him by way of directions under Section  47  of
    the Immigration, Asylum  and  Nationality  Act  2006.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal, in a decision promulgated on  9  March  2015,  dismissed  the
    appeal.  The appellant now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. There are four grounds of appeal.  The first concerns  the  refusal  of
    the judge to admit a  report  of  Emma  Citron,  a  psychologist.   The
    hearing before Judge Simpson took place on  9  December  2014  and  her
    decision was promulgated on 9 March 2015.  Following the hearing and on
    19 December 2014, the appellant's solicitors faxed  to  the  judge  the
    psychological assessment of Emma Citron which  was  dated  17 December
    2014.  The solicitors asked the judge  to  accept  the  report  and  to
    consider it in her analysis and prior to determining the  appeal.   The
    solicitors cited E and R [2004] EWCA Civ 49, in particular at paragraph
    [27]:
    The first question is strictly academic, because the new  evidence  was
    not made available to the IAT before the decision date. We  have  noted
    that in  refusing  leave  in  R's  case,  the  IAT  recorded  that  its
    determination had been "signed" at the end of the hearing, although  it
    was not "promulgated" until some months later. The  IAT's  decision  in
    fact bears the Vice-President's signature dated 23rd April  2003,  but
    there is no indication that it was communicated to the parties  at  the
    time; the "date determination notified" is given as 19th August  2003.
    The precise status of the appeal in the intervening period was not  the
    subject of detailed argument before us (see Macdonald  Immigration  Law
    and Practice 5th Ed. para  18.167,  for  discussion  of  the  possible
    consequences of delay  in  promulgation.)  As  we  understand  it,  the
    argument on both sides has proceeded on the basis that,  up  until  the
    date of promulgation, the IAT would  have  been  at  liberty  to  admit
    further evidence (whether or not it was under any duty to do so).  That
    seems correct. In accordance with ordinary principles, the IAT remained
    seized of the matter until the decision was  formally  communicated  to
    the parties.

 3. The solicitors also submitted that the late submission  of  the  report
    would not have "a detrimental effect on any of the  parties  concerned"
    [Judge Simpson's decision, 9].  Judge Simpson had made directions on  6
    January 2013. She recorded that she had received  the  report  and  the
    faxed  letter  from  the  solicitors  requesting   that   she   decide,



         ...whether or not to exercise my discretion to  admit  post-hearing
         evidence  [after]  the  respondent  had  the  opportunity  to  make
         representations which had to be received no later than  4  p.m.  16
         January 2015.  The respondent replied with submissions  by  fax  16
         January 2015.

 4. Ground 1 complains that the  judge  did  not  at  any  stage  prior  to
    promulgation   of   the   determination   "invite    the    appellant's
    representatives to respond to the respondent's submission either by way
    of written submissions ... or by reconvening the hearing  in  order  to
    hear oral submissions on the subject matter ..."  The appellant asserts
    that Judge Simpson,

         clearly attached great  weight  to  the  submissions  made  by  the
         respondent in reaching a decision on the admissibility of the post-
         hearing evidence e.g. comments on  the  force  of  the  submissions
         contained in paragraphs 61 and 62 of the determination.  It  should
         be further  noted  that  Judge  Simpson  in  paragraph  50  of  the
         determination noted that 'limited submissions' had  been  furnished
         by the appellant's representatives.

 5. The "limited submissions" from the appellant's representatives were the
    citing of [27] of in ER (see  above).   Judge  Simpson  summarised  the
    respondent's submissions regarding the expert report as follows:

    The respondent  furnished  detailed  submissions  concerning  the  late
    report obtained from Ms Citron and these concern not the  admission  of
    the evidence but the weight to be attached to it.  More particularly it
    was submitted that:

    .    the respondent had not had the opportunity  to  cross-examine  the
         appellant about the report;

    .    the appellant did not  have  any  up-to-date  information  at  the
         hearing about his mental health;

    .    the expert had described  matters  not  part  of  the  appellant's
         evidence, physical abuse, the wife throwing "objects" as opposed to
         an  "object"  and  made  conclusions  about  the  information   and
         instructions before her concerning  whether  the  appellant  was  a
         victim of domestic violence, citing in particular a description  of
         the wife as "having some form of paranoid  personality  profile  or
         low level paranoid psychosis";

    .    the expert had drawn conclusions concerning the appellant's mental
         health difficulties  without  sight  of  his  medical  records  and
         thereby his medical  history  when  concluding  such  problems  had
         arisen as a consequence of "severe abuse" faced in the marriage.

 6. As noted above,  the  grounds  of  appeal  assert  that  the  appellant
    suffered  a  procedural  unfairness  because  (i)  the  judge  attached
    significant weight  to  the  respondent's  submissions  and;  (ii)  the
    appellant was not able to make any submissions in response to those  of
    the respondent.  As regards (i), and  as  noted  above,  the  appellant
    asserts that the judge "attached great weight to the submissions of the
    respondent" at [61-62]:

         61.  As above I  have  intimated  my  views  that  with  reasonable
             diligence medical evidence should have been obtained.   Having
             regard to  other  matters  arising  under  Ladd  and  Marshall
             principles  and  the  submissions  made  on  behalf   of   the
             respondent concerning Ms Citron's report I consider there  was
             force  in  the  submissions  that  the  evidence  itself  also
             contained a material gap, namely  information  concerning  the
             appellant's medical history, and considered further that  this
             disclosed   a   probable   material   irrelevance    of    the
             psychologist's evidence as it effectively 'hung upon' the word
             of the appellant absent of material information from his GP.

         62.  Altogether I find that there was not shown a reasonable  basis
             for the  admission  of  the  post-hearing  evidence,  even  if
             admitted,  there  was  I  find  force  in   the   respondent's
             submission  that  the  expert  'overreached'  herself  on  the
             'facts' presented to her when absent of  the  medical  history
             there was concluded the appellant  had  faced  'severe  abuse'
             from his wife during the course of his marriage".

 7. Significantly, the judge has made no reference to the comments made  by
    Ms Citron regarding the appellant's wife (see above) which were  raised
    in the submissions of the respondent.  Mr  Blundell,  appearing  before
    the Upper Tribunal as he had before the First-tier  Tribunal,  told  me
    that he accepted the judge's  comment  that  "the  respondent  was  not
    afforded the ability at minimum to cross-examine the appellant  or  its
    contents or the experts themselves."  It follows from  that  acceptance
    that bullet points  (1)  and  (2)  (see  above)  were  uncontroversial.
    Therefore, the only submission of the respondent regarding  the  report
    to which the judge has attached weight and upon which  the  appellant's
    representative has not commented is that concerning the failure  of  Ms
    Citron to have sight of the appellant's medical  records  in  preparing
    her report.  Before the Upper Tribunal, the appellant did  not  dispute
    the  respondent's  submission  that  the  expert  had  not   seen   the
    appellant's medical records.  It is difficult to see,  therefore,  what
    injustice the appellant has suffered by being denied the opportunity to
    make submissions in response to those submitted by the respondent.   Ms
    Citron had not seen the medical records and Judge Simpson was  entitled
    to attach weight to that fact.  Furthermore, given that the  submission
    of the report was accompanied by submissions  as  to  the  reasons  for
    admitting it post-hearing, it seems likely that Judge Simpson concluded
    that the appellant had made the submissions that he wished to make both
    as regards the admission of the report and the weight to be attached to
    it.  I am not satisfied that any procedural unfairness has occurred  in
    the circumstances either as alleged or at all.

 8. The second ground of appeal concerns the alleged failure of  the  judge
    properly to assess the appellant's mental health and its  relevance  to
    the outcome of the appeal.  At [47], the judge  found  that  there  was
    insufficient "force of evidence on the  back  of  the  appellant's  two
    witnesses for his appeal to find that the problems in  the  appellant's
    mental health were an outcome of the domestic violence or abuse that he
    claimed."  The grounds cite Emma Citron's  report  and  her  conclusion
    that the appellant's mental health  profile  was  "entirely  consistent
    with that of a victim of a high level of domestic violence."

 9. Ground 2 also concerns the refusal of the judge to admit the report  of
    Emma Citron and argues in effect that, had the  report  been  admitted,
    the judge may have reached a  different  conclusion.   At  [59-60]  the
    judge wrote:

    59.  Addressing Ladd v Marshall principles which I consider firstly and
         that it was not shown that the fresh evidence could not  have  been
         obtained with reasonable diligence.  The  second  question  appears
         very much to be the concern of a reviewing court nevertheless I  am
         not satisfied that there were shown that  the  fresh  evidence  was
         probably materially relevant.  As to the third question putting  to
         the side for the moment questions concerning its weight  there  was
         no real basis to consider  that  the  evidence  was  but  credible,
         namely  that  it  was  the  expert  opinion   of   an   independent
         psychologist concerning the appellant (sic).

    60.  I considered the request to furnish this report after the  hearing
         was made very much on the basis of the belated stark realisation of
         the gaps in the appellant's evidence.  I consider that it  is  not
         without reason that where minor parts of  evidence  have  not  been
         provided that provision can be made for appellants to provide  some
         after   a   hearing,   for   example,   missing   pay    slips/bank
         statements/P60s where the probability of their controversy  is  low
         and where provision of such evidence provides a corrective function
         and assists in reaching an informed decision.  However this was not
         the case here as in  furnishing  an  expert  report  primarily  the
         respondent was not afforded the ability at minimum to cross-examine
         the appellant on its contents  or  the  experts  themselves  (sic).



10. In summary, the principles of Ladd v Marshall [1954]  I  WLR  1489  are
    that evidence is only admitted if it could not be and  could  not  with
    reasonable diligence have been obtained before the trial,  if  it  will
    probably have a significant impact on the result, and if it is credible
    though not necessarily incontrovertible.  Judge Simpson found that  the
    psychological  evidence  could  have  been  obtained  with   reasonable
    diligence [61].  The Ladd v Marshall application therefore fell at  the
    first hurdle.  With regard to the significance of  the  report  to  the
    judge's conclusions, the judge at [62] found  that,  even  if  she  had
    admitted  the  report,  she  would  have  attached  limited  weight  to
    conclusions which indicated that "the expert 'overreached'" herself  on
    "facts" which had been obtained only from  the  appellant  himself  and
    without reference to the appellant's medical records.  Paragraphs  [60-
    62] appear to mix up the questions of  the  report's  admissibility  as
    evidence and the judge's assessment of what weight should be  given  to
    the report if it were to be admitted, but it is nonetheless clear  that
    the report, had it been admitted, would  not  have  had  a  significant
    impact  upon  Judge  Simpson's  conclusions.    Further,   although   I
    acknowledge  (as  did  Judge  Simpson)  that  the  appellant  has  been
    suffering low mood the appellant has failed adequately to  explain  why
    he could not, with reasonable diligence, have obtained the report prior
    to the hearing.  Moreover, even if the judge was wrong to  exclude  the
    report for the reasons cited by Mr Blundell (see, in  particular,  [27]
    of E and R), she has  given  adequate  reasons  attaching  very  little
    weight to the report even if it  had  been  admitted.   Overall,  I  am
    satisfied  that  the  judge  has   not   perpetrated   any   procedural
    irregularity,  that  she  has  given  reasons  for  not  admitting  the
    psychologist's report and, even if she  was  wrong  not  to  admit  the
    report, has made it plain that the contents of  the  report  would  not
    have altered her decision.

11. Ground 3 states that there had been a broad consensus in  the  evidence
    of the appellant and  his  two  witnesses  and  challenge  the  judge's
    conclusion that the behaviour of the appellant's  wife  was  "a  random
    action ... and not one  purposely  directed  to  the  appellant."   The
    assessment of the factual evidence before the judge was  a  matter  for
    her and she has reached conclusions on  that  evidence  which  are  not
    perverse and which are clear and  cogent.   Ground  3  amounts,  in  my
    opinion, to nothing more than a disagreement with the judge's findings.



12. Ground 4 acknowledges that  "evidential  deficiencies  noted  by  Judge
    Simpson,  in  particular  those  in  paragraphs  41  and  42,  may  not
    necessarily be explained away by the psychological assessment  of  Emma
    Citron ...".  At  [41-42],  the  judge  noted  inconsistencies  in  the
    appellant's  evidence,  in  particular  his  ability  to   purchase   a
    restaurant business at a time when  he  claimed  to  be  facing  severe
    financial demands from his wife.  The appellant asserts that he suffers
    from self-neglect to low motivation and  memory  loss  and  that  these
    problems affected the appellant's ability to  obtain  medical  evidence
    prior to the hearing.  Having raised the inconsistencies referred to by
    the judge at [41-42], Ground 4 offers no further explanation for  those
    discrepancies.   It  is  not  clear   that   the   appellant   or   his
    representatives referred to  the  appellant's  low  mental  state  when
    seeking to explain the failure to obtain the psychological report prior
    to the hearing.  In any event, as I have stated above, I find that  the
    judge did not err in law in her treatment of the  psychological  report
    and its admissibility as evidence.

13. In the circumstances, this appeal is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 1 January 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date 1 January 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


