
-
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Numbers:
IA/35284/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 26 January 2016                     |On 18 April 2016                    |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                                HARDEEP SINGH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:         Ms M Mahotre, instructed by M&S Solicitors
For the Respondent:        Mr E Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of India  born  12  October  1990.   On  16
    September 2015 he was granted permission  to  appeal  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge N Dickson,  who  for  reasons  given  in  his
    decision dated 5 April 2015, dismissed the appeal against the Secretary
    of State's decision dated 27 August  2014  refusing  to  grant  further
    leave to remain.

 2. Entry clearance had been granted to the appellant as a  Tier-4  student
    on 15 February 2011 to expire 21 June 2014.  It is  his  case  that  he
    made an in time application on the expiry date  for  further  leave  to
    remain.  The Secretary of State however contended that the  application
    was not made until 24 June and thus not  giving  rise  to  a  right  of
    appeal as the refusal did not result in the appellant no longer  having
    leave to enter or remain (section  82(d),  Nationality,  Immigration  &
    Asylum Act 2002).

 3. The appellant did not attend the hearing of  his  appeal  on  31  March
    2015.  The First-tier judge considered  that  it  was  clear  from  the
    documents produced by the Presenting Officer  that  the  appellant  had
    sent his application by special delivery on  24  June  2015.   He  also
    considered a statement of  additional  grounds  dated  1  October  2014
    raising article 8.  For reasons given in her  letter  dated  3  October
    2014 the Secretary of State certified the claim  as  clearly  unfounded
    with reference to section 94(2) of  the  2002  Act.   Consequently  the
    judge concluded that there was no valid appeal before him and,  in  the
    alternative, dismissed the appeal as the appellant  had  not  left  the
    United Kingdom.

 4. The appellant relies on copies of emails that  he  submitted  with  his
    grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal in support of his case  in
    the Upper Tribunal.

 5. The first email timed at 7.53pm  from  "do-not-reply@homeoffice.gov.uk"
    addressed to the appellant confirms that his UKV'I on-line account  had
    been set up with the user name and temporary password.

 6.  The  next  email  timed  at  8.50pm  on   20   June   2014   is   from
    Shopper@worldpay.com to Hardeep11010@gmail.com and indicates  that  any
    reply should be sent to  i.-apply.feedback@homeoffice.gsi.gov.uk.   The
    body of the email acknowledges a processing of a transaction on  behalf
    of UK Visas and Immigration and provides, in  addition,  a  world  paid
    transaction ID a UKV'I reference number.   Any  enquiries  were  to  be
    directed to UK Visas and Immigration, with the indication that  it  was
    their responsibility "... to confirm that your order has been accepted,
    and to deliver any goods or services you have ordered."

 7. The third email again from  "do-not-reply@homeoffice.gov.uk"  addressed
    to the appellant on the same date and also  timed  at  8.50pm  includes
    this text; "you have completed your application tier-4  student  "print
    and send" application on line".

 8. The appellant subsequently sent a printed copy of  his  application  to
    the  Home  Office.   According  to  the  Secretary  of   State's   case
    information database, a special delivery letter was received on 24 June
    2014.  In her decision letter dated 27 August the  Secretary  of  State
    treated this date as the one  when  the  appellant  made  his  combined
    application for leave to remain as a Tier-4 (general)  student  migrant
    under the points base system and for a biometric residents permit.

 9. Paragraph 34(g) of the Immigration  Rules  provides  (relevant  to  the
    issue before us):

         "34(g)
         For the purposes of these rules, the date on which  an  application
         or claim (or a variation in accordance with paragraph 34(E) is made
         up as follows:
           i) ...
          ii) ...
         iii) ...
          iv) Where the application  is  made  by  the  online  application
              process, on the date on  which  the  on-line  application  is
              submitted."

10. The evidence submitted with the notice  of  appeal  was  sufficient  to
    persuade the Duty Judge that  the  application  for  further  leave  to
    remain had been made before expiry of the leave on which the  appellant
    had entered the United Kingdom.  He made this endorsement on  the  file
    when approving the issue of the appeal:

         "Valid (proof application made before leave expired on  HO  on-line
         portal has been filed)"

11. He also gave the following instruction:

        "Hardeep Singh
        IA/35284/2014
        Please copy the gmail docs and send to Chris  Weeks,  removal  case
        work team 14, Sheffield for his/her views.  If nothing is  received
        from him/her within  five  days  this  appeal  will  proceed  to  a
        hearing.
        NMK Lawrence, Duty Judge, 28 October 2014"

12. It is not evidently clear from  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Dickson what view he took of the emails, if any, even though they
    were before him.

13. Mr Toufan accepted that the Secretary of State's guidance  relating  to
    online applications reflected the position as stated in the third email
    above.  By this we understand that online applications were regarded as
    having been made when submitted online. Accordingly  we  expressed  the
    provisional view at the hearing that a valid  in-time  application  had
    been made by the appellant based on the material that he  had  provided
    to the First-tier Tribunal and he was entitled to a  right  of  appeal.
    Our view was contingent  upon  Mr  Toufan  checking  the  position  and
    responding; he did so in an email dated 27 January 2016 in these terms:

         "Further to your directions given in court  yesterday  I  have  now
         perused the file and confirm that there is no  further  information
         to  rebut  the  panels  finding  that   the   appellant's   on-line
         application made on 20 June 2014 was made in time."

14. Accordingly, we set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    and remit the case for reconsideration  by  a  differently  constituted
    tribunal.  In doing so we express no view on  the  merits;  that  is  a
    matter for the First-tier Tribunal.






Signed                                       Date 14 April 2016
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson





