
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/35472/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 November 2015                  |On 21 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                             PAVALARAJAH KESAVAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Nasim (counsel) instructed by Chris Raja,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  Designated
Tribunal Judge Manuell dated 20 April 2015, which dismissed the  Appellant's
appeal.

Background

3.    The Appellant was born on 2 April  1989  and  is  a  national  of  Sri
Lanka. The appellant left Sri Lanka when he  was  only  two  years  of  age.
Since then, his father has worked in Gulf States, where  the  appellant  has
lived for long periods. The appellant entered the UK on 25 August 2007 as  a
student, with  leave  to  remain  until  31  October  2009.  The  respondent
extended leave to remain three times so that  the  appellant  had  leave  to
remain until 21 June 2014. On  18  June  2014  the  appellant  submitted  an
application for leave to remain in  the  UK  on  the  basis  of  established
article 8  ECHR  private  life  in  the  UK.  The  respondent  refused  that
application 22nd of August 2014.

The Judge's Decision

4.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Designated
Tribunal Judge Manuell  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision.

5.    Grounds of appeal were lodged and on  4  August  2015  Upper  Tribunal
Judge Knowles QC gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

    "The Judge's reasoning with respect to  the  appellant's  ties  to  Sri
    Lanka  is  weak  and  insufficient  as  is  the  reasoning  behind  the
    conclusions in paragraph 15 that the appellant's private life in the UK
    is weak"

The Hearing

6.    Mr Nasim, counsel for the appellant, told  me  that  there  are  three
deficiencies contained within the decision. The first is the approach  taken
by the Judge to paragraph 276 ADE of the rules. The second is  the  approach
the Judge took to article 8 outside the rules.  The  third  is  the  Judge's
consideration of section 117B of the 2002 Act. He  relied  on  the  case  of
Bossadi (para 276ADE; suitability; ties) [2015] UKUT 00042(IAC), and  argued
that, in  each  of  these  three  areas,  the  Judge  has  given  inadequate
consideration to the law and set out no reason for his findings in fact.  He
argued that in using the expression "undue  hardship"  in  considering  both
paragraph 276 ADE and article 8 ECHR, the Judge has applied the wrong  test.
He referred me to  [9]of  the  decision  which  records  that  a  number  of
witnesses adopted letters  of  support  as  their  evidence  in  chief,  and
complained that there are no findings of fact in relation to that  evidence,
nor in relation to the significant amount of documentary evidence  produced.
He told me that an inadequate fact finding exercise had  been  carried  out,
and as a result the decision is tainted by material errors of law. He  asked
me to set the decision aside.

7.    Ms Holmes, for the respondent, argued that although  the  decision  is
brief, it contains everything it needs to contain  and  is  not  tainted  by
material error of law. She argued that, on the evidence presented,  if  more
findings of fact were made they would not favour the appellant.  She  relied
on the case of AM (Malawi) [2015]  UKUT,  and  argued  that  the  Judge  had
considered section 117B of the 2002 Act &  found  there  were  more  factors
weighing against the appellant than in the appellant's  favour  because  his
immigration status was precarious throughout his time in the  UK.  She  told
me that, in reality, the appellant had a weak case  because  any  article  8
private life established (if any  is  established  at  all)  is  of  limited
significance. She urged me to dismiss the appeal.

Analysis

8.    In Ogundimu (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria [2013]  UKUT  00060  (IAC)
it was held (inter alia) that the natural and ordinary meaning of  the  word
'ties' in  paragraph  399A  of  the  Immigration  Rules  imports  a  concept
involving something more  than  merely  remote  or  abstract  links  to  the
country of proposed deportation or  removal.   It  involves  there  being  a
connection to life in that country.  Consideration of whether a  person  has
'no ties' to such a country must involve a rounded assessment of all of  the
relevant circumstances and is not to be limited  to  'social,  cultural  and
family' circumstances."

9.    In Bossadi (paragraph 276ADE; suitability; ties) [2015] UKUT 42  (IAC)
it was held that:

         "(1)     Being able to meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE of
             the  Immigration  Rules  requires  being  able  to  meet   the
             suitability requirements set out in paragraph  276ADE(1).   It
             is because this subparagraph contains suitability requirements
             that it is not  possible  for  foreign  criminals  relying  on
             private life grounds to circumvent the provisions of the Rules
             dealing with deportation of foreign criminals.

         (2)      The requirement set out in paragraph 276ADE(vi) (in  force
             from 9 July 2012 to 27 July 2014) to show that  a  person  'is
             aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously in the  UK  for
             less than 20 years (discounting any  period  of  imprisonment)
             but has no ties (including social, cultural  or  family)  with
             the country to which he would have to go if required to  leave
             the UK',  requires  a  rounded  assessment  as  to  whether  a
             person's familial ties could result in support to him  in  the
             event of his return, an assessment taking  into  account  both
             subjective and objective considerations and also consideration
             of what lies within the choice of a claimant to achieve."

10.   The Judge's decision is brief. The Judge  commences  [12]  by  stating
"there was no dispute of  fact  save  possibly  as  to  the  extent  of  the
appellant's ties  with  Sri  Lanka".  At  [13]  the  Judge  finds  that  the
appellant's absence from Sri Lanka has been part  of  his  family's  choice,
but that the appellant has retained his nationality  and  has  travelled  to
Sri Lanka. His ethnicity as a Tamil is not in dispute. He concludes [13]  by
stating that the appellant ".. has no right to nominate the  United  Kingdom
as his country of residence"

11.   The Judge then goes on to consider the appellant's  article  8  rights
at [14] and [15]. In reality there is nothing wrong with the logic  employed
by the Judge.  The  difficulty  is  that  it  is  beyond  dispute  that  the
significant amount of documentary and oral evidence was  presented.  Between
[5] and  [9]  the  Judge  succinctly  summarises  the  hearing.  The  bundle
produced by the appellant makes it clear  that  there  was  documentary  and
oral evidence from the appellant. There was documentary  and  oral  evidence
from a number of the appellant's  friends.  A  witness  statement  from  the
appellant's father was placed before the Judge. The conclusions  reached  by
the Judge may be correct. What is missing from the decision is  an  analysis
of the evidence that was produced. The error that has been made is that  the
Judge has come to a conclusion, but is not apparent from the  decision  that
the conclusion is driven by findings in fact to which the law is applied.

12.   In DC (Philippines) [2005]  UKIAT  00011  the  Tribunal  said  that  a
failure to make findings on points raised in the notice of  refusal  (in  an
immigration appeal) was an error of law.  In Malaba v SSHD [2006]  EWCA  Civ
820 inadequate reasons were held to be an error of law.

13.   Put simply, the decision contains conclusions but does not contain  an
analysis of the evidence nor does it contain adequate findings of fact.  The
result is that when the appellant reads the decision he knows  that  he  has
lost, but he does not know why. I therefore have to find that  the  decision
is tainted by material errors of  law  because  it  races  to  a  conclusion
without sufficient explanation.  As the decision  contains  material  errors
of law, I set it aside. There is sufficient evidence before me to enable  me
to remake the decision.

Findings of Fact

14.   The appellant is an ethnic Tamil born in Sri Lanka on  2  April  1989.
The appellant's first language is Tamil. The appellant left Sri  Lanka  with
his family when he was two years old. The only other time the appellant  has
lived in Sri Lanka was for 18 months between 2005 and 2007.

15.   The appellant first entered the UK as a  student  on  25th  of  August
2007 (when he was 18 years old). He returned to his family in Dubai for  the
holiday periods, but has spent the majority of time in the UK  since  August
2007. The respondent granted the appellant further leave to  remain  in  the
UK as a student until 21 June 2014. On 21 May  2014  the  appellant  applied
for leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  describing  himself  as  stateless.  The
respondent refused the appellant's application in part  (at  least)  because
the appellant holds a Sri Lankan passport and so is not stateless.

16.   On 18 June 2014 the appellant submitted an application  for  leave  to
remain in terms of appendix FM and paragraph  276  ADE  of  the  immigration
rules. The respondent refused the appellant's application 22nd August  2014.
It is against that decision that the appellant appeals.

16.   None of the appellant's  family  members  remain  in  Sri  Lanka.  The
appellant's parents continue to live  in  Dubai.  Some  of  the  appellant's
relatives have sought asylum in Europe and Canada.  The  appellant's  sister
is married and now lives in Thailand.

17.   The appellant lives with his maternal grand uncle,  whose  son  is  of
similar age to the appellant. In July 2012 the appellant  graduated  with  a
BSc in computer science. In January 2013 the appellant enrolled for  a  BTEC
extended diploma.

Analysis

18.   Although the appellant's application makes reference  to  appendix  FM
of the immigration rules, it is not seriously argued that he can fulfil  the
requirements of appendix FM. It  is  beyond  dispute  that  the  appellant's
parents are in  Dubai  and  that  the  appellant's  only  sibling  lives  in
Thailand. The appellant might argue that he lives with  his  maternal  grand
uncle and that his maternal grand uncle's son is  like  a  brother  to  him.
What the appellant cannot escape is that he  does  not  have  any  immediate
family members in the UK. Including  the  exceptions  set  out  in  EX.1  of
appendix FM, there are seven categories  of  persons  to  whom  appendix  FM
applies. The appellant does not fall within any of those categories

19.   The appellant argues that he can fulfil the requirements of  paragraph
297 ADE of the immigration rules. The appellant  submitted  his  application
on 18 June 2014. The respondent's decision was made  on  22nd  August  2014.
For applications made after 9 July 2012 when the decision was  taken  before
28 July 2014 the relevant wording of paragraph 276 ADE was "(vi) is aged  18
years or above, has lived continuously in the UK  for  less  than  20  years
(discounting any period of imprisonment) but has no ties (including  social,
cultural or family) with the country  to  which  he  would  have  to  go  if
required to leave the UK". For applications which are decided after 28  July
2014 the relevant wording is " ....  aged  18  years  or  above,  has  lived
continuously in the UK for less than 20 years  (discounting  any  period  of
imprisonment)  but  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   the
applicant's integration into the country to which he would  have  to  go  if
required to leave the United Kingdom".

20.   The cases of Ogundimu (Article 8 -  new  rules)  Nigeria  [2013]  UKUT
00060 (IAC) and Bossadi (paragraph 276ADE; suitability;  ties)  [2015]  UKUT
42 (IAC) are of limited  relevance,  because  the  test  applicable  to  the
appellant's case is not a lack of ties, it is whether or not there are  very
significant  obstacles  to  the  appellant's  integration  into  Sri  Lankan
society.

21.   No reliable evidence of  very  significant  obstacles  to  integration
into Sri Lankan society  is  placed  before  me.  It  is  a  fact  that  the
appellant is a Sri Lankan national and holds a Sri Lankan passport. It is  a
fact that the appellant is a gifted, well-educated, healthy young  man.  The
appellant has only spent limited periods of time in Sri Lanka. He  was  only
two when he left the country, but he returned there when he was 16.  Between
the ages of 16 and 18 he was in education in  Sri  Lanka.  His  evidence  is
that he did not enjoy that time and that  he  was  bullied  at  school,  but
historic schoolboy bullying does not amount to a very  significant  obstacle
to integration.

22.   The appellant could return to Sri Lanka where he has no relatives  and
no friends. He would have to  start  afresh.  To  assist  him,  he  has  the
benefit of education in Sri Lanka, Dubai and  the  UK.  He  now  has  a  BSc
degree. He has experience in moving between countries and starting anew.  He
is a gifted, intelligent, educated, capable young man.  He  knew  enough  of
the Sri Lankan language to participate in education in  his  mid-teens.  Put
simply, what is to stop a young intelligent Sri  Lankan  from  returning  to
his country of origin and establishing  himself  there?  When  I  pose  that
question I can only come to the conclusion  that  are  no  obstacles;  I  am
certain that very significant obstacles to integration do not exist.

23.   The appellant would prefer to stay in the UK  rather  than  return  to
Sri Lanka. The appellant is 26 years old. He  has  lived  in  the  UK  since
August 2007 (eight years ago). The appellant came to the UK from Dubai,  but
he had only lived in Dubai for seven months before coming to the UK. I  find
that I am drawn to the same conclusion as designated  Judge  Manuell.  There
is no justifiable reason for the appellant to nominate the UK as his  choice
of residence just because he has not spent much time his country of  origin.
The appellant cannot fulfil the requirements of paragraph  276  ADE  of  the
immigration rules.

24.   In R (on the application of Esther Ebun Oludoyi & Ors) v Secretary  of
State for the Home Department (Article 8  -  MM  (Lebanon)  and  Nagre)  IJR
[2014] UKUT 00539 (IAC) it was held that there is nothing  in  R  (Nagre)  v
SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin), Gulshan (Article  8  -  new  Rules  -  correct
approach) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC) or Shahzad (Art 8: legitimate  aim)
[2014] UKUT 00085 (IAC) that  suggests  that  a  threshold  test  was  being
suggested as opposed to making it clear that there was a  need  to  look  at
the evidence to see if  there  was  anything  which  has  not  already  been
adequately considered in the context of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  which
could lead to a successful Article 8 claim. These authorities  must  not  be
read as seeking to qualify or fetter the assessment of Article  8.  This  is
consistent with para 128 of R (MM & Others) v  SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  985,
that there is no utility in  imposing  a  further  intermediate  test  as  a
preliminary to a consideration of an Article 8  claim  beyond  the  relevant
criterion-based Rule. As is held in R (Ganesabalan) v SSHD [2014] EWHC  2712
(Admin), there is no prior threshold which dictates whether the exercise  of
discretion should be considered; rather the nature  of  the  assessment  and
the  reasoning  which   are   called   for   are   informed   by   threshold
considerations.

25.   Section 117 of the 2002 Act is a factor to be taken  into  account  in
determining proportionality.  I  appreciate  that  as  the  public  interest
provisions are now contained in primary legislation they  override  existing
case law, Section 117A(2) requires me to have regard to  the  considerations
listed in Sections 117B and 117C.  I am conscious of my  statutory  duty  to
take these factors into account when coming to my conclusions.   I  am  also
aware that Section 117A(3) imposes upon  me  the  duty  of  carrying  out  a
balancing exercise. In so doing I remind myself of  the  guidance  contained
within Razgar.

26.   I must ask the following questions

    (i)    Does family life, private life,  home  or  correspondence  exist
    within the meaning of Article 8;

    (ii)   If so, has the right to respect for this been interfered with;

    (iii)  If so, was the interference in accordance with the law;

    (iv)   If so, was the interference in pursuit of one of the  legitimate
    aims set out in Article 8(2); and

    (v)    If so, is the interference proportionate to the pursuit  of  the
    legitimate aim?

27.   (a)   In  Kugathas v SSHD [2003] INLR 170 the  Court  of  Appeal  said
    that, in order to establish family life, it is necessary to  show  that
    there is a real committed or effective support or relationship  between
    the family members and the normal emotional ties between a  mother  and
    an adult son would not, without more, be  enough.  In  Etti-Adegbola  v
    SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 1319 the Court of Appeal concentrated on the  last
    part of that test and confirmed that the Tribunal had applied the right
    test in finding that a family's behaviour was "no  way  exceptional  or
    beyond the norm".  In JB (India) and Others v ECO, Bombay  [2009]  EWCA
    Civ 234 the Court of Appeal reiterated that the  approach  in  Kugathas
    must be applied to the question of whether family life for the purposes
    of Article 8 subsists between parents and adult children.

    (b)    The only family members the appellant has  in  the  UK  are  his
    grand uncle and the son of his grand uncle. The appellant  states  that
    the son of his grand uncle is of similar age to the appellant, and that
    the two young men feel like  they  are  brothers.  What  the  appellant
    cannot escape is that he and his distant cousin are young men in  their
    mid-20s. They enjoy an almost fraternal relationship, but both men  are
    now well into majority. There is no evidence of any form of dependence.
    The appellant has normal emotional ties to his only  two  relatives  in
    the UK. Family life within the meaning of article 8 ECHR does not exist
    for this appellant in the UK.

    (c)    This case really  turns  on  consideration  of  the  appellant's
    private life. Section 117B of the 2002 act tells  me  that  immigration
    control is in the  public  interest.  The  appellant  has  always  been
    lawfully in the UK. But any private life the  appellant  has  developed
    has been whilst his immigration status was precarious (AM (Malawi). The
    appellant speaks fluent English and is financially independent.

    (d)    In AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC) the Tribunal held a
    person's  immigration  status  is  "precarious"  if  their   continued
    presence in the UK will be dependent upon their  obtaining  a  further
    grant of leave; in some circumstances it  may  also  be  that  even  a
    person with indefinite leave to remain. In Deelah and others  (section
    117B - ambit) [2015] UKUT 00515  (IAC)  the  Tribunal  held  that  the
    adjective "precarious" in section 117B(5) of the  2002  Act  does  not
    contemplate only, and is not restricted to, temporary admission to the
    United Kingdom or a grant of leave  to  remain  in  a  category  which
    permits no expectation of a further grant.

    (e)    In AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC) the  Tribunal  held
    that an appellant can obtain no positive right to a grant of leave  to
    remain from either s117B (2)  or  (3),  whatever  the  degree  of  his
    fluency in English, or the strength of  his  financial  resources.  In
    Forman (ss 117A-C considerations) [2015] UKUT 00412 (IAC) it was  held
    that the public interest in firm immigration control is not diluted by
    the consideration that a person pursuing a claim under Article 8  ECHR
    has at no time been a financial  burden  on  the  state  or  is  self-
    sufficient or is likely to remain so indefinitely.   The  significance
    of these factors is  that  where  they  are  not  present  the  public
    interest is fortified.

    (f)    Even though there are factors set out in s.117B which weigh  in
    the appellant's favour, their  effect  in  the  consideration  of  the
    appellant's appeal are neutral.

    (g)    After considering each strand of evidence in this case I  still
    know very little about the component  parts  the  appellant's  private
    life. I know that the appellant has completed the course of study that
    he came to the UK for. I know that the appellant is a popular man with
    a number of friends. But those  are  the  only  conclusions  that  the
    evidence led in this case allow me to make. I still do  not  know  how
    the appellant passes his time; what  contribution  the  appellant  has
    made to the community; the degree of the appellant's integration  into
    UK life.  I know nothing of  the  appellant's  hobbies  and  pastimes.
    There  is  a  paucity  of  evidence  of  the  appellant's  significant
    friendships. The appellant has a home in  the  UK  the  appellant  has
    worked in the UK.

    (h)    Against those findings I balance the respondent's  interest  in
    preserving fair and effective  immigration  control  to  protect  this
    country's fragile economy. In Nasim and others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT
    25 (IAC) it was held that the judgments of the Supreme Court in  Patel
    and Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 72
    serve to re-focus attention on the nature and purpose of Article 8  of
    the ECHR and, in  particular,  to  recognise  that  Article's  limited
    utility in private life cases that are far removed from the protection
    of an individual's moral and physical integrity.

    (i)    When I weigh all of these  matters  I  can  only  come  to  the
    conclusion that if the respondent's decision amounts to  a  breach  of
    the appellant's right to respect for private life at all, it does  not
    amount to a disproportionate breach.

Conclusion

28.   I therefore find that the Judge's decision is tainted  by  a  material
error of law. I remake the decision. I set aside the decision of the  First-
tier Tribunal because it contains a material error of law. I substitute  the
following decision.

Decision

I dismiss the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

I dismiss the Appeal on Articles 8 ECHR grounds.


Signed      Date 4th December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
