
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/35269/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd June, 2015                    |On 10th June, 2015                   |
|Given extempore                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mr Vincent Emeje
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Not represented


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this appeal the Secretary of State is the appellant and  Mr  Vincent
    Emeje is the respondent.  The appellant appeals the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Denson promulgated on 15th January, 2015  following
    a hearing at Taylor House on 8th January, 2015, in which he allowed the
    appeal of the respondent, a citizen of  Ghana  who  was  born  on  13th
    September, 1980.

Immigration history

2.   The respondent has a lengthy immigration history.

3.   He made application for entry clearance as a visitor in  Accra  on  5th
    May, 2000, and was granted entry clearance valid from  8th  May,  2000,
    until 8th November, 2000.  He submitted a second application for  entry
    clearance as a visitor in Accra  on  20th  December,  2000,  which  was
    granted and was valid from 18th May, 2001 until  18th  November,  2001.
    He then made an application for entry clearance as a student  in  Accra
    on 3rd October, 2001.  That application was refused  with  a  right  of
    appeal on 1st November, 2001.  He lodged an appeal against the decision
    to refuse and this was dismissed on 24th September, 2002.  He then made
    a further entry clearance application as a student  in  Accra  on  21st
    March, 2002, and this was also refused.

4.    On  6th  February,  2006  he  was  encountered  by  UK  Border  Agency
    officials, at which time he advised that  he  had  entered  the  United
    Kingdom as a visitor sometime in 2000 and had remained here since  that
    date.  He was served with form IS.151A as an overstayer and was removed
    from the United Kingdom on 14th February, 2006.

5.    The  respondent  was  then  encountered  by  UK  Border  Agency  staff
    following his arrest by police at Plaistow on 9th February,  2007,  and
    again was served with  form  IS.151A  Notice  to  a  Person  Liable  to
    Detention, and when interviewed he said that he had entered the  United
    Kingdom using a Dutch passport which contained his photograph  but  not
    his personal details.  He was released on reporting restrictions.

Application of leave to remain

6.   On 10th May, 2010 the appellant then  made  application  for  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of private and  family  life.
    This application was refused on 28th June, 2011.  He lodged  an  appeal
    on 15th July, 2011  which  was  dismissed  on  30th  August,  2011  and
    permission to appeal was refused on 16th September, 2011.   His  appeal
    rights  became  exhausted  on  28th  September,  2011.   The  appellant
    remained in the United Kingdom and on  12th  March,  2012  applied  for
    indefinite leave to remain in the category of a  spouse  of  a  settled
    person.  That application was refused and the appellant appealed to the
    First Tier Tribunal.

Appeal to the First Tier Tribunal

7.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Denson noted that it was  accepted  that  the
    respondent could not meet the requirements of the relevant  Immigration
    Rules to remain in the United Kingdom as the spouse of a person present
    and  settled  and  neither  could  he  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules with regard to  his  family  or  private  life  under
    Article 8, notwithstanding the fact that he has  two  children  by  his
    wife and one by somebody else in the United Kingdom.

8.   Having noted that the appellant could not meet the requirements of  the
    Immigration Rules in relation to Article 8, the judge  then  noted  the
    provisions of Section 117B of the 2002 Act and  in  particular  Section
    117B(6).  He found that the respondent was in a genuine and  subsisting
    relationship with qualifying  children  who  are  British  and  in  the
    circumstances found that it would not be reasonable to expect  them  to
    leave the United Kingdom.

9.    The  judge  then  purported  to  undertake  a  Razgar  step  by   step
    consideration  of  the  question  of  proportionality.   He  noted  the
    provisions of Section 117B(6) and concluded  that  the  respondent  had
    shown that his removal would be disproportionate.

Submission on error of law

10.  The  appellant,  dissatisfied  with  that  decision,  appealed  and  in
    addressing me today Ms Fijiwala on behalf of the respondent, said  that
    effectively there were two errors in the  judge's  determination.   The
    first was in applying the Rules.  The judge noted at paragraph 7 of the
    determination that the Immigration Rules could not be met  in  relation
    to an application to remain as a spouse and at paragraph 31 found  that
    the respondent could not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules
    in respect of Article 8 either.  He then went on  to  consider  Section
    117B(6) ignoring the fact that Section 117B(6) is not freestanding.

11.  Ms Fijiwala prayed in aid Section 44 of SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ  387
    where Lord Justice Richards said this:

         "The proper approach should  always  be  to  identify,  first,  the
         substantive content of the relevant Immigration Rules, to see if an
         applicant for leave to remain  or  leave  to  enter  satisfies  the
         conditions laid down in those Rules (so as to be entitled to  leave
         to remain or leave to enter within the Rules)  and  to  assess  the
         force of the public interest given expression in those Rules (which
         will be relevant to the balancing  exercise  under  Article  8,  in
         deciding whether leave to  remain  or  leave  to  enter  should  be
         granted outside the substantive provisions set out in  the  Rules).
         Secondly, if an applicant does not satisfy the requirements in  the
         substantive part of the Rules, they may seek to  maintain  a  claim
         for grant of  leave  to  remain  or  leave  to  enter  outside  the
         substantive provisions of the Rules, pursuant  to  Article  8.   If
         there is a reasonably arguable case under Article 8 which  has  not
         already been  sufficiently  dealt  with  by  consideration  of  the
         application under the substantive provisions of the Rules, then  in
         considering that case the individual interests of the applicant and
         others whose Article 8 rights  are  in  issue  should  be  balanced
         against the public interest, including as expressed in  the  Rules,
         in order to make an assessment whether refusal to  grant  leave  to
         remain or leave to enter, as the case may be,  is  disproportionate
         and hence unlawful by virtue of Section 6(1) of  the  Human  Rights
         Act read with Article 8."

12.  The Presenting Officer submitted that the Rules must be identified  and
    the public interest needs to be considered.   Then,  if  the  appellant
    does not satisfy the Rules there needs to be a reasonably arguable case
    which has not already been dealt with by the Rules.  If  is  proper  to
    consider the matter outside the Rules then the public interest needs to
    be balanced with the matters due for consideration outside  the  Rules.
    Considering the matters outside the  Rules,  the  judge  has  taken  an
    incorrect approach because he simply has not followed  SS  (Congo)  and
    failed to identify some compelling circumstance to support such a claim
    outwith the Immigration Rules.

13.  The partner route and the parent  route  under  the  Immigration  Rules
    were considered in the case of the respondent under the Rules and there
    is no other reason for the judge to look outside the  Rules.   He  also
    failed to engage with the public interest element expressed within  the
    Rules.  It is clear from the refusal letter that the respondent did not
    meet the requirements of the Rules, because he did not  have  leave  to
    enter the United Kingdom as a spouse.  He had actually been removed  by
    the United Kingdom Border Agency  and  re-entered  the  United  Kingdom
    illegally using false documentation.  That was not  considered  by  the
    judge, as it should have been, if the judge was considering the  matter
    as a question of proportionality.

14.  The respondent did not  meet  the  parent  route  because  he  did  not
    demonstrate that he had full responsibility for his two  children  with
    his current partner and it is said on behalf of the Home Office that he
    failed to provide evidence of access rights to  his  other  child  and,
    therefore, the appeal fails under  the  Rules  and  there  was  nothing
    further for the judge to consider outwith the Rules.   The  Immigration
    Judge simply erred by taking into account Section 117B(6) as a separate
    matter outwith the Rules.

15.  I heard a response from the respondent, who was  not  represented.   He
    suggested that he  had  provided  three  separate  pieces  of  evidence
    showing that he has access and has supported his third child.  He  also
    indicated to  me  that  following  submission  of  his  application  he
    attended an interview and provided medical evidence  showing  that  his
    current partner has type 1 diabetes.   He  said  that  were  he  to  be
    removed from the United Kingdom and she were to suffer  a  hypo  attack
    that there would be nobody to look after her, because she would  be  at
    home with two young children.  He said that she was vulnerable to  such
    attacks and had had them in the past.  Unfortunately no evidence  could
    be found within the Home Office file and I  have  no  medical  evidence
    before me.

16.  In the circumstances I am satisfied that there is an error  of  law  in
    the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Denson  which  is
    material, such that the determination cannot  stand.   Given  that  the
    respondent has further evidence on which  he  wishes  to  rely  I  have
    concluded that the most appropriate method of dealing with this  matter
    is to remit it to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh  before  a
    judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Denson and  in  doing  so  I
    hope that the respondent will  seek  to  be  represented  at  any  such
    hearing.  Two hours should be allowed for the hearing.



Richard Chalkley

Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

