
 [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/35673/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 8 January 2016                    |On 22 January 2016                   |
|Prepared on 11 January 2016          |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    M. S.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Pickering, Counsel, instructed by David Gray
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Kingham, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, born 5 February 1974, is a citizen of the Philippines.

 2. The Appellant met her husband, a British  citizen,  whilst  working  in
    Oman in  2000.  They  married  on  8  February  2003,  and  they  lived
    thereafter together in Oman as husband and wife.

 3. In February 2010 whilst on holiday in the UK, the  Appellant's  husband
    was diagnosed with an aggressive  brain  tumour  following  a  hospital
    referral that had been suggested by his optician during a  routine  eye
    test. At the time he was  not  prepared  to  accept  the  diagnosis  of
    cancer, or the recommended treatment of brain surgery, and  instead  he
    returned to Oman with the Appellant.

 4. In July 2010 the Appellant's husband's condition deteriorated suddenly,
    and significantly, causing him to then accept both  the  diagnosis  and
    the need for the recommended surgery. He expressed the desire to return
    to the UK immediately  and  seek  treatment,  and  his  employers  were
    prepared to finance that.  Accordingly  he  returned  to  the  UK.  The
    Appellant accompanied him using a visitor's visa to do so, issued on  4
    August 2010, so that she had leave to enter until 3 February 2011.

 5. Before the expiry of her leave  the  Appellant  applied  for,  and  was
    granted, a period of leave to remain on discretionary grounds  to  care
    for her husband. The period granted was six months. The  Appellant  was
    legally advised that the period of this grant was unlawfully too short,
    and thus she challenged the length of the grant, as a failure to  grant
    a period of three years leave. She did so by way of judicial review  on
    the basis that the Respondent had not followed published policy.

 6. The application she had made for leave on 28 January 2011 [ApB p40] had
    noted the circumstances in which the Appellant  had  found  herself  in
    July 2010, and the advice she had received from the  BHC  that  it  was
    only if she applied for a visitor's visa  that  she  could  receive  an
    immediate grant of entry clearance. In  the  light  of  this,  and  the
    application for judicial review, the Respondent reviewed her  decision,
    and ultimately the judicial review proceedings were compromised upon  a
    discretionary grant of leave until 30 June 2014.

 7. Notwithstanding his surgery, and his ongoing treatment, on  8  November
    2012 the Appellant's husband died.

 8. On  19  June  2014  the  Appellant  applied  for  a  further  grant  of
    discretionary leave to remain.  This  application  was  refused  on  28
    August 2014, when the  Respondent  also  made  a  removal  decision  in
    relation to her by reference to s47. It  was  against  these  decisions
    that the Appellant appealed to the First Tier Tribunal. Her appeal  was
    heard and dismissed by Judge Buchanan in a decision  promulgated  on  2
    March 2015.

 9. The Appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Permission was refused by the First Tier Tribunal by way of decision of
    Judge Nicholson of 5 May 2015. The application for permission to appeal
    was then renewed by the Appellant to the Upper  Tribunal  on  the  same
    grounds. Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Ward on 10 July
    2015 on only the second ground,  which  asserted  that  the  Judge  had
    adopted a flawed approach to the assessment of the  proportionality  of
    the removal decision when considering the Article 8 appeal.

10. The Respondent served a Rule 24 response to the grounds of appeal dated
    13 August 2015 in which she asserted that there was no  material  error
    of law because the Appellant could not meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules for a grant of leave to remain as a bereaved  spouse.
    She asserted that it would only be if compassionate circumstances arose
    that s117A-D should be considered, and that she could not meet  all  of
    the requirements of that section. Finally it was said that it  was  for
    the Appellant to show what family/private life she had in  the  UK  and
    the effect her removal would have upon it.

11. Neither party has applied for permission to rely upon further  evidence
    pursuant to Rule 15(2A) of the Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules 2008.

12. Thus the matter comes before me.

Error of Law?

13. It was not disputed before the Judge that the Appellant  most  recently
    entered the UK as a visitor, and, that she was  not  in  possession  of
    leave to remain as a spouse when she made her  June  2014  application.
    Thus it was not disputed  on  the  Appellant's  behalf  that  when  she
    applied for a leave to remain in June  2014  she  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules (as they then were) for  a  grant
    of ILR as a bereaved spouse; paragraph 287(b)(i).

14. On the other hand it was not disputed by the Respondent either  in  the
    course of her decision of 28 August 2014, or  subsequently  during  the
    course of  the  appeal,  that  the  Appellant  met  all  of  the  other
    requirements of paragraph 287(b), and that it was  the  lack  of  entry
    clearance for settlement as a spouse, or subsequent grant of  leave  as
    such, (the requirement of paragraph 287(b)(i)) that was the sole reason
    for the refusal to grant ILR [8.1].

15. The Judge took the view that the  Appellant's  circumstances  were  not
    exceptional because the Immigration Rules provided a means by  which  a
    bereaved spouse could be granted ILR, and that this was simply  a  case
    of the Appellant failing to meet the requirements. Whilst that analysis
    is undoubtedly correct up to a point,  it  fails  in  my  judgement  to
    address the circumstances in which the Appellant had found  herself  in
    late July 2010, and thus there is a  failure  to  assess  whether  they
    amounted to exceptional compassionate  circumstances  so  that  it  was
    disproportionate for the Respondent either to refuse to grant  ILR,  or
    to seek to remove the Appellant.

16. The Appellant's unchallenged evidence was that she was advised in  July
    2010 that time for her husband's brain surgery and cancer treatment was
    critical, and that she did not have the time  to  make  an  application
    for, and then await a decision upon, a spouse settlement visa. Moreover
    her evidence as to the advice that she received from the  British  High
    Commission, that a spouse settlement visa application  would  take  too
    long to process and  that  she  should  instead  make  a  visitor  visa
    application which could be processed immediately, was  not  challenged.
    Indeed the Respondent's own contemporary file records corroborated  it,
    as the Judge noted [6.1-6.5]. Thus the record of her application  on  3
    August 2010 is endorsed with the ECO's note that  she  is  accompanying
    her spouse to the UK for emergency surgery funded by his employer  [ApB
    p22].

17. Before the Judge the Respondent had also accepted that in January  2011
    when the Appellant applied for a variation of her leave, her  intention
    was to seek leave to allow her to settle in the UK as the spouse  of  a
    British citizen [8]. At that point his treatment continued.

18. Internal file records show that in response to the Appellant's  January
    2011 application, the Respondent recognised that although  surgery  had
    removed the tumour on 9 August 2010 from her husband's brain, and  that
    he was receiving radical radiotherapy and chemotherapy,  the  prognosis
    was that his cancer would prove terminal. The caseworker noted his view
    that it would be unfair in those circumstances to ask the Appellant  to
    make an entry clearance application for settlement  as  a  spouse  from
    abroad. His decision  was  to  recommend  the  grant  of  a  period  of
    discretionary leave instead [ApB p28], which resulted in the  grant  of
    three months leave.

19. That recommendation was  reviewed  in  the  light  of  the  Appellant's
    challenge to the length of the period of  the  discretionary  grant  of
    leave in March 2011, when a different caseworker also took  account  of
    the fact that the couple had been living abroad in a genuine subsisting
    marriage for over 8 years, and recommended in all of the  circumstances
    the Appellant be granted ILR, notwithstanding her most recent entry  as
    a visitor [ApB p30].

20. The recommendation to grant ILR was not followed  by  the  more  senior
    caseworker to whom it was made. On 31 March 2011 his file  note  simply
    makes reference to the failure to enter the UK as a spouse, rather than
    as a visitor [ApB p31], and thus he  appears  to  have  maintained  the
    recommendation to grant only a period of three months DLR.

21. A further review by yet another caseworker on 22 June 2011 prompted the
    decision to grant a  period  of  three  years  discretionary  leave  to
    remain, and noted the failure to follow published guidance in  relation
    to  the  length  of  the  period  of  DLR  granted,  even  though   the
    recommendation of this review was not acted upon by the  Respondent  by
    way of a formal decision until June 2011 [ApB p33-5].

22. Before me Mr Kingham was prepared to go so far as to accept  both  that
    there was no evidence to suggest;
      i) that if the Appellant had made a spouse settlement application from
         Oman  in  July  2010  that  she  would  have  failed  to  meet  the
         requirements of paragraph 281, and,
     ii) that if she had applied to vary  her  leave  for  settlement  as  a
         spouse in February 2011, that she would have  failed  to  meet  the
         requirements of paragraphs 286 and 284.

23. Mr Kingham also accepted that the  decision  records  that  these  same
    concessions were also made to the Judge.  The  Judge  treated  them  as
    being no more than the basis for a "near miss" argument  (of  the  sort
    dealt with in Miah [2012] EWCA Civ 261), but I am  not  satisfied  that
    this was the correct approach. Indeed that too is conceded  before  me.
    This was not a points based system appeal, with a failure to  meet  one
    of the evidential stipulations of Appendix A, C, or FM-SE, said  to  be
    trivial or  immaterial.  The  argument  pursued  is  much  more  easily
    recognised as a "but for" argument. The Appellant accepts that she knew
    in July 2010 that she could be travelling to the  UK  for  an  extended
    period well in excess of  six  months,  whilst  her  husband  undertook
    treatment. It was not in dispute before the  Judge  that  but  for  the
    urgency of the situation that the Appellant found herself in July  2010
    a successful spouse settlement application could, and would, have  then
    been made. If that application had been successfully made,  then  after
    the death of her husband on 8 November 2012 the  Appellant  would  have
    been entitled to ILR. She would also ultimately have been in that  same
    position, if it were not for the failure to advise her to formally make
    an application to vary her leave as a visitor under paragraph  286,  as
    opposed to the application for discretionary leave that was  made.  She
    would also ultimately have been in that same position, if it  were  not
    for the failure of the Respondent  in  January  2011  to  consider  her
    application  for  an  extension  of  her  leave  by  reference  to  the
    requirements of paragraphs  284  and  286  rather  than  simply  as  an
    application for a period of discretionary leave. As it happens, one  of
    the  caseworkers  who  subsequently  reviewed  this   application   did
    precisely that, but his recommendation was  not  acted  upon,  and  the
    decision not to act upon his  recommendation  was  itself  subsequently
    accepted by the Respondent to be wrongful.

24. The Judge accepted, and the Respondent has not sought  to  cross-appeal
    this point, that the Appellant had established both  a  "family  life",
    and a "private life" in the UK, which was centred  upon  her  husband's
    extended family. He was satisfied upon the unchallenged evidence before
    him that the necessary  threshold  of  emotional  dependency  upon  the
    adults relied upon, was passed. Thus he found Article 8 engaged in both
    respects,  although  there  is  no  obvious  consideration  within  the
    decision of the effect of the Appellant's  proposed  removal  upon  the
    British citizens with whom he had found that "family life" existed, and
    in this respect too he erred.

25. There was of course no error in the  Judge's  acceptance  of  Counsel's
    concession  that  the  Appellant  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 287(b)(i); she did not.

26. There was however in my judgement a further error of law in the Judge's
    approach to the assessment of the proportionality of  the  decision  to
    remove the Appellant from the UK. That error was to  fail  to  identify
    what (if any) public interest there was upon these facts either in  the
    decision to refuse to grant ILR, or, to remove her from the  UK.  There
    is of  course  a  public  interest  in  the  maintenance  of  effective
    immigration controls, as s117A reiterates, but as Mr  Kingham  accepted
    before me it is extremely hard to  see  how  that  public  interest  is
    advanced upon these facts by either decision.

27. In the circumstances I  am  satisfied  that  I  should  set  aside  the
    decision upon the Article 8 appeal and remake it.

28. My starting point must be the Appellant's circumstances in  July  2010,
    which as set out above, I am  satisfied  amounted  to  exceptional  and
    compelling compassionate circumstances. Realistically she then  had  no
    option but to enter the UK as a visitor, as indeed the  Respondent  has
    subsequently recognised. Were it not for that, as the  Respondent  also
    accepts, she would by the  date  of  the  decision  under  appeal  have
    qualified for a grant of ILR as a bereaved spouse.

29. As the Judge accepted, she had by the date of decision,  exceptionally,
    also established a "family life" with her husband's extended family  as
    a result of her emotional dependency upon them. This then is a  "family
    life" Article 8 appeal, by one who has always been present  in  the  UK
    lawfully with the result that s117B (4-6) has no application.

30. Whilst the maintenance of effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the
    public interest (s117B(1)) it is, as set out above,  difficult  to  see
    how the  Respondent's  decisions  advance  that  public  interest.  The
    Appellant is fluent in English, and is financially independent (s117B(2
    & 3)). Whilst she can obtain no positive right to a grant of  leave  to
    remain as a result, these matters do diminish,  and  indeed  appear  to
    largely (if not entirely) extinguish the weight that could otherwise be
    given  to  them  as  public  interest  factors  weighing  against   the
    Appellant; AM (s117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260  [18].  Since  this  is  a
    "family  life"  as  opposed  to  only  a  "private  life"  appeal   the
    Appellant's precarious immigration status does not require the Tribunal
    to give diminished weight to it.

31. Having considered the guidance to be found in SS  (Congo)  [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 387 I am satisfied, as set out above, that compelling compassionate
    circumstances exist in this case. When all  the  relevant  matters  are
    properly weighed, I am satisfied that  the  decision  under  appeal  is
    readily seen to be disproportionate  to  the  public  interest  in  the
    maintenance of  effective  immigration  controls.  Thus  I  remake  the
    decision so as to allow the Article 8 appeal.

DECISION

    The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 2
    March 2015 did involve the making of an error of law in  the  dismissal
    of the Article 8 appeal that requires that decision to be set aside and
    remade.

    I remake the decision so as to allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008

    Unless and until  the  Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
    granted anonymity. No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
    indirectly identify him. This direction applies both to  the  Appellant
    and to the Respondent. Failure to comply with this direction could lead
    to proceedings being brought for contempt of court.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes
Dated 11 January 2016
