
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number: IA/35073/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 November 2017                        |   On 7 December 2017            |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            mr md masudur rahman
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms C Litchfield, of Counsel instructed by Messrs
                  Simon Noble Solicitors or Nova Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals with permission against  a  decision  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal I  M  Scott  who  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 22 February 2017 allowed the appeal  of  Mr  Md  Masudur
    Rahman against a decision of the Secretary of State made on 28  October
    2015 to refuse him leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) under the
    of the points-based system.

2.   Although the Secretary of State is the appellant before me I  will  for
    ease of reference refer to  her  as  the  respondent  as  she  was  the
    respondent in the First-tier.  Similarly, I will refer to Mr Md Masudur
    Rahman as the appellant.

3.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 31 December  1982  who
    came to Britain as a student in 2009. He made an application for  leave
    to remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur)  Migrant  under  the  points-based
    system on 26 October 2012.  That application  was  refused  and  on  20
    January 2014 his appeal against that decision was heard by Judge of the
    First-tier Tribunal  Sharp.   The  appeal  turned  on  the  documentary
    evidence submitted by  the  appellant.   Judge  Sharp  found  that  the
    relevant documents had not been submitted but  rather  found  that  the
    Secretary of State should have employed the provisions  of  "evidential
    flexibility" when making the  decision.   Judge  Sharp  on  that  basis
    allowed the appeal "to the extent that the decision  was  not  made  in
    accordance with the law" and then remitted the case to the Secretary of
    State  for  further  consideration.   The  Secretary  of   State   then
    considered the application again reaching a decision made on 28 October
    2015 to again refuse the application.  The reason given for the refusal
    was under the general grounds that the appellant had used deception  in
    obtaining a TOEIC certificate from ETS.  The letter of refusal stated:-

         "ETS has a record of your speaking test.  Using voice  verification
         software, ETS is able to detect when a single person is undertaking
         multiple tests.  ETS undertook a check of your test  and  confirmed
         to the SSHD that there was significant evidence  to  conclude  that
         your certificate was fraudulently obtained by the use  of  a  proxy
         test taker.  ETS have declared your test to be 'invalid' due to the
         aforementioned presence of a proxy tester who sat the test in  your
         place, and the scores have therefore been cancelled by ETS."

4.   When the application was refused   for  a  second  time  the  appellant
    again appealed and his appeal was determined by  Judge  Scott  after  a
    hearing on 8 December 2016.

5.   Judge Scott noted the history  of  the  case  and  the  fact  that  the
    Secretary of State had not complied with the direction of  Judge  Sharp
    that the application be considered in  the  light  of  the  "evidential
    flexibility"  provisions  but  then  considered  whether  or  not   the
    application should have been  refused  on  the  general  grounds  under
    paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration Rules.

6.   Judge  Scott  noted  the  provisions  of  paragraph  322(1A)  and  then
    considered the background evidence which had led the Secretary of State
    to reach the decision to refuse the application.   He  noted  that  the
    certificate had been issued by ETS following a test  taken  at  Colwell
    College on 27 June  2012  and  that  voice  verification  software  had
    detected when a single person was undertaking multiple tests  and  that
    ETS considered that there was  "significant  evidence"  from  which  to
    conclude  that  the  appellant's  certificate  had  been   fraudulently
    obtained.

7.   Judge Scott heard evidence from the appellant regarding his  attendance
    at Colwell College to take the test and  he  noted  moreover  that  the
    appellant spoke clear English and that  he  had  not  only  studied  in
    English for  his first degree  in  Bangladesh  but  also  that  he  had
    obtained a  Masters  of  Business  Administration  from  Anglia  Ruskin
    University in July 2015.

8.    Having  noted  the  ETS  invalid  test   analysis   document   and   a
    supplementary bundle which included a report regarding fraud at Colwell
    College in respect of TOEIC tests there and the issuing of ETS language
    certificates, nevertheless went on to make findings on which he allowed
    the appeal although in so doing he stated that:-

         "This appeal is allowed but the respondent still has  to  act  upon
         the outcome of the  previous  appeal  by  applying  her  evidential
         flexibility policy, seeking the necessary additional evidence  from
         the appellant in support of his application and  reconsidering  her
         decision."

9.   The reason the judge reached his  decision  to  allow  the  appeal  was
    based on his reading of the determination in SM & Qadir v SSHD  (ETS  -
    evidence - burden of proof) [2016] UKUT 229 (IAC) in which the Tribunal
    had stated that the Secretary of State's generic evidence  sufficed  to
    discharge  the  evidential  burden  of  proving  that   certain   TOEIC
    certificates were being procured by dishonesty.  However he noted  that
    the Tribunal had also written:-

         "However, given the multiple  frailties  from  which  this  generic
         evidence was considered to suffer and, in the light of the evidence
         adduced by  the  appellants,  the  Secretary  of  State  failed  to
         discharge the legal burden of proving dishonesty on their part."

10.  The judge then  stated  that  he  took  into  account  the  appellant's
    English at the hearing, his degree from Bangladesh, the  fact  that  he
    had not been required to undertake an English course on arrival when he
    had intended to study an ACCA course until his  college  where  he  had
    hoped to study was suspended, and that the appellant  had  subsequently
    gained entry to university from  which  he  had  graduated.    He  then
    stated:-

         "All this suggests a proficiency with the  English  language  which
         makes it very difficult to see why the  appellant  would  have  any
         need to use a proxy to take the TOEIC test for him."


     He then stated that he was applying the ratio of the decision in  SM  &
    Qadir and said that:
         "I find... in view of the 'multiple frailties' identified  in  that
         evidence in SM & Qadir and in light of the evidence  given  by  the
         appellant, that the respondent has not discharged the legal  burden
         of proving dishonesty on the part of the appellant."


     He therefore allowed the appeal.

11.  The Secretary of State appealed.  It was argued that the judge had  not
    given adequate findings on a material matter. The grounds  referred  to
    the judgment in MA (ETS - TOEIC testing) [2016] UKUT 00450  (IAC).  The
    appellant in MA, like the appellant in this case had gone to  the  test
    centre himself, had his photograph taken but had still cheated  -  that
    judgment indicated that mere attendance at  the  test  centre  did  not
    prove that the appellant had taken a test.  Moreover,   it  was  argued
    that the appellant's ability to  speak  English  had  been  taken  into
    account by the judge incorrectly.  The reality was that there might  be
    many reasons why a person was able to speak  English  to  the  required
    level would nonetheless cause or permit a proxy candidate to  undertake
    an ETS test on their behalf or otherwise  cheat.   It  was  stated  the
    judge had failed to give adequate reasons for holding that a person who
    clearly speaks English would therefore have no reason to secure a  test
    certificate by deception.

12.  At the hearing of the appeal before me Mr Tufan relied on  the  grounds
    of appeal and referred to the bundle of documents which was before  the
    judge which related to tests taken at Colwell College and the report of
    Professor French which clearly stated that the ETS results  could  only
    be wrong in a tiny minority of cases.  He pointed  out  that  all  this
    information had been before the judge.  Moreover the judge  had  before
    him the "lookup tool" which would indicate why  the  results  had  been
    declared to be  invalid.   He  also  referred  to  what  is  stated  in
    paragraph 57 of the judgment in MA in which the court had said:-

         "...we acknowledge the suggestion that the appellant had no  reason
         to engage in the deception which we have  found  proven.   However,
         this has not deflected  us  in  any  way  from  reaching  our  main
         findings and conclusions.  In the abstract, of course, there  is  a
         range of reasons why a person who  is  proficient  in  English  may
         engage in TOEIC fraud.  These  include,  exhaustively,  a  lack  of
         confidence, fear of  failure,  lack  of  time  and  commitment  and
         contempt  for  the  immigration  system.    These   reasons   could
         conceivably overlap in individual cases  and  there  is  scope  for
         other explanations for deceitful conduct in this  sphere.   We  are
         not required to make the  further  finding  of  why  the  appellant
         engaged in deception and to this we would add that  the  issue  was
         not explored during the hearing."

13.  He also referred to paragraph 51 in that judgment in  which  the  court
    had stated regarding the lookup tool that:-

         "....the  use  of  this  tool  generated  an   Excel   spreadsheet,
         spreadsheet, included in the evidence, in familiar form relating to
         the second  of  the  TOEIC  certificates.  This  contains  the  ETS
         assessment of the scores recorded as 'invalid'.  While we take into
         account the questions and doubts expressed  by  the  experts  these
         focus more on the ETS and test centre methodologies  than  the  ETS
         mechanisms and processes for the analysis of the computerised files
         holding suspect speaking tests. We record further that there was no
         frontal  challenge  to  this  particular  piece  of  evidence.  The
         'invalid' assessment is  also  supported  by  our  findings  above.
         Overall we  are  satisfied  that  we  should  treat  the  'invalid'
         assessment as reliable."

14.  Mr Tufan also took me to the report of The Criminal Inquiry into  abuse
    of the TOEIC tests at Colwell College.  In paragraph 11 of that  report
    it is stated that between October 2011 and January  2013,  2,901  TOEIC
    speaking and writing tests were taken of which ETS  had  identified  as
    invalid 1,559 tests, and questionable 1,342.  The  results  showed,  Mr
    Tufan pointed out,  that no tests were accepted as being valid.

15.  Moreover the report from Dr French clearly considered  the  methodology
    of ETS and the conclusion in that report was that he:

         "...would  estimate  the  rate  of  false  positives  to  be   very
         substantially less than 1%  after  the  process  of  assessment  by
         trained listeners had been applied."


16.  Dr French gave reasons as to why he had reached that conclusion.

17.  Ms Litchfield argued that the judge had reached conclusions which  were
    not perverse and were fully open to him.  She referred to the report on
    Colwell College and stated that it was only 53% of the decisions  which
    were thought to be invalid.  She referred to the decision in SM & Qadir
    and stated that the judge had taken into account all evidence including
    that of the appellant and the documentary evidence  which  he  produced
    regarding his various qualifications and had reached a conclusion  that
    the appellant had not used deception, which was fully open to him.

Discussion

18.  The reality is that the judge had before him  the  papers  relating  to
    the inquiry into the testing at Colwell College but did not  appear  to
    place any weight thereon or give any reasons as to why he did not place
    weight on that.  Moreover he did not deal with the report of Dr French.
     The Secretary of State did not appear before  him  and  therefore  the
    judgment in MA was not placed before the judge.  However,  the  reality
    is that it had been handed down before the hearing (it was handed  down
    on 16 September 2016).  The judge I consider reached a conclusion which
    was in effect perverse.  He accepted  the  evidence  of  the  appellant
    without considering reasons why the appellant would have decided not to
    take the  test.   Moreover,   he  considered  the  appellant's  English
    language ability as at the date of the  hearing  rather  than  that  in
    2012.   He  had,  in  paragraph  20  stated  that  the  respondent  had
    discharged the evidential burden incumbent upon her but then went on to
    find that had been unseated by  the  appellant's  evidence.   That  was
    clearly wrong.  In reaching the conclusion he reached he had not  taken
    into account all the evidence of the Secretary of State nor  considered
    the reasons why the appellant might have  reached  a  decision  not  to
    attend the course nor indeed why he had attended at Colwell College  in
    any event and I therefore consider that he reached a  conclusion  which
    was not open to him and in so doing had erred in law.  I therefore  set
    aside the decision of the Judge of the First-tier.

19.  I had before  me  all  the  relevant  evidence  including  the  generic
    evidence of the affidavits from Collings and Millington  but  also  the
    report of Dr French and the general inquiry into abuse of the TOEIC  at
    Colwell  College.   I  can  only  conclude  on  that   evidence   that,
    notwithstanding the fact that the appellant  had  produced  documentary
    evidence to show that he had graduated three years after the test  from
    Anglia Ruskin University but also that he spoke  good  English  at  the
    hearing, that not only was the judge not entitled to allow  the  appeal
    but on the evidence which is now before me that the  appeal  should  be
    dismissed.

20.  I therefore, having set aside the decision of the judge in  the  First-
    tier dismiss this appeal.  It is not argued before me that there  could
    be  any  human  rights  application  which  could  succeed  and  having
    considered the evidence before me I see no basis on which the appellant
    would be entitled to remain on human rights grounds.

Notice of Decision

21.  The appeal is dismissed on immigration grounds.   The  appeal  is  also
    dismissed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   [pic]                      Date 29 November 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
