
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)               Appeal Number:
IA/35814/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                   |Determination Promulgated|
|On: 18th June 2014                     |On: 24th June 2014       |
|                                       |                         |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                              Taveesak Jantong
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr Allen, Global Immigration Solutions
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnstone,  Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant is a national of Thailand.  He has  permission  to
       appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Smith
       to dismiss his appeal against directions for  his  removal  from
       the United Kingdom pursuant to section 10 of the Immigration and
       Asylum Act 1999. That decision to remove the Appellant  followed
       rejection of his application for indefinite leave to  remain  on
       human rights grounds.

    2. The basis of the Appellant's application was that  he  is  in  a
       durable relationship with a British woman, Sarah Gudegast.  They
       had been living together in Thailand  since  June  2011  and  in
       January 2013 they came to  the  United  Kingdom,  the  Appellant
       having obtained a visit visa.  It was their intention to  return
       to Thailand where the Appellant had work  commitments  and  they
       had  their  home.  However  after  their  arrival  Ms   Gudegast
       discovered that she was pregnant.   They decided to stay in  the
       UK for the birth. Ms Gudegast has the support of her family here
       and would like to bring her child up in the United Kingdom.  The
       Appellant therefore applied for leave to remain in order  to  be
       with his British wife and child.

    3.  The  Respondent  refused  the  application  with  reference  to
       Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.  The  Respondent  was  not
       satisfied that the Appellant and Ms  Gudegast  had  been  living
       together in a relationship akin to marriage  for  two  years  or
       more so he failed at the first hurdle, that being 'eligibility'.
        The refusal did not  address  the  matter  of  the  Appellant's
       relationship with his British child, since at the  date  of  the
       decision the Respondent was not aware that the  child  had  been
       born. In fact the couple's daughter was born the day before  the
       refusal was served, on the 15th August 2013.

    4. On appeal to the First-tier Tribunal Judge Smith  accepted  that
       the couple had in fact been living together since June 2011  but
       found  that  the  Appellant  still  failed  under  'eligibility'
       because he was in the United Kingdom as a visitor at the date of
       application: E-LTRPT.3.1. Although there was no need for him  to
       do so, Judge Smith also gave consideration to whether EX.1 could
       have applied to the Appellant. He found that it did  not,  since
       it could not be said that it would "not be reasonable" to expect
       the  Appellant's  daughter  to  leave  the  UK.  In  making  the
       assessment of whether it would be  "reasonable"  the  Judge  had
       regard to ten factors listed at his paragraph 27(i)-(j).


Error of Law

    5. The grounds of appeal are that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in
       its approach to failing to give adequate  consideration  to  the
       fact  that  the  Appellant's  daughter  is  a  British  national
       entitled  to  enjoy  the  benefits  of  such  nationality.   The
       Appellant relies in particular on the speech of Baroness Hale in
       ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4 and submits that in failing to  give
       this factor adequate weight the Tribunal erred in respect of its
       assessment of section 55 'best interests' as well as  the  wider
       proportionality balancing exercise.

    6. The Respondent submits  that  the  findings  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal were lawful  and  open  to  it  on  the  evidence.  The
       Tribunal conducted a rounded assessment of proportionality.

    7. I find that the Tribunal was correct in dismissing  this  appeal
       under the Rules. The provisions of Appendix FM are exacting, and
       for this young couple who have unexpectedly become parents,  too
       exacting to meet.  The Appellant was here as a visitor when  the
       application  was  made,  so  he  immediately  fell  foul  of  E-
       LTRPT.3.1. Ms Johnstone further pointed out that  there  was  no
       evidence as to the Appellant's English language ability,  not  a
       matter considered by the First-tier Tribunal but another  reason
       why the application could not have succeeded.

    8. The Tribunal went on to consider the appeal under Article 8.  Ms
       Johnstone rightly observed that the Tribunal did so without  any
       consideration of whether there was a good arguable  case[1]  for
       so doing, and to that extent that Appellant had the  benefit  of
       that omission.

    9.  Having  proceeded  to  consider  proportionality  under  Razgar
       Article 8  the  Tribunal  is  criticised  for  failing  to  give
       adequate weight to the fact that the Appellant's baby  daughter,
       then only four months old, could potentially be deprived of  the
       benefits of her British nationality should her father  lose  his
       appeal and she travel to Thailand with him.

   10. The Tribunal set out the factors relevant to proportionality  at
       paragraph 27-29.  He  takes  into  account  the  fact  that  the
       Appellant came here as a visitor and had only been in the  UK  a
       very short time.  Until he  came  here,  and  at  the  point  of
       return, he had friends, family, a home  and  work  in  Thailand.
       There was therefore a strong private life there and virtually no
       private life here.   His only ties to the UK  were  his  partner
       and daughter.  The Tribunal noted that the baby was  still  very
       young and as such her Article  8  rights  were  limited  to  her
       relationship with her parents.  As a family unit there  did  not
       appear to be any reason why they could not relocate to  Thailand
       where the  couple  had  previously  been  living;  in  his  oral
       evidence the Appellant had said that if he went back they  would
       all go together.  The baby had no health concerns.  His  partner
       had also  worked  in  Thailand  and  before  her  pregnancy  had
       apparently considered pursuing a career there.  At paragraph  29
       the Tribunal states that it has given  particular  consideration
       to the interests of the baby.

   11.  Mr Allen submitted that these paragraphs, summarised above,  do
       not give any or adequate consideration to the fact that the baby
       is British.  It is true that no express consideration  is  given
       to that point. However I  am  not  satisfied  that  this  is  an
       omission such  that  the  decision  should  be  set  aside.  The
       Tribunal rightly identified that this  is  a  very  young  child
       whose private  and  family  life  is  entirely  centred  on  its
       parents.  Unlike the children in ZH (Tanzania) this little  girl
       has not (yet) grown up in this country. The children of ZH  were
       aged 9 and 12 and had been born in the UK.  They  had  known  no
       other life, culture or language.  Baroness  Hale  was  therefore
       concerned that inadequate focus had been placed  on  that  fact.
       The Appellant's daughter will not  be  removed  from  school  or
       friends, and there is nothing to suggest that this decision will
       involve a long-term interference with her right to live  in  the
       UK. As Judge Smith notes, she is entitled to  remain  here  with
       her  mother  until  such  time  as  her  father  can  meet   the
       requirements of the Immigration Rules, or she and her mother may
       decide to move to Thailand and stay with him until that time.

   12. I understand that this is  not  the  ideal  situation  for  this
       family. Whatever they decide to do, someone in this family  will
       be separated from the baby - if the family unit leaves  it  will
       be her maternal grandparents in the UK, if  only  the  Appellant
       leaves it will be her father.   This is  a  difficult  situation
       but it is not one that is "unjustifiably harsh" for any  of  the
       parties  concerned.   It  is  obviously  in  this  child's  best
       interests to be with both Mum and Dad. There was nothing in  the
       evidence before the First-tier Tribunal to suggest that this had
       to be in the UK. I am not  prepared  to  find  that  this  child
       should automatically prefer the exercise of her  UK  citizenship
       rights over those deriving from the Thai  nationality  to  which
       she is undoubtedly entitled. Mr Allen submitted that  healthcare
       and education are of poorer quality in Thailand than they are in
       the UK and that these were rights intrinsically  connected  with
       the exercise of her  nationality  rights.    This  baby  is  not
       currently in education and happily has no  immediate  healthcare
       concerns. If her parents wish for her to access either of  these
       services she is entitled to come back to the UK at any point.


Decisions

   13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error of law
       and it is upheld.




                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                              18th June 2014
                                                     -----------------------
[1] MS (Petitioner) [2013] CSIH 52; R (on the application of) Nagre v
SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin); Gulshan v SSHD (Article 8 - new Rules -
correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC), Shahzad (Article 8: legitimate
aim) [2014] UKUT 85 (IAC)




