
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/35470/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 14 January 2016                   |On 22 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                 ABDUL RAJAB
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Unrepresented
For the SSHD:    Ms Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

      1. In a decision dated 20 April 2015 the First-tier  Tribunal  ('FTT')
         dismissed the appellant's appeal against a decision to refuse him a
         residence card on the basis of his marriage to an EEA citizen.

      2. The FTT recorded that the appellant did not attend the  hearing  on
         16 April 2015.  The appellant  and  his  wife  have  explained  the
         reasons for this in the grounds of appeal  and  in  their  evidence
         before me and I set this out in summary.   The  appellant  and  his
         wife attended the Tribunal on 9 January 2015.  This was the initial
         date for the hearing.  This had been adjourned by the Tribunal in a
         notice of hearing dated 7 January  2015.   This  was  not  received
         until after 9 January.  Upon receiving the  new  hearing  date  (16
         April 2015) the appellant wrote to the Tribunal and the Home Office
         requesting an alternative date and for the hearing to take place in
         Manchester instead of Newport.  The  letter  to  the  Tribunal  was
         returned to the appellant by post.  The appellant spoke to  someone
         in the Home Office who confirmed that the letter to the Home Office
         had been received and there was nothing more to do.  The  appellant
         misunderstood the meaning of this and did not appreciate that  this
         was meant in relation to the Home Office and not the Tribunal.   In
         his evidence before me the appellant  accepted  he  was  wrong  but
         explained that he was not represented and did  not  understand  the
         process.  He was apologetic for not attending the hearing.

      3. Ms Johnstone  asked  me  to  find  that  there  was  no  procedural
         unfairness because the  appellant  had  not  established  that  the
         Tribunal letter had been returned to him.  I  must  decide  whether
         there was unfairness in all the circumstances, not  simply  whether
         the FTT acted reasonably  -  see  Nwaigwe  (adjournment:  fairness)
         [2014] UKUT 418 (IAC).

      4. I am satisfied that the appellant  has  been  deprived  of  a  fair
         hearing  and  that  this   can   be   explained   by   a   credible
         misunderstanding of the process rather than a  deliberate  decision
         not to attend the hearing.  I accept that  the  appellant  and  his
         wife have demonstrated a willingness to attend the Tribunal -  they
         attended the Tribunal in January 2015 (but that  hearing  had  been
         adjourned) and the hearing before me.  They have provided a copy of
         a letter in which they make it clear that they wish to  attend  the
         hearing but request an alternative date and venue.  The reason  for
         not attending  the  FTT  hearing  is  entirely  predicated  upon  a
         misunderstanding of the process.   This has  caused  the  appellant
         unfairness as he has been deprived of an opportunity to demonstrate
         by his attendance at a hearing together with his wife  and  through
         oral  evidence  that  their  marriage  is  a  genuine  one.    This
         unfairness has infected the FTT decision such that it can  be  said
         to contain a material error of law.

Decision

      5. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  a
         material error of law.  Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.

      6. The appeal shall be remade by First-tier Tribunal de novo.

Directions

      1) The appeal shall be reheard de  novo  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         sitting in Stoke (TE: 2 hrs) on the first date available.

      2) Arabic and German interpreters necessary.

      3) The appellant shall provide the Tribunal and the Home  Office  with
         all relevant documentary evidence 14 days before the hearing.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
14 January 2016

