
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/35655/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 15 September 2015                 |On 16 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                  M P WAHAB
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     no appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of India, born on 14 April 1978.  On 18 June
    2013 he sought further leave to remain as a tier 2  (general)  migrant.
    The respondent refused that application  for  reasons  explained  in  a
    letter dated 22 August 2014.  The licence of  the  appellant's  sponsor
    had been revoked on 19 August 2014, so his certificate  of  sponsorship
    had been cancelled.

 2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  His grounds are not
    very clearly expressed, but his central complaint appears to have  been
    that when he made his application he believed all his documentation  to
    be in order, and that the respondent should not have delayed in  making
    a decision (while his sponsor was under investigation).

 3. Judge Blair heard the case on 28 November 2014.  The appellant  was  no
    longer legally represented but appeared  in  person.   His  appeal  was
    dismissed by determination promulgated on 17 December 2014.  The  judge
    found that more likely than not the appellant knew that his sponsor was
    under investigation, but in any event he did not meet the terms of  the
    immigration rules because the sponsor's licence had been suspended  and
    in due course revoked.  There  was  no  case  of  any  substance  under
    article 8 of the ECHR.

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  on
    grounds which express disagreement rather than formulating any arguable
    propositions  of  legal  error.   The   First-tier   Tribunal   refused
    permission to appeal.  However, on 30 July  2015  a  UT  Judge  granted
    permission, observing:

         "The application made on 18 June 2013 was refused ... on 22  August
         [2014] because the appellant's certificate of sponsorship had  been
         cancelled by the respondent.  The licence was revoked on 19  August
         2014 (3 days before the decision).

         The appellant is not represented.  It  is  arguable  that  the  ...
         decision to revoke leave without giving the appellant  60  days  to
         find an alternative sponsor raises unfairness issues."

 5. The appellant did not appear and was not represented  on  15  September
    2015.  Notice of hearing had been duly issued.   No  communication  had
    been received by the UT or by the respondent.   The  hearing  therefore
    proceeded in his absence.

 6. Mr Mullen submitted that the grant of permission  did  not  arise  from
    anything  in  the  appellant's  grounds,  and  was  misconceived.   The
    respondent did not revoke the appellant's leave.   His  leave  expired.
    It was the sponsor's licence which was revoked.  He suggested that  the
    judge granting permission may have misapprehended  that  the  case  was
    analogous to those where the respondent allows students, under  certain
    circumstances, time to find another college.  He said that there is  no
    policy which might apply to a case such as the present,  and  that  the
    judge  had  made  no  error  in  applying  the  immigration  rules,  or
    otherwise.

 7. I reserved my determination.

 8. The appellant has not shown that the making  of  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal involved the making of any error on a point of law.
     The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

 9. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




           [pic]
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


           15 September 2015
