

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/35077/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                          | Decision & Reasons           |
|                                             |Promulgated                   |
|On 1st April 2015                            | On 14th April 2015           |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD


                                   Between

                         mrs Chidinma Florence madu
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Responden

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Rashid - Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison - Home Office Pr4senting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by Mrs Chidinma Florence Madu, a citizen  of  Nigeria
    born 19th April 1988.  She appeals against the determination of  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  K  Henderson  issued  on  26th  November   2014,
    dismissing under the Immigration Rules and Article 8  ECHR  her  appeal
    against the decision of the Respondent made  on  21st  August  2014  to
    refuse leave to remain and to remove her from the United Kingdom.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Levin  on
    5th February 2015.  He said:

         "2.  The Appellant asserts in her grounds that the Judge failed  to
             consider documents within her bundle  which  were  before  the
             Judge and which showed that she met the financial requirements
             of the Rules.

         3.   Given the Judge's findings in paragraph  18  of  her  decision
             that the Appellant could not meet the requirements of Appendix
             FM because  of  her  failure  to  provide  to  the  Respondent
             specified evidence with her application, and as the Judge  was
             not precluded by paragraph D in the preamble to Appendix FM-SE
             from considering further  documents  not  submitted  with  the
             application and as it is unclear from her decision whether she
             took into account  the  further  documents  submitted  by  the
             Appellant with her appeal it  is  arguable  that  the  Judge's
             decision is materially flawed.

         4.   It is also arguable that by her failure to identify  and  make
             findings in paragraph  16  of  her  decision  which  specified
             documents the Appellant had failed to  provide  and  for  what
             period the evidence was lacking that the Judge has  failed  to
             give adequate reasons for her findings.

         5.   It is further  arguable  that  the  Judge's  consideration  of
             Article 8 outside of the Rules and her reliance  upon  Gulshan
             (Article 8 - new Rules - correct  approach)  [2013]  UKUT  640
             (IAC) and Nagre amounted to an error of law as  given  in  the
             judgment of the Court of Appeal in  MM  (Lebanon)  and  Others
             [2014] EWCA Civ 985  the  Judge  arguably  adopted  the  wrong
             approach."

 3. I have a response from the Respondent in which it is submitted that the
    Judge  directed  himself  appropriately.   It  is  submitted  that  the
    Appellant simply did not provide the evidence with her  application  or
    meet the requirements of the Rules with regard to  documents  submitted
    after the application.

 4. At the start of the hearing Mr Harrison said that it is not clear  from
    his file what documents were  actually  before  Judge  Henderson.   The
    appeal was determined by Judge Henderson on the papers.   At  paragraph
    14 she states that she  did  not  have  the  Respondent's  bundle.   Mr
    Harrison said that there is a Respondent's  bundle  in  his  file  with
    some relevant documents in  it.  He  also  had  a  bundle  of  original
    documents which appeared to support the application.  It is clear  from
    paragraph 3 of the decision that Judge Henderson  had  some  documents.
    She appears to have had   some bank statements and  some  payslips  but
    she notes the absence of other documents required under Appendix FM-SE.
     The Appellant's representative had provided some additional  documents
    as noted at paragraph 9.

 5. Mr Harrison said that in light of the confusion about the documents and
    about what was actually in the papers that were before the  Judge  when
    she made the decision he would have no objection to  the  appeal  being
    reheard due to arguable procedural unfairness. Mr  Rashid  was  content
    with that. The Appellant was at the hearing before me  and  I  made  it
    clear to her that it would be  in  her  interests  to  attend  an  oral
    hearing.

Notice of Decision

I set aside the decision of Judge Henderson and  remit  the  appeal  to  the
First-tier Tribunal to be heard anew by a Judge other than Judge Henderson.






Signed                              Date: 7th April 2015

N A Baird
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Baird






