
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/35994/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 27 October 2014                            |On 4 November 2014           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ROBERTSON


                                   Between

                           MISS SANTOSHI BHATTARAI
                        ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:         Mr Rees, Counsel, instructed by Jein, Solicitors
For the Respondent:        Mr Tarlow, Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant, a female citizen of Nepal, applied for leave  to  remain
    as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant pursuant to para 245ZX of HC 395,
    as  amended  (the  Immigration  Rules).  Her  application  was  refused
    pursuant to 245ZX (d)  and  the  provisions  of  paragraph  13  (b)  of
    Appendix  C  because  she  did  not  provide  a  birth  certificate  as
    confirmation of the relationship between her and the  person  providing
    financial sponsorship or a letter  from  him  confirming  that  he  was
    prepared to support her during the period of her study in the UK.


 2. Her appeal  was  heard  and  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Turquet,  and  the  reasons  for  her  decision  are  set  out  in  her
    determination promulgated on 14 August 2014. She found that the  letter
    from the Office of the Karahiya Development Committee dated 15 May 2013
    was not a birth certificate because (i) there was no indication of  the
    birth being registered (ii) and the letter was stated to expire  on  27
    July 2015 and no explanation was provided as to why a birth certificate
    would expire and (iii) there was no indication as to what evidence  was
    provided to the Committee prior to issue of the letter. The  Judge  was
    also not satisfied that this was the same letter that was provided when
    the  Appellant  made  her  initial  application,  as  asserted  by  the
    Appellant, because it was dated May 2013 and she arrived in the  UK  in
    April 2011.With regard to the letter  of  consent  from  her  financial
    sponsor, before the First-tier Tribunal it was submitted on  behalf  of
    the Appellant that she did provide a letter of consent  when  she  made
    her application. The Judge found that she did not.


 3. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal on the  basis  that  the
    decision was not in accordance with the law because:


        a. The Respondent failed to apply the provisions of paragraph 245AA
           of the Rules; a birth certificate  should  have  been  requested
           because ""the Birth certification" letter was  document  in  the
           wrong  format".  The  Judge's  findings  at  paragraph  12  were
           therefore unreasonable.


        b. The Judge made  an  unreasonable  finding  at  paragraph  13  in
           rejecting the Appellant's evidence that the  letter  of  consent
           from her father had been submitted with the application.

 4. Permission was granted on the basis  that  it  was  arguable  that  the
    letter was a purported birth certificate which is in the  wrong  format
    and the  Respondent  should  have  written  to  the  Appellant  or  her
    representative and requested the correct document and  that  the  Judge
    erred in finding the document did not amount to a birth certificate for
    the purposes of Appendix C. Permission to appeal  was  granted  on  all
    grounds.


 5. Before me, Mr Rees relied on the  grounds  of  application,  submitting
    that the Judge should  have  considered  the  provisions  of  paragraph
    245AA. When it was put to him that in the grounds of appeal, there  was
    no reference to the exercise of  discretion  by  the  Respondent  under
    paragraph 245AA, Mr Rees stated that paragraph 6  of  the  grounds  was
    wide enough to include this provision and this  was  clearly  the  view
    taken by Judge Osborne, who granted  permission.  Mr  Tarlow  submitted
    that the Immigration Rules were specific as to the evidence required; a
    birth certificate was not provided and the document was  in  the  wrong
    format. He could not say whether birth certificates were not issued  in
    Nepal because he simply did not know. The Respondent would not  request
    a document where there was  no  reason  to  believe  that  the  correct
    document was available. In response, Mr Rees submitted that  the  Judge
    had erred in stating that the birth certificate was  to  expire  on  27
    July 2015. It was the notary's certificate that was due  to  expire  on
    that date, not the birth certificate.

 6. On conclusion of submissions, I reserved my decision which I give below
    together with my reasons

  Decision and reasons

 7. I find that the grounds of appeal before the Judge were not wide enough
    to include a challenge under s 84 (f) of the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002.  No  mention  was  made  of  the  failure  by  the
    Respondent to  exercise  differently  a  discretion  conferred  by  the
    Immigration Rules; they simply rely on the failure of the Respondent to
    consider the evidence submitted.

 8. However, even if I were to find that the grounds of  appeal  were  wide
    enough to include a  challenge  under  s  84  (f),  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 245AA  confer  a  discretion  upon  the  Respondent  but  the
    Respondent is not obliged to exercise it. Paragraph 245AA only requires
    the Respondent to request a  document  in  the  correct  format  if  it
    appears that addressing the omission will result in a grant  of  leave.
    As noted by Mr Tarlow, there was no obvious reason to  suppose  that  a
    birth  certificate  in  the  correct  format  would  be  available  and
    therefore a request would not have been made.

 9. I also  note  that  paragraph  245AA  requires  any  evidence  that  is
    requested to be sent to the Respondent within 7  working  days  of  the
    request. If the Appellant  was  relying  on  paragraph  245AA,  she  is
    required not only to raise it but to supply evidence to the Judge  that
    a birth  certificate  in  the  correct  format  was  available  to  the
    Appellant and could have been sent within 7 days of a request. There is
    nothing before me to indicate that  the  Appellant  provided  any  such
    evidence.

10. Furthermore, the birth certificate was not the only reason for  refusal
    of the application. It was also refused because the Appellant  did  not
    send a letter of consent from her financial sponsor when she  made  her
    application. A letter of consent is  a  specified  document.  Paragraph
    245AA does not require the Respondent to request a  specified  document
    that has not been submitted and is not required  to  request  it  where
    addressing  the  omission  will  not  lead  to  a  grant  because   the
    application will be refused for other reasons. The  Appellant  had  not
    supplied a birth certificate in the correct format  and  there  was  no
    evidence to suggest that  it  was  available  in  the  correct  format.
    Requesting a letter of consent would not therefore have resulted  in  a
    grant of leave. As to the Appellant's assertion that she  did  in  fact
    supply the letter of consent, I  find  that  the  Judge  gave  adequate
    reasons for her finding that the Appellant's evidence  in  this  regard
    was unreliable.


11. Against this background, the Judge made findings of fact that were open
    to her on the evidence before her at  paragraphs  [12]  and  [13].  The
    determination discloses no errors of law.


Decision

12. The determination of Judge Turquet contains no material errors of  law.
    Her decision must therefore stand.

Anonymity


13. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)
   of the Asylum and immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and we  see
   no reason why an order should be made pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal
   Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.





Signed                                  Date

Manjinder Robertson                          4 November 2014
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have considered whether to make a fee award. I have had regard to the
Joint Presidential Guidance Note: Fee Awards in Immigration Appeals
(December 2011). As the Respondent's appeal has been dismissed, the
decision of Judge Turquet as to the fee award shall also stand.



Signed                     Dated:

M Robertson                     4 November 2014
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
