

                                    [pic]


      Upper Tribunal
      Immigration and Asylum Chamber                     Appeal Number:
IA/35732/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House |
|On: 3 October 2016   |
|                     |

|Decision & Reasons           |
|Promulgated                  |
|On 05th October 2016         |








                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   BETWEEN

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              MR ASSAD HUSSAIN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


      Representation:

             For the Appellant:               Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Home Office
 Presenting Officer
             For the Respondent:        Mr T Gaisford, counsel instructed by
 M-R Solicitors




                        DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    1. This is an appeal against the decision, promulgated on 16 June 2015,
       of First-tier Tribunal Judge Stokes.


    2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pooler
       on 9 September 2015.



Background

    3. The respondent to this appeal sought a residence card as confirmation
       of a right to reside in the United Kingdom on the basis of being  the
       extended family member of Assad Hussain, an EEA national.


    4. In refusing the above-mentioned application, the Secretary  of  State
       did not accept that the EEA sponsor was exercising treaty rights  nor
       that the respondent was either residing with or dependent on the  EEA
       sponsor prior to or following his entry to the United Kingdom.


    5. Following the hearing before Judge Stokes, the  judge  accepted  that
       the sponsor was a qualified person; that the respondent was dependent
       upon the sponsor prior to his entry to the United Kingdom and that he
       was presently  living  with  and  dependent  upon  the  sponsor.  She
       concluded that the respondent's decision was not in  accordance  with
       the law and proceeded to allow the appeal under the 2006 Regulations.


    6. The grounds of application argued that the judge  erred  in  allowing
       the  appeal  of  an  extended  family  member  outright  rather  than
       remitting the matter to the Secretary of State. Reliance  was  placed
       on Ihemedu (OFMs - meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00340 (IAC).


    7. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought.

    8. Those representing the respondent did not lodge a Rule 24 response.


    9. At the hearing before me, Ms Ahmed simply argued that the  judge  had
       no jurisdiction to consider the appeal in  view  of  in  Sala  (EFMs:
       Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC).


   10. Mr Gaisford questioned the scope of Sala with reference  to  [85]  of
       the determination, stating that there was  a  difference  of  opinion
       regarding jurisdiction, albeit the Secretary of State had amended her
       guidance to state that there is no right of appeal. He  asked  me  to
       note that there were no disputed findings of fact in relation to  the
       judge's findings and the limited scope of the  Secretary  of  State's
       grounds amounted to a concession that there was no challenge to those
       findings.  Mr Gainsford argued, with regard to the issue  upon  which
       permission  was  granted,  that  of  discretion,  that  the   judge's
       misdirection was immaterial because there was  no  challenge  to  her
       findings.


   11. In reply, Ms Ahmad relied on Virk & others [2013]  EWCA  Civ  652  at
       [23], as follows; "Statutory  jurisdiction  cannot  be  conferred  by
       waiver or agreement; or by the failure of the parties or the tribunal
       to be alive to the point." She confirmed that the Secretary of  State
       did not challenge the judge's findings of fact and suggested that  it
       was open to the respondent to supply  the  judge's  decision  to  the
       Secretary of  State  in  support  of  a  further  application  for  a
       residence card.


   12. At the  conclusion  of  the  hearing,  I  announced  that  I  had  no
       jurisdiction to  consider  this  appeal  owing  to  Sala,  where  the
       following was decided; "There is no statutory right of appeal against
       the decision of the Secretary of State not to grant a Residence  Card
       to a person claiming to be an Extended Family Member. "


Conclusions

      I have no jurisdiction to consider this appeal.

      No application for anonymity was made and I  saw  no  reason  to  make
    such a direction.






     Signed:     Date: 4 October 2016


     Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

