
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/36394/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 July 2015                      |On 23 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                        MR ADEDAYO OLATUNJI OSHIYOKU
                                                                  Respondent
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person (unrepresented)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   For the sake of continuity I will refer to the  parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically  the  Secretary  of
    State is the appellant in the appeal before the Upper Tribunal.





Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria whose date of birth is 15  August
    1976.  He appeals against the respondent's decision to refuse to  grant
    him further leave to remain in the UK on  human  rights  grounds  as  a
    result of his family life with his partner and child.

3.   First-tier Tribunal Judge J. Bartlett  heard  the  appeal  at  Richmond
    Magistrates' Court on 29 January 2015. In a decision promulgated on  12
    February 2015 she allowed  the  appeal.   The  respondent  was  granted
    permission to appeal against the First-tier Tribunal decision.  The two
    main grounds of appeal are as follows:

    (i)  The respondent asserts that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in
         failing to apply the correct standard  of  proof.   The  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge pointed out a number of  flaws  in  the  appellant's
         evidence which went to the core of the matters before the Tribunal.
          It was argued that in light  of  the  fact  that  the  appellant's
         evidence was deemed to be wrong, evasive and contradictory  it  was
         not open to the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  to  conclude  that  the
         appellant currently a parental relationship with his son.

    (ii) The second ground of appeal makes essentially the same point  that
         the appellant had failed to establish to the required standard that
         he continued to have a genuine and subsisting relationship with his
         son.  The judge had found  his  evidence  to  be  evasive  and  his
         evidence was uncorroborated by any other evidence of the  level  of
         contact he presently had with his son.

4.   The matter comes before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether the First-
    tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on  a  point  of
    law.

5.   The appellant was unrepresented.  At the hearing I made clear  that  my
    role was to assist him to understand  any  points  that  were  made  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State and to assist him to put  forward  any
    information that might be relevant to my decision.

Decision and reasons

6.   After having considered the grounds of appeal and the submissions  made
    at the hearing I conclude that the First-tier Tribunal decision did not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law.

7.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge made a number of findings about  apparent
    inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence and in the  evidence  given
    by his wife, Mrs Nicola Baker.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  noted
    that the appellant asserted  in  his  witness  statement  (also  headed
    'grounds of appeal') that he was living  separately  from  the  child's
    mother due to work commitments [5]. The  suggestion  was  that  he  was
    still in  a  relationship  with  the  child's  mother.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge observed that when he was cross-examined  the  appellant
    said that he was in fact  separated  from  Mrs  Baker.  They  had  been
    separated since 2012.

8.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge said that  the  appellant  asserted  once
    again that he was in a subsisting marriage  with  Mrs  Baker  but  when
    questioned more closely it became apparent that what he meant was  that
    they were not divorced and were still formally married [6].

9.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge noted that the appellant appeared  to  be
    an evasive witness and had difficulty  in  giving  precise  information
    about when and how often he saw his  son  [7].   When  questioned  more
    closely the appellant stated that he cared for his son two  evenings  a
    week and every weekend.  He said that he now lived close to Mrs Baker's
    house. He moved there in December 2014 but  before  that  he  had  been
    living in Kent which was one hour away from Mrs Baker's house.

10.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge took into account a contact  order  dated
    11 November 2013.  This was a consent  order  which  provided  for  the
    appellant to see his son at a contact centre once  a  week.  The  order
    also stated that contact should move outside the centre and take  place
    every Sunday between 10:00am and 4:00pm upon completion of satisfactory
    police checks in respect of  the  proposed  contact  supervisors.   The
    First-tier Tribunal Judge noted  that  the  appellant  said  that  this
    arrangement ended in January 2014. He did not  receive  any  particular
    paperwork  from  social  workers  in  relation  to  the   new   contact
    arrangements. He said that the arrangements ended  because  the  social
    workers found there was no cause for concern about his contact with his
    son.

11.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge went to  consider  Mrs  Baker's  evidence
    [10].  Her short witness statement also asserted that they continued to
    be in a subsisting marriage. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  noted  that
    Mrs Baker's evidence relating to the appellant's contact with  his  son
    differed in a number of respects.

12.  The respondent asserts that in light of her findings  relating  to  the
    reliability of some of the evidence given by the appellant and his wife
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
    concluding that the appellant met the requirements of  the  immigration
    rules.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that there was no  evidence
    to show that the couple had divorced. However, she was  satisfied  that
    they had not been living together since their relationship  broke  down
    in July 2012 [15].  She accepted that Mrs Baker intends to apply for  a
    divorce and also that the appellant and his wife continued  to  have  a
    relationship of sorts, which was based on mutual co-operation in  order
    to raise their son. Because the relationship had broken down the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge concluded that  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of the immigration rules under  the  partner  route.   She
    then went on to consider whether the appellant met the requirements  as
    a parent under paragraph EX.1.

13.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge found both the appellant  and  Mrs  Baker
    to be  unreliable  witnesses  "in  some  respects"  and  quite  clearly
    considered that the  assertions  made  in  the  witness  statements  to
    suggest that they were still in a subsisting marriage  was  "deplorable
    conduct" [16].  She also considered the appellant's  evidence  that  he
    gave about his relationship  with  his  son  to  be  somewhat  evasive.
    However, the First-tier Tribunal Judge  went  on  to  say  that  having
    considered the evidence in the round  she  nevertheless  was  satisfied
    that the appellant had ongoing access and contact with  his  son.   She
    was also satisfied that this was regular and substantial in  nature  so
    far as it could be when the appellant no longer lives with  the  child.
    The First-tier Tribunal Judge also made a clear finding that because of
    this regular and substantial contact she considered that the  appellant
    was playing an active role in his son's upbringing.

14.  The respondent argues that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  findings
    are inadequate in light of her comments about the  credibility  of  the
    witnesses.  However, I am satisfied that  an  overall  reading  of  the
    decision indicates that one issue that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    had with the witnesses was that they had initially sought to gloss over
    the fact that they had separated. On closer questioning at the  hearing
    both witnesses were in the end quite clear that they had separated  but
    continued to be married. They continued to have  a  relationship  to  a
    certain extent insofar as they co-operate to bring up their son.

15.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered evidence to show that  despite
    the split in July 2012 the appellant continued to have regular  contact
    with his child. The residence and contact order  made  on  11  November
    2013 confirmed that the child would reside with  his  mother  and  made
    provision for the appellant to have contact with  his  son  at  certain
    times of the week and at a contact centre once a week.   Crucially  the
    order went on to say that upon  completion  of  police  checks  contact
    would eventually move outside the centre and take  place  every  Sunday
    and then the final part of the order said that  it  would  move  on  to
    "such further and other contact as the parties may agree  in  writing".
    At the hearing Mr Oshiyoku told me that it  is  because  of  this  last
    provision he did not have any further orders made by the  court.   Once
    the social workers were satisfied that the contact arrangements did not
    need to be supervised he and his wife  were  left  to  make  their  own
    arrangements.

16.  I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings  regarding
    the appellant's relationship with his son are sustainable and could not
    be said to be so inadequate that they amount to an error  of  law.  The
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  heard  evidence  from  both  witnesses  and
    although she had concerns about some aspects of their  evidence,  where
    it seems that they initial tried  to  gloss  over  the  fact  of  their
    separation, the situation appeared  to  be  clarified  to  some  extent
    during  questioning  at  the  hearing.   Although   there   were   some
    discrepancies as to the exact level of contact the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge did not consider them so serious that they would cause  any  real
    doubt as to whether the appellant continued to have  contact  with  his
    son. The appellant was previously granted Discretionary Leave to Remain
    on the basis of his family life with his wife and son. Even though  the
    appellant separated from his wife  there  was  evidence  to  show  that
    formal contact arrangements continued and were eventually left for  him
    and his wife to negotiate. Despite  their  separation  the  appellant's
    wife attended the hearing to give evidence. In light  of  the  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  there  was  no  good  reason  to
    conclude that the appellant no longer had any contact with his son.

17.  For the reasons given above it  is  clear  that  despite  her  concerns
    about some aspects of the evidence the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was
    satisfied that the appellant had regular contact with his son. As  such
    it was also open to the First-tier Tribunal Judge to  accept  that  the
    appellant continued to have  parental  responsibility  for  the  child.
    While the respondent may disagree with the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    decision I find that the grounds of appeal amount to little more than a
    disagreement with her findings and do not disclose  any  error  of  law
    that would have made a  material  difference  to  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal.

18.  A final point made by Mr Kandola was that  the  judge  failed  to  give
    adequate  reasons  for  finding  that  the  appellant   now   met   the
    "Suitability"  requirements  of  the  immigration  rules  [17].    This
    argument did not form part  of  the  grounds  of  appeal.  Although  Mr
    Kandola sought to frame it  as  part  of  his  overall  submissions  in
    relation to the other  two  points  it  bears  no  relation  and  is  a
    completely separate  point.   Nevertheless  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    findings made by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  are  sustainable  and
    disclose no material error of law. The  "Suitability"  requirement  the
    respondent relied on in  the  original  decision  was  the  appellant's
    failure to provide additional information regarding the contact that he
    had with his son. It is true that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not
    set out in exact terms the  reason  why  she  was  satisfied  that  the
    appellant now met the requirements of Appendix FM-S-LTR. However, it is
    self-evident that after  having  given  evidence  at  the  hearing  and
    submitting further evidence in the form of the contact order  that  the
    appellant had provided the further evidence relating to his family life
    at the date of the hearing. The  reason  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's finding was apparent from the face of the evidence without  any
    need for her to set it out in  more  detail.  As  an  aside,  paragraph
    322(9) did not apply to this case by operation of paragraph A320 of the
    immigration rules.

19.  I conclude that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  discloses  no
    error of law that would  have  made  any  material  difference  to  the
    outcome of the appeal. The First-tier Tribunal decision shall stand.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law.

The First-tier Tribunal decision shall stand.



Signed   [pic]    Date 23 July 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
