

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/36230/2013
                                                               IA/36495/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at  Newport                             |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29 July 2014                               |On 6 August 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               RONG HUA ZHANG
                                GUI YING CHEN

                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   No representative

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The Secretary of State appeals against a decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal (Judge C J Woolley) allowing the appeals of  Rong  Hua  Zhang
      and Gui Ying Chen under para 276ADE of the Immigration Rules  (HC  395
      as amended).

   2. For convenience, I will refer to the parties as they  appeared  before
      the First-tier Tribunal.

Introduction

   3. The first and second appellants are citizens of China who were born on
      19 May 1939 and 23 December 1938 respectively.  They are married.  The
      appellants arrived in the United Kingdom  on  8  April  1997.   On  26
      September 2012, the appellants made applications for indefinite  leave
      to remain in the UK on compassionate grounds.  On 16  July  2013,  the
      Secretary of State refused each of the appellants' applications  under
      the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended) and under Article 8  of  the
      ECHR.  On 20 August 2013, the Secretary of  State  made  decisions  to
      remove each of the appellants to China.

The Appeal to the First-Tier Tribunal

   4. The appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

   5. Before Judge Woolley it was conceded that  the  appellants  could  not
      succeed under Appendix FM of the Rules.  Reliance was, however,  place
      upon para 276ADE and Article 8 of the ECHR based upon the  appellants'
      private life and long residence in the UK.  Judge Woolley allowed each
      of the appellants' appeals under para 276ADE(vi)  on  the  basis  that
      they had  established  that  they  had  "no  ties  (including  social,
      cultural or family)" with China.  Judge Woolley concluded  that  their
      links with China were "remote and  abstract"  and,  applying  Ogundimu
      (Article 8 - New Rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 00060 (IAC) they  had  "no
      ties" within the meaning of para 276ADE(vi).   In the  light  of  that
      finding, Judge Woolley  considered  it  unnecessary  to  consider  the
      appellants' rights under Article 8 of the ECHR.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

   6. The Secretary of State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal on the basis that the Judge had been wrong  in  law  to  find
      that the appellants had "no ties" with China.  The grounds  of  appeal
      were in the following terms:

           "I.   In determining whether or not the  Appellants  would  have
                 ties to China for the purposes of Para  276ADE,  the  judge
                 erred in failing to consider that both appellants would  be
                 removed together, and so each would have ties to  China  by
                 virtue of the other's presence.

              1. At [29] the judge found that the Appellants had no ties  to
                 China for the purposes of Para 276ADE, on  the  basis  that
                 although they spoke Cantonese, the appellants had no family
                 remaining in China and had had no contact with that country
                 during the seventeen years in which they had  been  in  the
                 UK.

              2. The judge erred in  finding  the  Appellants'  ties  to  be
                 "remote  and  abstract".   Each  Appellant  made   separate
                 application, received a separate refusal letter, and made a
                 separate appeal.  While there are common  issues  of  fact,
                 each appeal needed  to  be  considered  separately  on  its
                 merits.

              3. The Appellants would be removed to  China  together.   Upon
                 arrival in China, each appellant would have a tie to  China
                 in the form of the other appellant, their spouse.

              4. Accordingly, it cannot be said,  per  Ogundimu,  that  each
                 Appellant's ties are "remote" or "abstract", or  that  each
                 Appellant would be a "stranger" to China upon removal."

   7. On 2 May 2014, the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Parkes)  granted  the
      Secretary of State permission to appeal on the following basis:

           "3.   The grounds argue that the Judge overlooked the fact  that
                 the Appellants would be removed  together  and  would  have
                 each other presence as a tie to China.   It  was  wrong  to
                 state that their ties were remote  and  abstract  and  they
                 spoke Cantonese. "

   8. At the hearing, neither appellant attended.  However, their  grandson,
      Mr Voong did attend.  He  indicated  that  his  grandparents  had  not
      attended as his grandmother suffered from a severe car  sickness.   Mr
      McVeety, who represented the Secretary of State saw  no  objection  to
      allowing Mr Voong to speak on their behalf.

   9. Mr McVeety relied upon the grounds of appeal.  He submitted  that  the
      Judge had failed to apply the approach set out in Ogundimu at [125] in
      concluding that the  appellants'  ties  with  China  were  remote  and
      abstract  and  therefore  they  satisfied  the  requirement  in   para
      276ADE(vi).  However, he accepted that it was a novel ground of appeal
      to suggest that the appellants had ties with China simply because they
      would be returning to China together.  He  accepted  that  if  neither
      appellant had any ties with China individually then it  could  not  be
      said that they  had  ties  with  China  because  they  were  returning
      together.  Mr McVeety submitted that the Judge had failed to  consider
      the appellants' circumstances in the round as required by Ogundimu.

  10. Mr Voong reminded me that the appellants, when they had been in  China
      between 1978 (when they came from Vietnam) until 1997 (when they  came
      to the UK), had worked in a government tea  factory  subject  to  long
      hours and had not made friends  or  developed  cultural  ties.   Since
      2005, when their son had died, the appellants had had  neither  friend
      nor family in China.  Two of their  daughters  were  in  the  USA  and
      another daughter (Mr Voong's mother) was in the UK.   He  reminded  me
      that they had been away for 17 years and their links with  China  were
      therefore remote.

Para 276ADE

  11. The relevant immigration  rule  applicable  to  this  appeal  is  para
      276ADE(vi) which provides as follows:

           "The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to  remain
           on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the date of
           application, the applicant:

           ....(vi)    is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously in
                 the UK for less than 20 years (discounting any  periods  of
                 imprisonment) but has no ties (including  social,  cultural
                 or family) with the country to which he would have to go if
                 required to leave the UK."

The Background Facts

  12. The background facts are set out in the Judge's determination and,  as
      Mr McVeety accepted, are not in dispute.

  13. The appellants were born in Vietnam in 1939 and 1938 respectively  and
      were nationals of Vietnam.  In 1978, they  fled  Vietnam  to  live  in
      China where they were accepted  by  the  Chinese  government.   During
      their time in China, the appellants had three  daughters  and  a  son.
      Whilst they lived in China, the  appellants  worked  in  a  state  tea
      plantation or factory.  At some point, all three daughters left  China
      to live either in the USA or in the UK.  The appellants' son  remained
      in China.  In 1997, the appellants came to the UK to live  with  their
      daughter and her family.  In 2005, their son in  China,  who  suffered
      from liver cancer, died.   It is accepted that  they  have  no  family
      left in China.

The Judge's Determination

  14. The Judge dealt with the appellants' claims under para 276ADE in paras
      26-30 of his determination as follows:

           "26.  ...They have not lived in the UK for  20  years  nor  have
                 they spent at least half his life in  this  country,  since
                 when they arrived they were both  in  their  late  fifties.
                 The question as to whether they have any ties in  China  is
                 answered in the positive by the  respondent  by  virtue  of
                 their residence there  from  1978  to  1997.   In  Ogundimu
                 (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT  60  (IAC)  the
                 President  explained  the  meaning  of  276ADE  (vi).   The
                 natural and ordinary meaning of the word "ties" imported  a
                 concept involving something more  than  merely  remote  and
                 abstract links to the country of  proposed  deportation  or
                 removal.  It involved there being a connection to the  life
                 in that country.  Consideration of whether a person had "no
                 ties" to such a country must involve a  rounded  assessment
                 of all of the relevant circumstances and was not limited to
                 "social, cultural and family" circumstances.

             27. The appellant have no family left in China.  They  had  one
                 son but I note that he died in China in  2005.   They  have
                 three daughters who now all live in the  United  States  of
                 America.  I note their history.  They were originally  both
                 born in Vietnam and married in that country when they  were
                 aged 21 and 22 respectively.  In 1978 they  fled  to  China
                 and were received by the  Chinese  government.   They  were
                 sent to a tea farm and lived and worked  there  until  they
                 came to the UK in 1997.  Even though the time they spent in
                 China therefore exceeds the time they have spent in the  UK
                 neither were  originally  Chinese  nationals  (although  Ms
                 Toney confirmed that they were both now Chinese  nationals)
                 and they have spent the longest portion of their  lives  in
                 Vietnam.  The ties  they  have  with  China  therefore  are
                 limited to the period 1978-1997.   These  ties  are  weaker
                 therefore than if they had been born and  spent  all  their
                 lives in China prior to arrival in the UK.  They both  left
                 China when they were mature adults.  They had been sent  to
                 work on a tea plantation on their  reception  by  China  in
                 1978 and it is I  find  arguable  whether  work  on  a  tea
                 plantation as immigrants would  expose  the  appellants  to
                 much of the cultural norms of Chinese society.   They  have
                 no family or friends in China, as their son  did  there  in
                 2005.  Their ties are rather to the UK and the  USA,  where
                 their surviving daughters live.

             28. Both appellants still  speak  Cantonese  -  indeed  it  was
                 apparent  that  both  have  very  limited  English  indeed.
                 Cantonese is still spoken in the family home and  both  the
                 main  appellants  who  have  acquired  British  citizenship
                 needed the help of the interpreter  when  they  gave  their
                 evidence.  I accept that if they went back  to  China  that
                 both would be able to communicate  in  Cantonese  with  the
                 inhabitants of China.  As inhabitants originally of Vietnam
                 this would not have been their first language.

             29. Ogundimu however requires a rounded assessment of  all  the
                 circumstances.  It is not limited to  social  and  cultural
                 ties.  In answer to the question of  whether  they  have  a
                 connection to the life of that country  I  find  that  they
                 have no connection now to life  in  China.   They  have  no
                 family there; they receive no help  or  even  communication
                 from the Chinese authorities; and China in  any  event  was
                 their adopted home only for 19 years.  They have remote and
                 abstract links with China in that  China  was  the  country
                 from which they came to the UK and whose  language  (or  at
                 least the language of Southern  China)  they  still  speak.
                 For the last 17 years however their lives have been  solely
                 in the UK within their family and any real links with China
                 I find were severed with the death of their  son  in  2005.
                 Connection with life in China is now I find as  remote  and
                 abstract for them as any connection with life in Vietnam.

             30. On the rounded assessment of the  appellants  I  find  that
                 they have no ties to China.  I  find  therefore  that  they
                 meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(vi) and that they
                 are entitled to remain in the UK  on  the  basis  of  their
                 private life."

Discussion

  15. The proper approach to determining whether an individual has "no ties"
      with his own country is set out in the Upper  Tribunal's  decision  in
      Ogundimu at [123]-[125] as follows:

           "123. The natural  and  ordinary  meaning  of  the  word  'ties'
                 imports, we think, a concept involving something more  than
                 merely remote and abstract links to the country of proposed
                 deportation  or  removal.   It  involves  there   being   a
                 continued connection to life  in  that  country;  something
                 that ties a claimant to his or her country of  origin.   If
                 this were not the case then it would appear that a person's
                 nationality of the country of proposed deportation could of
                 itself lead to a failure to meet the  requirements  of  the
                 rule.  This would render the application of the rule, given
                 the context within which it operates, entirely meaningless.



            124. We recognise that the text under the rules is  an  exacting
                 one. Consideration of whether a person  has  'no  ties'  to
                 such country must involve a rounded assessment of  all  the
                 relevant circumstances and is not to be limited to 'social,
                 cultural and family' circumstances.  Nevertheless,  we  are
                 satisfied that the appellant has no ties with Nigeria.   He
                 is a stranger to the country, the people, and  the  way  of
                 life.  His father may have ties but they are  not  ties  of
                 the appellant or any ties that could result in  support  to
                 the appellant in the event of his return there.

            125. Whilst each case turns  on  its  own  facts,  circumstances
                 relevant to the assessment of whether a person has ties  to
                 the country to which they would have to  go  if  they  were
                 required to leave the United Kingdom must include, but  are
                 not limited to: the length of time a person  has  spent  in
                 the country to which  he  would  have  to  go  if  he  were
                 required to leave the United  Kingdom,  the  age  that  the
                 person left that country, the exposure that person has  had
                 to the cultural norms of that country, whether that  person
                 speaks the language of  the  country,  the  extent  of  the
                 family and friends that person has in the country to  which
                 he is being deported or removed  and  the  quality  of  the
                 relationships that person has with those friends and family
                 members."

  16. As the Upper Tribunal  identifies,  the  concept  of  "ties"  involves
      something "more than merely remote and abstract links" to the  country
      of removal.  There must be a "continued connection  to  life  in  that
      country" which ties that individual to that country.  That assessment,
      as Mr McVeety submitted, requires a "rounded assessment" of  "all  the
      relevant circumstances".   In  para  [125]  of  its  determination  in
      Ogundimu, the Upper Tribunal set out the relevant  circumstances  that
      should be taken into account.

  17. Mr McVeety's principal submission was that the  Judge  had  failed  to
      engage in  that  exercise  in  this  appeal.  I  do  not  accept  that
      submission.  It is clear from paras 26-30 of the Judge's determination
      that, as he himself states in  para  20,  he  engaged  in  a  "rounded
      assessment" of the circumstances.  He correctly  directed  himself  in
      accordance  with  the  Upper  Tribunal's  guidance  in  Ogundimu.  The
      appellants were not Chinese by birth.  They had come to live in  China
      when they were approximately 40 years old.  They had  lived  in  China
      between 1978 and 1997, in other words for 19 years.  During that  time
      they had worked within a state tea plantation or factory and, as Judge
      Woolley noted in paragraph 27 of his  determination,  it  is  arguable
      whether that working regime would have exposed the appellants to "much
      of the cultural norms of Chinese society".  Judge Woolley found  as  a
      fact that the appellants, having been in the UK for 17 years,  had  no
      friends in China.   Equally,  although  whilst  living  in  China  the
      appellants had a family, none of that family lived in  China  anymore.
      The appellants' daughters lived either in the USA or the UK and  their
      son had died in 2005.    It must be  remembered  that  the  appellants
      came from Vietnam and  there  is  no  suggestion  that  any  of  their
      original family came to China with them.  This is a case where it  can
      be confidently said that these appellants have  no  family  in  China.
      Judge Woolley accepted that the appellants could speak Cantonese  (one
      of the languages spoken in China) and, although, this  was  not  their
      first language, they would be able to communicate with people in China
      at least, I suppose, if they also  spoke  Cantonese  rather  than  any
      different Chinese language such as Mandarin.

  18. Although the appellants are Chinese nationals,  given  their  history,
      their situation is different from that of individuals  who  were  born
      and lived their entire lives until coming to the UK in  China.   China
      was, in effect, their adopted country.  Even though they had lived  in
      China for 19 years, the Judge was entitled, in my  view,  to  conclude
      that as a result of  their  particular  circumstances  (including  the
      absence of family or friends in China) that  their  links  with  China
      were "remote and abstract" such that they had  established  that  they
      had "no ties" with China for the purposes of para 276 ADE 9(vi).  That
      conclusion was not perverse or otherwise one not properly open to  the
      Judge to make on the evidence.

  19. Mr  McVeety  did  not  press  the  argument  that  if  the  appellants
      individually had "no ties" with China then the  mere  fact  that  they
      would return together meant that they did, in fact, have  "ties"  with
      China.  In my judgement, Mr McVeety was right not to pursue this point
      which is made in the grounds of appeal and  was  the  basis  on  which
      permission to appeal was granted.  It is clearly wrong.  The mere fact
      that two individuals return to their own  country  together  does  not
      mean that, as a consequence, they have "ties" with that  country.   If
      they individually have "no ties" then their  joint  presence  in  that
      country cannot somehow result in them collectively  have  "ties"  with
      that country.  The opposite proposition is both counter-intuitive  and
      wholly illogical and does not represent the law.

  20. For these reasons, the Judge did not err in law in  finding  that  the
      appellants had established that they had "no ties" with China for  the
      purposes of para 276ADE(vi).

Decision

  21. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  allow  the  appellants'
      appeals under para 276ADE(vi) did not involve the making of  an  error
      of law.  The Judge's decision to allow their appeals stands.

  22. Accordingly, the Secretary of State's appeals to  the  Upper  Tribunal
      are dismissed.










                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:

















