
[pic]
IAC-AH-sc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/36171/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd April 2016                            |On 9 May 2016                 |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                Anas Mansour
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Ali of Counsel instructed by ASR Legal
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appealed against a decision of a panel of the  First-tier
    Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 15th December 2014.

 2. The Appellant is an Algerian citizen born 1st January 1973 who  entered
    the United Kingdom as a visitor on 25th April 2014.   He  had  a  visit
    visa valid between 22nd August 2012 and 22nd August 2014.

 3. On 22nd May 2014 the Appellant applied  for  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom, to enable him to enjoy a  family  life  with  his  four
    daughters who are now aged 18, 14, 13, and 4 years of age respectively.



 4. The Appellant lived in Algeria with his wife who is a  Syrian  citizen.
    His daughters are Algerian citizens.  The  Appellant's  marriage  broke
    down, his wife left him and returned  with  one  of  her  daughters  to
    Syria.  However because  of  conditions  there,  the  Appellant's  wife
    returned to Algeria, collected her other three daughters, and travelled
    to the United Kingdom without the Appellant's knowledge.

 5. The Appellant's wife and his  four  daughters  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom in October 2012.  They have been granted refugee  status  which
    gives them limited leave to remain in the United Kingdom from 5th March
    2013 until 9th February 2018.

 6. On 4th September 2014 the Respondent refused to  vary  the  Appellant's
    leave to remain, and decided to remove him  from  the  United  Kingdom.
    The Appellant appealed to the FTT.

 7. The appeal was heard on 3rd December 2014.  It  was  acknowledged  that
    the appeal could not succeed under the Immigration Rules, and therefore
    the FTT considered Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention  on  Human
    Rights (the 1950 Convention) outside the Immigration  Rules.   The  FTT
    accepted that the Appellant had a genuine and  subsisting  relationship
    with his daughters and enjoyed family life with them.   The  FTT  noted
    that the Coventry Family Proceedings Court had  granted  the  Appellant
    contact with his children from 3.15pm on Friday  until  3pm  on  Sunday
    each week.  That order was dated 24th February 2014.   The  appeal  was
    however dismissed as the FTT found  that  it  would  be  reasonable  to
    expect the children  to  return  to  Algeria  with  the  Appellant,  or
    alternatively the  Appellant  could  return  to  Algeria  and  make  an
    application for entry clearance under the Immigration Rules.

 8. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,
    contending that the FTT  had  erred  materially  by  finding  that  the
    Appellant's children had been granted indefinite  leave  to  remain  as
    refugees.  The FTT described the  children  as  being  settled  in  the
    United Kingdom, but it  was  contended  that  this  was  incorrect,  as
    evidence had been submitted to the FTT to prove that the  children  had
    been granted refugee status, which gave them limited  leave  to  remain
    for a period of five years.

 9. It was contended that the FTT had made a perverse finding at  paragraph
    10 of its decision, in finding that if the Appellant  left  the  United
    Kingdom and applied for entry clearance from abroad, he  would  have  a
    reasonable but not  inevitable  prospect  of  meeting  the  Immigration
    Rules' requirements, subject to evidence of financial independence  and
    English language.  It was contended that this  was  wrong,  because  E-
    ECPT.2.2(c) required that the children  must  be  British  citizens  or
    settled in the United  Kingdom.   The  Appellant  therefore  could  not
    succeed with an entry  clearance  application  from  abroad  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

10. It was contended that the FTT had reached an irrational  conclusion  in
    finding that it would be reasonable  for  the  children  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom, as the travel documents issued  to  them  as  refugees,
    would not allow them to travel to the country of their nationality, and
    the children's mother would not give consent  for  them  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom, and the family court order stated that her  consent  or
    the consent of the Family Court would be required  to  enable  them  to
    leave.

11. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Lambert of the FTT who  found
    that the FTT had arguably erred  in  concluding  that  the  Appellant's
    children's children were settled in the United Kingdom and that the FTT
    conclusion  that  the  children  could  reasonably  relocate  with  the
    Appellant to Algeria was questionable, and  there  was  an  absence  of
    consideration whether either the mother or the Family  Court  would  be
    likely to agree to such a proposal.

Error of Law

12. At a hearing on 18th January 2016 I heard submissions from both parties
    regarding error of law.  It was accepted on behalf  of  the  Respondent
    that the FTT had  clearly  erred  by  mistakenly  concluding  that  the
    children had settled status.  The FTT was also wrong  in  law  to  find
    that the Appellant would have a reasonable prospect of succeeding if he
    made an entry clearance application under the Immigration Rules, as  he
    could not succeed because his children  are  not  British  citizens  or
    settled in this country, as required by E-ECPT.2.2.  It was argued that
    the errors were not material because the finding that it was reasonable
    to expect the children to  return  to  Algeria  was  sustainable.   The
    children need not rely upon the travel documents they had  been  issued
    as refugees in this country, because they could  travel  on  their  own
    Algerian passports.

13. I set out below my conclusions and reasons for finding an error of  law
    and setting aside the decision of the FTT;

         "17. The FTT erred in  law  (as  conceded  by  the  Respondent)  in
             finding that the Appellant's four  daughters  have  indefinite
             leave to remain and are settled in the United  Kingdom.   This
             finding is recorded  by  the  FTT  at  paragraphs  2  and  28.
             Paragraph 6  of  the  Immigration  Rules  defines  the  phrase
             'settled in the United Kingdom' as  meaning  that  the  person
             concerned is free from any restriction on the period for which
             he  may  remain.   Because  the  Appellant's   daughters   are
             refugees, they are not settled,  but  have  limited  leave  to
             remain.  The FTT did therefore consider the appeal,  based  in
             part at least, upon a mistake of fact.
         18.  The issue is whether this is material.  I find that this error
             influenced the FTT when considering whether it was  reasonable
             for the Appellant to leave the UK and make an entry  clearance
             application from abroad.   The  FTT  found  in  paragraph  10,
             having set out the requirements of the Immigration Rules;
                  'On the evidence  before  us,  the  Appellant  would  have
                  reasonable but not inevitable  prospects  of  meeting  all
                  those  requirements,  subject  to  evidence  of  financial
                  independence and English language.'
         19.  The FTT did  not  appreciate  that  the  Appellant  could  not
             satisfy E-ECPT.2.2(c) which requires that his children must be
             British citizens or settled in the United Kingdom.  The  error
             is  repeated  in  paragraph  34,  with  the  FTT  finding  the
             Appellant  would  only  have  to  demonstrate  financial   and
             accommodation independence and English  skills,  in  order  to
             satisfy the Immigration Rules.
         20.  I conclude that the findings made by the FTT as  to  it  being
             reasonable to expect the Appellant to make an entry  clearance
             application  from  abroad  are  based  upon  a  mistake,   and
             therefore are not safe and cannot stand.
         21.  The FTT also  found  that  it  would  be  reasonable  for  the
             Appellant's children to leave the United Kingdom.  As they are
             Algerian citizens they  would  not  need  to  use  the  travel
             documents issued to them as refugees, as they could use  their
             Algerian passports.  There was no evidence before the  FTT  to
             indicate that the children had been granted asylum because  of
             a fear of persecution in Algeria.  The  FTT  in  paragraph  27
             gave five reasons why it would be  reasonable  to  expect  the
             children to return to Algeria.  However I find that there  has
             been inadequate consideration, and inadequate  reasons  given,
             as to why it would be reasonable to  expect  the  children  to
             return to Algeria  without  their  mother,  who  the  evidence
             indicates has been their primary carer,  and  with  whom  they
             live, for five out of seven days in a week.
         22.  For the above reasons I conclude that the decision of the  FTT
             must be set aside."

14. As there had been no challenge to the conclusion  reached  by  the  FTT
    that the Appellant has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  his
    daughters and enjoys family life with them under Article  8,  and  that
    his removal would interfere with that family life, and that it would be
    in  the  childrens'  best  interests  to  continue  to  have   such   a
    relationship with their father, those findings  were  preserved.   Full
    details of the application for  permission  to  appeal,  the  grant  of
    permission, and the submissions made by both parties are  contained  in
    my error of law decision dated 22nd January 2016.

Re-Making the Decision - Upper Tribunal Hearing 22nd April 2016

Preliminary Issues

15. I ascertained that I had received  all  documentation  upon  which  the
    parties intended to rely, and that each party had served the other with
    any documentation upon which reliance was to be placed.

16. I had the Respondent's bundle that had been before the FTT with Annexes
    A - D.  I had the Appellant's bundle that  had  been  before  the  FTT,
    comprising 142 pages to which I will refer  as  the  first  Appellant's
    bundle.  I had a second Appellant's bundle comprising 195 pages, and  a
    third Appellant's bundle comprising 30 pages.  I received  from  Ali  a
    skeleton argument.

17. Mr Ali advised that no further oral evidence  would  be  called.   Both
    representatives indicated that they were ready to proceed and there was
    no application for an adjournment.



The Respondent's Oral Submissions

18. Mr Mills acknowledged that the Appellant's estranged wife is  a  Syrian
    citizen, and there was no indication that  she  had  any  intention  to
    return to live in  Algeria.   Therefore  if  the  Appellant's  children
    returned to Algeria, it would be without their mother.  Mr Mills stated
    that he was not arguing that it would be reasonable for the children to
    return to Algeria.

19. Mr Mills acknowledged that if the Appellant returned to Algeria to make
    an entry clearance application under the Immigration  Rules,  he  could
    not succeed because his children are not settled in the United  Kingdom
    and are not British citizens.

20. Therefore if the Appellant was removed from the United Kingdom he would
    be separated from his children and the issue that must be  decided,  is
    whether that would be proportionate, and whether the public interest in
    maintaining effective immigration control was  sufficient  to  outweigh
    the best interests of the children in having contact with their father.



21. Mr Mills submitted that it may be proportionate for the Appellant to be
    removed, as he cannot  satisfy  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  Mr Mills acknowledged  that  it  was  appropriate  to  consider
    Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules, and it was a  matter  for  the
    Tribunal as to whether  the  need  to  maintain  effective  immigration
    control, should be given more weight than the  best  interests  of  the
    children in having physical contact with their father.

The Appellant's Oral Submissions

22. Mr Ali relied upon his skeleton argument.  He maintained that it was in
    the best interests of the Appellant's children to remain in the  United
    Kingdom and it would be disproportionate to  expect  the  Appellant  to
    return to  Algeria  without  them.   It  was  common  ground  that  the
    Appellant could not succeed in making an  entry  clearance  application
    under the Immigration Rules.

23. The mother of the children would not give permission for them to  leave
    the United Kingdom, and the Family Court contact order  prohibited  the
    removal by the Appellant of the children from the United Kingdom.

24. Mr Ali submitted that it would clearly be unreasonable for the children
    to be separated from  their  mother  to  live  with  the  Appellant  in
    Algeria.  The travel documents issued to the children as refugees,  did
    not permit travel to Algeria.  The three eldest children, had submitted
    statements confirming the close relationship that  they  had  with  the
    Appellant, and confirming their wishes for him to remain in the  United
    Kingdom.

25. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.





My Conclusion and Reasons

26. I have taken into  account  all  of  the  evidence  placed  before  the
    Tribunal.   It  is  accepted  by  the  parties  that  the   Appellant's
    application for leave to remain could not succeed under Appendix FM  of
    the Immigration Rules because he could not  satisfy  E-LTRPT.3.1  which
    provides that an applicant must not be  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    visitor.

27. As this appeal is based upon  the  Appellant's  family  life  with  his
    children, he does not rely upon private life established in the  United
    Kingdom, and therefore does not rely upon paragraph 276ADE(1).

28. The issue before me, is therefore whether the Appellant can succeed  by
    relying upon Article 8 of the 1950 Convention, outside the  Immigration
    Rules.  It was conceded before the  FTT  that  it  was  appropriate  to
    consider Article 8 outside the rules, and Mr Mills confirmed before  me
    that it was accepted that  Article  8  outside  the  Immigration  Rules
    should be considered.

29. I find as a fact that the Appellant's wife, who is  a  Syrian  citizen,
    left him in Algeria, and took his four children to the  United  Kingdom
    without his knowledge.  I find that when the Appellant discovered their
    whereabouts, he applied for a visit visa  which  was  granted,  and  he
    subsequently visited his children in the United Kingdom.  The Appellant
    and his wife remain separated and estranged.  The basis of  the  asylum
    claim was a fear of persecution in Syria.

30. The Appellant's children have been granted refugee status,  and  copies
    of their residence permits have been produced showing  that  they  have
    limited leave to remain until 9th February 2018.

31. I set out below in part,  paragraph  23  of  the  FTT  decision,  which
    summarises the preserved findings;

         "23. We have no hesitation in finding  that  the  Appellant  has  a
             genuine and subsisting relationship  with  his  daughters  and
             enjoys family life with them under Article 8, that his removal
             would interfere with his and their family life following Beoku-
             Betts, and indeed that it would  be  in  the  children's  best
             interests to continue to have such a relationship  with  their
             father."

32. I have seen a copy of the Coventry Family Proceedings Court order dated
    24th February 2014, which orders that the Appellant should have contact
    with his children three days per week.  The Appellant is  to  pick  the
    children up from school on Friday at 3.15pm, and return them  to  their
    mother on Sunday at 3pm.  The order confirms that the children may  not
    be removed from the United Kingdom without the written consent of every
    person with parental responsibility for the children, or the  leave  of
    the court.

33. It is also the case that the Appellant has supplied  an  IELTS  English
    language test certificate as evidence of his English language  ability,
    and it was confirmed before the FTT (paragraph 6(iii)) that it was  not
    suggested that the  Appellant  is  not  financially  independent.   The
    Appellant is a qualified dentist, and has financially supported himself
    from his own resources while in the United Kingdom, and there has  been
    no reliance by him on public funds.

34. When  considering  Article  8  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  it  is
    appropriate to adopt the five stage approach advocated in Razgar [2004]
    UKHL 27 which involves answering the following questions;

         "(1) Will the proposed removal  be  an  interference  by  a  public
             authority with  the  exercise  of  the  applicant's  right  to
             respect for his private or (as the case may be) family life?
         (2)  If so,  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such
             gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?
         (3)  If so,  is such interference in accordance with the law?
         (4)  If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic  society
             in the interests of national security, public safety,  or  the
             economic well-being of the  country,  for  the  prevention  of
             disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals,  or
             for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others?
         (5)  If so, is such interference proportionate  to  the  legitimate
             public end sought to be achieved?"

35. It is accepted that the Appellant has established a  family  life  with
    his four children and Article 8 is engaged.  As to whether the proposed
    inference with that family life is in accordance with the law,  I  find
    that it is, insofar as the Appellant cannot satisfy the requirements of
    the Immigration Rules.

36. I find that it is necessary for a state to have  effective  immigration
    control, and therefore the issue to be  decided  is  whether,  in  this
    case, the Respondent's decision to remove the Appellant from the United
    Kingdom is proportionate to the legitimate  public  end  sought  to  be
    achieved.

37. Although it has been found that the best interests of the children  are
    to continue to have a relationship with the  Appellant  in  the  United
    Kingdom, I remind myself that while the best interests of children  are
    a primary consideration, they are not the paramount consideration,  and
    their   best   interests   can   be   outweighed   by    countervailing
    considerations, such as the  need  to  maintain  effective  immigration
    control.

38. I have taken into account section 117B of the Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act).  Sub-section (1) confirms that  the
    maintenance  of  effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the   public
    interest.  Sub-sections (2) and (3) confirm that it is  in  the  public
    interest that an individual seeking to remain in the United Kingdom can
    speak English,  and  is  financially  independent.   I  find  that  the
    Appellant can speak English and is  financially  independent,  although
    these are not positive factors to be taken into account when  assessing
    his application, as they are neutral  factors.   As  explained  in  the
    second paragraph of the headnote to AM Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC);

         "An Appellant can obtain no positive right to a grant of  leave  to
         remain from either s117B(2) or (3),  whatever  the  degree  of  his
         fluency in English, or the strength of his financial resources."

39. The Appellant is not and has not been in the United Kingdom  unlawfully
    so sub-section (4) does not apply, and sub-section (5) is not relevant,
    because although the Appellant's immigration status is precarious,  his
    application and subsequent appeal is not based upon his private life.

40. Sub-section (6) is not relevant, because although the Appellant  has  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  his  children,  they
    are not qualifying children, because they are not British citizens, and
    they have not lived in the United Kingdom for a  continuous  period  of
    seven years or more.

41. The Supreme Court in ZH  (Tanzania)  [2011]  UKSC  4  at  paragraph  29
    confirmed that;

         "When considering the best interests of a child, consideration must
         be given as to whether it is reasonable to expect the child to live
         in another country."

    In this appeal Mr Mills  did  not  seek  to  argue  that  it  would  be
    reasonable to  expect  the  Appellant's  four  children  to  return  to
    Algeria.  In my view that was a fair and appropriate  stance  to  take.
    The mother of the  children  is  Syrian,  and  is  estranged  from  the
    Appellant.  She has refugee status in the United Kingdom.  It  was  not
    suggested that she would be willing to return to Algeria.  Therefore if
    the children were returned to Algeria, this  would  involve  separating
    them from their mother, who has been their primary carer, and with whom
    they live in the United Kingdom for five out of seven days.  The  order
    made by the family court clearly envisages that the best  interests  of
    the children are to remain living with their mother, and  to  have  two
    days per week living with the Appellant.  I conclude, that it would not
    be reasonable to expect the children to  return  to  Algeria  with  the
    Appellant, notwithstanding that they have only  been  resident  in  the
    United Kingdom since October 2012.  It is now common ground that if the
    Appellant returned  to  Algeria  and  made  an  application  for  entry
    clearance under the Immigration Rules, he could not succeed.   This  is
    because he could not satisfy E-ECPT.2.2(c) because his children are not
    British citizens and not settled in the United Kingdom.   Therefore  if
    the Appellant returned to Algeria, and his  children  remained  in  the
    United Kingdom, this would involve a separation of the family.

42. I have  to  decide  whether  this  would  be  proportionate.   I  place
    significant weight upon the  need  to  maintain  effective  immigration
    control, and that the Appellant cannot satisfy the Immigration Rules in
    order to be granted either leave to remain,  or  entry  clearance  from
    abroad.  I find that the only reason that  he  could  not  satisfy  the
    requirements for entry clearance, is that his children are not  British
    citizens or settled in the United Kingdom.

43. I also bear in mind, as explained in paragraph 33 of SS (Congo)  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 387, that in order to succeed with an Article 8 claim  outside
    the Immigration  Rules,  compelling  circumstances  would  need  to  be
    identified.   This  formulation  is  not  as  strict  as  the  test  of
    exceptionality or a requirement of very compelling reasons.

44. I find that there are compelling circumstances  in  this  appeal.   The
    situation that the Appellant finds himself in is  not  covered  by  the
    Immigration Rules.  It is clear  from  the  finding  of  the  FTT,  the
    evidence of the Appellant's eldest three children who have made witness
    statements, and the conclusions of the  family  court,  that  the  best
    interests of the children  are  served  by  the  current  arrangements.
    Those are that they reside with their mother as  their  primary  carer,
    but that they reside with the Appellant at weekends.

45. The Appellant has not entered the United Kingdom illegally, or remained
    here unlawfully.  He has complied with the Immigration Rules, in  order
    to maintain contact with his  children.   The  Appellant  has  not  had
    recourse to, and would not need to have  recourse  in  the  future,  to
    public funds.

46. I appreciate that Article 8 is not a general dispensing power,  neither
    does it give an individual the right to chose in which  country  he  or
    she wishes to live.  In this case the Appellant only came to the United
    Kingdom because his wife took his children away  from  Algeria  without
    his knowledge.

47. I conclude that the weight to be given to the  best  interests  of  the
    children to remain in physical contact with the  Appellant,  outweighs,
    on the somewhat unusual facts of this case, the weight to  be  attached
    to the need to maintain effective immigration control.

48.  I  therefore  conclude  that  the   Respondent's   decision   is   not
    proportionate, and to refuse the Appellant leave to remain would breach
    Article 8 of the 1950 Convention, in relation to the Appellant's family
    life with his children.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and  was
set aside.  I substitute a fresh decision.

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds, pursuant to Article 8 of  the
1950 Convention, outside the Immigration Rules.

Anonymity

There has been no request for anonymity  and  I  see  no  need  to  make  an
anonymity order.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             26th April 2016
TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Although the appeal is allowed I do not make a  fee  award.    The  Tribunal
considered evidence and representations that were  not  before  the  initial
decision maker.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             26th April 2016

