
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/36808/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 January 2016                    |On 11 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                              MR. AAMER SHAHZAD
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. S. Karim of Counsel, instructed by CDRK
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. N. Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge G. Jones QC promulgated on  1  July  2015  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to refuse to grant leave to remain as the spouse of  a  person
    present and settled in the United Kingdom.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted as it was arguable that the judge  had
    not correctly applied the relevant test provided for by the immigration
    rules.

 3. At the hearing I found that there was a material error of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  I set  aside  that  decision  and
    remade the decision, allowing the appeal under the  immigration  rules,
    for reasons set out below.

Error of law

 4. The application was refused by reference to paragraph S-LTR 2.2 (a)  of
    Appendix FM of the immigration rules.  There is  no  reference  in  the
    decision to this paragraph.  Paragraph  S-LTR2.2(a)  provides  that  an
    applicant will not meet the requirements of the rules where "whether or
    not to the applicant's knowledge false information, representations  or
    documents have been submitted in relation to the application (including
    false information submitted to any person to obtain a document used  in
    support of the application)."

 5. Both the reasons for refusal letter, and the decision,  make  reference
    to TOEIC test results dated 27 June 2012.   It  is  with  reference  to
    these test results that both the application was refused and the appeal
    dismissed.  However, these TOEIC test results  were  not  submitted  in
    relation to the application made by the Appellant for leave  to  remain
    as a spouse.   The  English  language  test  results  provided  by  the
    Appellant for this application are found at pages  92  and  93  of  the
    Appellant's bundle provided for the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.
     They are dated 18 April 2014, and are not TOEIC test  results.   These
    are the documents "submitted in  relation  to  the  application".   Mr.
    Bramble  accepted  that  these  were  the  relevant  English   language
    documents,  rather  than  the  TOEIC  documents  referred  to  in   the
    Respondent's decision.

 6. I found that the TOEIC test results were not relevant for the  purposes
    of this application.  Irrespective of any concerns which the Respondent
    may have in relation to that test, the  TOEIC  test  results  were  not
    "submitted in relation to the application" made by the  Appellant,  and
    therefore are not relevant to this appeal.

 7. The judge in the First-tier Tribunal failed  to  address  paragraph  S-
    LTR2.2(a).  He failed to consider which English language  test  results
    had been submitted in relation to the application.   I  find  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law.   Given
    that this was the only reason that the  application  was  refused,  and
    that the appeal was dismissed, it is a material error, and  I  set  the
    decision aside.

Remaking

 8. Given the evidence, Mr. Bramble accepted that the  Respondent  was  not
    entitled to  refuse  the  application  by  reference  to  paragraph  S-
    LTR2.2(a).  He further accepted  that  the  application  had  not  been
    refused by reference to any other requirements, although it  was  noted
    that the decision was not entirely clear in  its  approach.   The  only
    reason that the Respondent had refused the  application  was  that  the
    Appellant did not meet the suitability requirements.

 9. Given that the only reason that the application was refused was  not  a
    reason open to the Respondent, who wrongly referred to the  TOEIC  test
    results which were not submitted with the application, I find that  the
    application should not have been refused under  paragraph  S-LTR2.2(a).
    Given that this was the only reason that the application was refused, I
    find on the balance of  probabilities  that  the  Appellant  meets  the
    requirements  of  the  immigration  rules.    The  appeal   under   the
    immigration rules is allowed.

10. As I have allowed the appeal under the immigration rules, I do not need
    to go on to consider Article 8.

Notice of decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involves the making of an  error  on
a point of law.  The decision is set aside.

I remake the decision allowing the Appellant's appeal under the  immigration
rules.


Signed   Date 9 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
