
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/36920/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 14 December 2015                  |On 5 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                AMJAD HUSSAIN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms H. Masoud, Counsel instructed by ZA Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    For the sake of continuity I will refer to the parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically  the  Secretary  of
    State is the appellant in the appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

2.    The appellant says that he entered the  UK  on  04  August  2005  with
    entry clearance as a visitor that was valid until  31  March  2006.  He
    married on 04 February 2012. On 26 March 2012 he applied for  leave  to
    remain as the spouse of a British citizen. The application was  refused
    in a decision dated 30 January 2013 without  a  right  of  appeal.  The
    respondent issued an appealable immigration decision  on  02  September
    2014.

3.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Stokes ("the judge") allowed the  appeal  in
    a decision promulgated on 23 June 2015.  In light of  the  decision  in
    Singh & Khalid v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ  74  the  judge  found  that  the
    respondent was entitled to consider the application with  reference  to
    the new rules because the decision did not fall within  the  relatively
    small two month window identified by the Court of Appeal in that  case.
    The  judge  went  on  to  consider  whether  the  appellant   met   the
    requirements of EX.1 and EX.2 of the immigration rules. In  considering
    whether there were insurmountable obstacles to  the  couple  continuing
    their family life  outside  the  UK  the  judge  considered  principles
    outlined in MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2014] 2 All ER 543,  Izuazu (Article 8
    - new rules) [2013] UKUT 00045 and AB (Jamaica) v SSHD [2007] EWCA  Civ
    1302.

4.    The judge went on to consider the facts of the  case.  She  considered
    the fact that the appellant's wife was a British citizen. Although  she
    was born in India she had entered the UK in 1964 with her parents  aged
    two years old. She was divorced from her  first  husband  but  has  two
    children in the UK who are British citizens as well  as  grandchildren.
    Her mother is 75 years old and dependent on the appellant's wife  to  a
    certain extent. His wife is the sole director of her own company, which
    is an established business with sales totalling about �112,000 a  year.
    The appellant helps his wife with the  business,  in  particular,  with
    physical tasks such as moving stock. His wife was on medication  for  a
    heart condition. The judge  noted  that  she  had  never  travelled  to
    Pakistan. The judge took judicial notice of the  fact  that  there  are
    political tensions between India and  Pakistan,  which  might  make  it
    difficult for an ethnic Indian to integrate into Pakistani society.

5.    The judge also took note of the fact that the appellant's  wife  spoke
    one of the main languages of Pakistan. She was a Muslim so there  would
    be few  religious  differences.  The  judge  accepted  that  there  was
    evidence to show that, as a woman, her life would be far more curtailed
    in  Pakistan  than  it  is  in  the  UK  where  she  is  able  to  live
    independently and run her own business. The judge recognised  that  the
    appellant's wife would have his support to adapt to  life  in  Pakistan
    but concluded that her relocation away from a  culture  where  she  had
    lived since she  was  two  years  old,  and  her  separation  from  her
    immediate family, was likely to have an adverse affect on  her  health.
    The judge also took into account the fact that the appellant  had  been
    living outside Pakistan for the last 10 years albeit that he  continued
    to have links there through his children from his previous marriage.

6.    The First-tier Tribunal went on  to  mention  the  cases  of  Zambrano
    (Case C-34/09) and Sanade and others (British  children  -  Zambrano  -
    Dereci) [2012] UKUT 00048  but  did  no  more  than  cite  the  general
    principles outlined in those cases. The judge then concluded  that,  in
    light of the evidence, the appellant, and particularly his wife,  would
    face "very significant difficulties" in continuing their family life in
    Pakistan, which could not easily be  overcome  and  would  entail  very
    serious hardship. As such the judge concluded that  the  appellant  met
    the requirements of paragraph EX.1(b). The judge went  on  to  consider
    whether removal in consequence of the decision would be unlawful  under
    Article 8 with reference to the five stage test in R v  SSHD  ex  parte
    Razgar [2004] 3 WLR 58  she  concluded,  largely  in  reliance  on  her
    earlier  findings  relating  to  EX.1(b),   that   removal   would   be
    disproportionate in all the circumstances of the case.

7.    The respondent seeks to appeal the decision on the following grounds:

    (i)     The  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  relation  to  the  proper
         assessment of the  "insurmountable  obstacles"  test  contained  in
         paragraph EX.2 of Appendix FM. The  test  is  more  stringent  than
         merely being unreasonable to expect their family life  to  continue
         outside the UK. The judge focussed too heavily on factors  relating
         to their life in the UK rather than whether there were obstacles to
         their family life continuing in Pakistan.

    (ii)   The First-tier Tribunal erred in reliance  on  Zambrano  because
         the decision did not compel  the  appellant's  spouse  to  relocate
         elsewhere. The case was not authority for the proposition the judge
         was trying to make.

    (iii)  The First-tier Tribunal erred  in  relying  on  the  appellant's
         earnings from unlawful employment when considering whether he would
         be financially independent for the purpose of  section  117B(3)  of
         the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("NIAA 2002").

Decision and reasons

8.    The central issue in this appeal is whether the judge was entitled  to
    take into account the matters she did in coming to the conclusion  that
    the  appellant  met  the  requirements  of  paragraph  EX.1(b)  of  the
    immigration rules in light of the associated  definition  contained  in
    EX.2.

9.    Paragraph EX.1(b) was inserted into the immigration rules as  part  of
    the major changes introduced on 09 July 2012 (HC 194).

         "EX.1. This paragraph applies if

         ...

         (b)      the applicant has a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
         with a partner who is in the UK and is a British  Citizen,  settled
         in the  UK  or  in  the  UK  with  refugee  leave  or  humanitarian
         protection, and there are insurmountable obstacles to  family  life
         with that partner continuing outside the UK."

10.   Paragraph EX.2 was  introduced  by  a  Statement  of  Changes  to  the
    immigration rules (HC 532) and applies to  all  decisions  made  on  or
    after 28 July 2014.

         "EX.2. For  the  purposes  of  paragraph  EX.1.(b)  "insurmountable
         obstacles" means the very significant difficulties which  would  be
         faced by the applicant or their partner in continuing their  family
         life together outside the UK and which could  not  be  overcome  or
         would entail very serious  hardship  for  the  applicant  or  their
         partner."

11.   In the recent decision of the Court of Appeal in R  (Agyarko)  v  SSHD
    [2015] EWCA Civ 440 Lord Justice Sales made  the  following  statements
    about  the  "insurmountable  obstacles"  test  contained  in  paragraph
    EX.1(b)  of  the  immigration  rules  (prior  to  the  introduction  of
    paragraph EX.2):

         "21.     The phrase "insurmountable  obstacles"  as  used  in  this
             paragraph of the Rules clearly imposes a  high  hurdle  to  be
             overcome by an applicant for leave to remain under the  Rules.
             The test is significantly more demanding than a mere  test  of
             whether it would be reasonable to expect a couple to  continue
             their family life outside the United Kingdom.

         22.       This  interpretation  is  in  line  with   the   relevant
             Strasbourg   jurisprudence.   The    phrase    "insurmountable
             obstacles" has its origin in the Strasbourg  jurisprudence  in
             relation to immigration cases in a family context, where it is
             mentioned as one factor among others to be taken into  account
             in determining whether any right under Article  8  exists  for
             family members to be granted leave to remain or leave to enter
             a Contracting State: see e.g. Rodrigues da Silva and Hoogkamer
             v Netherlands (2007) 44 EHRR  34,  para.  [39]  ("...  whether
             there are insurmountable obstacles in the way  of  the  family
             living together in the country of origin of  one  or  more  of
             them ..."). The phrase as used in the  Rules  is  intended  to
             have the same meaning as in the Strasbourg  jurisprudence.  It
             is clear that the ECtHR regards it as a formulation imposing a
             stringent test in respect of that factor, as is illustrated by
             Jeunesse  v  Netherlands  (see  para.  [117]:  there  were  no
             insurmountable obstacles to the family settling  in  Suriname,
             even though the applicant  and  her  family  would  experience
             hardship if forced to do so).

         23.       For  clarity,  two  points  should  be  made  about   the
             "insurmountable  obstacles"  criterion.  First,  although   it
             involves a stringent test, it is obviously  intended  in  both
             the case-law and the Rules to be interpreted in a sensible and
             practical rather than a purely literal way: see, e.g., the way
             in which  the  Grand  Chamber  approached  that  criterion  in
             Jeunesse v Netherlands at para. [117]; also the observation by
             this court in MF (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
             Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1192; [2014] 1  WLR  544,  at  [49]
             (although it should be noted that the passage in the  judgment
             of the Upper Tribunal in Izuazu v Secretary of State  for  the
             Home Department [2013] UKUT 45 (IAC); [2013] Imm AR 453  there
             referred  to,  at  paras.  [53]-[59],  was  making  a   rather
             different point, namely that explained  in  para.  [24]  below
             regarding the  significance of the criterion in the context of
             an Article 8 assessment).

         24.      Secondly, the "insurmountable obstacles" criterion is used
             in the Rules to define one of the  preconditions  set  out  in
             section EX.1(b) which need to be satisfied before an applicant
             can claim to be entitled to be granted leave to  remain  under
             the Rules. In that context, it is not simply a  factor  to  be
             taken into account. However, in the context of making a  wider
             Article 8 assessment outside the Rules, it is a factor  to  be
             taken into account, not an absolute requirement which  has  to
             be satisfied in every single case across the  whole  range  of
             cases covered by Article 8: see paras. [29]-[30] below."

12.   The definition now contained in  paragraph  EX.2  of  the  immigration
    rules has two main elements. The first element is that the applicant or
    their  partner  must  show  that  they  would  face  "very  significant
    difficulties" in continuing their family life together outside the  UK.
    The  second  element  is  divided  into  two   alternatives   (i)   the
    difficulties could not be  overcome  or  (ii)  the  difficulties  would
    entail "very serious hardship" for the applicant or their partner.

13.   The immigration rules are said to reflect  the  respondent's  view  of
    where a fair balance should be struck between the right to respect  for
    private and family life and public interest considerations relating  to
    the  maintenance  of  an  effective  system  of   immigration   control
    (paragraph GEN.1.1 Appendix FM).  The rules should be  read  in  a  way
    that reflects a proper interpretation of  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention. However, there will be some cases where the  rules  do  not
    address the relevant  Article  8  issues.  In  such  cases  it  may  be
    necessary to consider whether there  are  compelling  circumstances  to
    justify granting leave to remain outside the immigration rules: SSHD  v
    SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387.

14.   The respondent's first  ground  of  appeal  makes  general  statements
    about the stringent nature of the test  of  "insurmountable  obstacles"
    within the meaning of EX.1(b) of the immigration rules but then goes on
    to list a series of issues where it is said that the  judge  failed  to
    give adequate  reasons  for  finding  that  there  were  insurmountable
    obstacles in this case. However, many of the points  amount  to  little
    more than disagreements with the judge's findings.

15.   Mr Whitwell argued that it is a "forward facing" test that  should  be
    assessed solely in relation to what obstacles the couple might face  in
    the applicant's country of origin but Agyarko makes clear that the test
    of "insurmountable obstacles" is intended to have the same  meaning  as
    Strasbourg jurisprudence, which takes into account all relevant factors
    in the assessment. Mr Whitwell did not refer me to any  case  law  that
    supported such a narrow reading of the test. It  seems  clear  that  an
    obstacle to relocation may include compelling circumstances surrounding
    an applicant or his partner's life in the UK  that  could  properly  be
    described as a very significant obstacle to them being able to continue
    their family life outside the UK. For example, if the couple  were  the
    main carers for a close family  member  in  the  UK.   The  wording  of
    paragraph EX.1(b) and EX.2 states that  there  must  be  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life continuing  "outside  the  UK"  but  does  not
    specify that those obstacles need be in another country, although  such
    obstacles if they did exist in the proposed country of relocation would
    also be relevant to the overall assessment.

16.   The grounds complain that the judge's findings in relation to  factors
    such as the sponsor's length of residence in the UK, her  close  family
    connections in the UK, the fact that she is an ethnic Indian who  would
    relocate to Pakistan where political relations  "remain  troubled"  and
    the sponsor's medical condition were  inadequate.  While  some  of  the
    judge's findings in relation to those matters were more fully  reasoned
    than others, and it is the case  that  none  of  those  factors,  taken
    alone, would have been sufficient to meet the requirements  of  such  a
    stringent test, it was open to the  judge  to  take  into  account  the
    cumulative effect of a range of  factors  in  assessing  whether  there
    could properly be said to be insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  couple
    continuing their family life outside the UK.

17.   Ms Masoud accepted that the judge was mistaken in  thinking  that  the
    appellant's wife had not been to Pakistan because she had made a single
    visit there on a business trip about 10 years ago. Although this is  an
    error of fact I find that the judge's finding on  this  issue  did  not
    form such a central part of her reasoning that it would be material  to
    the outcome of the appeal. It is nevertheless the case that the sponsor
    has very little experience of life in Pakistan.

18.   Similarly, the judge's reference to Zambrano was limited to  a  single
    reference in paragraph 18, which quoted an extract from the  Tribunal's
    decision in Sanade & Others. It came at the end of  her  assessment  of
    whether there were "insurmountable obstacles". The reference was rather
    opaque and the point was not developed in any way  save  for  the  bare
    reference to those cases. I accept that if the  judge  did  purport  to
    apply the Zambrano in this case it would amount to an error  given  the
    relatively narrow application of those principles. However, the judge's
    reference is so limited that it does not appear that she was seeking to
    do any more than emphasise that the rights of a British citizen, who is
    also a European citizen, should be taken into account. Given  the  very
    limited reference, which was not developed with any further  reasoning,
    I conclude that even if the judge erred in  referring  to  Zambrano  it
    formed such a peripheral part of the overall reasoning that it was  not
    material to her overall conclusion.

19.   The judge conducted a detailed  and  careful  assessment  of  all  the
    relevant circumstances of the case and it is clear from her  conclusion
    at paragraph 19 of the decision that she applied the correct  test  and
    was fully aware of the stringent nature of the test. She concluded that
    in light of the evidence before her the appellant,  and  in  particular
    his wife, would face  "very  significant  difficulties"  in  continuing
    their family life in Pakistan and found that these could not easily  be
    overcome and would entail very serious hardship. Another judge may have
    come to a different conclusion on the same evidence but it was open  to
    the judge to make the findings that she did. It could not be said  that
    her conclusion is irrational on the facts of this case.

20.   Even if I am wrong in relation to the judge's assessment of  the  test
    of "insurmountable obstacles" it is quite  clear  that  she  took  into
    account all of the same factors in her assessment of Article 8  outside
    the immigration rules. This approach is consistent with  the  Court  of
    Appeal decision in Agyarko, which recognised that  there  may  be  some
    cases that engage the operation of Article  8  even  if  insurmountable
    obstacles are not shown. The judge made reference  to  the  five  stage
    test outlined in R v SSHD ex parte Razgar [2004]  3  WLR  58  and  gave
    proper weight to the public interest considerations outlined in section
    117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  that  weighed
    against the appellant [23].

21.   The judge took into account the fact that the appellant spoke  English
    and was not a burden on the taxpayer (in light  of  the  evidence  that
    showed that he helped his wife  with  her  business)  as  factors  that
    "weighed in favour of  the  appellant".  In  light  of  the  Tribunal's
    decision in AM (s.117B)(Malawi) [2015] UKUT 0260 it is likely  that  no
    positive weight should be placed on these neutral factors. If a  person
    does not speak English and is therefore less likely to integrate and is
    likely to be a burden on taxpayers it would add weight  to  the  public
    interest considerations. The fact that a person is  able  to  integrate
    and is not a burden on taxpayers is a matter that goes to the weight to
    be given to the public interest but does not add to the claim.

22.   Although the wording  suggests  that  the  judge  may  have  taken  an
    incorrect approach to that part of her assessment I find that there  is
    nothing to suggest that she placed undue weight on those  matters  such
    that it would have made any material difference to the outcome  of  the
    appeal. She made quite clear in paragraph 25 that she placed particular
    reliance on the factors that underpinned her findings  in  relation  to
    EX.1(b) [25]. The two factors relevant to an assessment  under  section
    117B(2) and  (3)  were  at  best  peripheral  to  the  judge's  overall
    proportionality assessment. It is  clear  that  having  considered  the
    public interest considerations that weighed in favour  of  removal   it
    was open  to  the  judge  to  conclude  that  there  were  sufficiently
    compelling  circumstances  to  render  the   appellant's   removal   in
    consequence of the decision disproportionate.

23.   For the reasons given above I conclude that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision did not involve the making of an error on a point of law.  The
    decision shall stand.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law

The First-tier Tribunal decision shall stand


Signed      [pic]      Date 16 December 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

