
[pic]
Hzk29h

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/36423/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 3 December 2015                   |On 15 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               NAUMAN SHABBIR
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Karnik, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant ('the SSHD') appeals against a decision of First-tier
         Tribunal (FTT) to "allow the appeal under the EEA Regulations".  At
         the beginning of the hearing Mr Harrison clarified  that  the  SSHD
         did not seek to challenge any of the findings of fact made  by  the
         FTT.   The  FTT  accepted  that  the  appellant  is  in  a  durable
         relationship with his EEA spouse and that she is exercising  Treaty
         rights.  Mr Harrison  submitted  that  the  proper  course  in  the
         circumstances of this appeal was for me to find that the FTT  erred
         in law in allowing the appeal when it should have found the  SSHD's
         decision not to be in accordance with the law.

      2. The correct approach in cases where the Secretary of State has  not
         yet considered the exercise her discretion is to be  found  in  the
         decision of the Upper Tribunal in SSHD v Ihemedu [2011] UKUT  00340
         (IAC). In  that  case,  the  SSHD  refused  an  application  for  a
         residence card because she did not accept that  the  applicant  was
         related to the  extended  family  member,  as  claimed.  The  Upper
         Tribunal found that the  immigration  judge  below,  had  erred  in
         finding that the applicant was entitled to a residence card for the
         sole reason that he was an extended family member as  claimed.  The
         Upper Tribunal held:

             "..Regulation 17(4) of the 2006  Regulations  confers  on  the
             decision-maker discretion as to whether a person found  to  be
             an OFM/extended family member is to  be  granted  a  residence
             card. In exercising that discretion matters such as whether an
             applicant has entered the UK lawfully or otherwise are plainly
             relevant (although not necessarily determinative: see YB  (EEA
             reg 17(4) - proper approach) Ivory Coast  [2008]  UKAIT  00062
             and Aladeselu and Others (2006 Regs - reg  8)  Nigeria  [2011]
             UKUT 00253 (IAC)). But in this case the Secretary of State had
             not yet exercised that discretion and so the most the  IJ  was
             entitled to do was allow the appeal as being not in accordance
             with the law leaving the matter of whether to exercise the reg
             17(4) discretion in his favour to the Secretary of State:  see
             Yau Yak Wah [1982] Imm AR 16; MO (reg  17(4)  EEA  Regs)  Iraq
             [2008] UKAIT 00061."

      3. Mr Harrison accepted that the SSHD would be satisfied if the appeal
         against the FTT was allowed to the limited extent  of  substituting
         the wording under 'notice of decision' with the following:

             "The appeal is allowed to the limited extent that the decision
             is not in accordance with the law and there is an  outstanding
             application before the SSHD, which requires  her  to  consider
             exercising  the  discretion  under  Regulation   17   of   the
             Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 by making a lawful decision
             in accordance with the findings of fact of the FTT."

      4. Mr Karnik at first objected to the  above  wording.   He  submitted
         that this did not reflect the language of the  relevant  Directive.
         He clarified that he was seeking to submit that Ihemedu  was  wrong
         but accepted that the  respondent  had  not  filed  a  respondent's
         notice or skeleton argument, and he was raising the issue  for  the
         first time at the hearing.  In these circumstances  I  declined  to
         grant him permission to rely upon new matters not raised before the
         FTT or in a respondent's notice.  In those circumstances, Mr Karnik
         indicated he had nothing to add and was content  with  the  wording
         set out above.

Decision

      5. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  a
         material error of law and I set it  aside  to  the  limited  extent
         indicated above.

      6. I remake the decision by allowing the appeal to the limited  extent
         that it is  not  in  accordance  with  the  law  and  there  is  an
         outstanding application before the  SSHD,  which  requires  her  to
         consider exercising the  discretion  under  Regulation  17  of  the
         Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 by making a lawful  decision  in
         accordance with the findings of fact of the FTT.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
3 December 2015

