
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA367532014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd May 2016                               |On 8th June 2016              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                               MR JASPAL SINGH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Cooke, Counsel instructed by Bhogal Partners
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. For ease of comprehension, the parties are referred to by their  status
    before the First-tier Tribunal.






 2. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Lloyd allowing the Appellant's appeal against
    the Secretary of State's decision dated 22 August  2014  notifying  the
    Appellant of his liability to removal pursuant to  section  10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum  Act  1999  and  simultaneously  curtailing  his
    leave.






 3.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated  its  decision   allowing   the
    Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision on 12 August 2015.







 4.  The  Respondent  appealed  against  that  decision  and  was   granted
    permission to appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson. The  grounds
    upon which permission to  appeal  was  granted  may  be  summarised  as
    follows:





      i) It is arguable that the judge did not have jurisdiction to hear the
         appeal as the appeal was instigated and lodged while the  Appellant
         was in the United Kingdom.






 5. It is of note that both parties were represented before the  First-tier
    Tribunal, and neither party, particularly the  Respondent  raised  this
    issue prior to these grounds of appeal.





Error of Law


 6. At the close of  submissions  I  indicated  that  I  would  reserve  my
    decision.  I find that there is no  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.  My reasons for so finding are as follows.






 7. It was not in dispute that the Respondent could bring a  jurisdictional
    point on appeal at this stage and it was accepted that I  was  apprised
    of the  appeal  and  held  the  requisite  jurisdictional  capacity  to
    dispense with the issue on appeal.  The authority  relied  on  by  both
    parties to this extent is Virk and Others v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 652.






 8. The chronology underlying the lodging and instituting of the appeal  by
    the Appellant are of importance.  It is also pertinent to note that the
    point taken on appeal by the Respondent was not raised by  her  at  the
    First-tier Tribunal but only on appeal,  although  this  would  not  be
    reason in of itself to reject the appeal  pursued.   Miss  Cooke  makes
    clear that the Appellant's solicitors lodged the appeal form IAFT-3  on
    23 September 2014 by special delivery and that the Appellant  left  the
    United Kingdom thereafter on 25 September 2014.  Ms  Fijiwala  did  not
    seek to take issue with that date even though the Grounds of Appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal sought to suggest that the  date  of  departure
    was 26 September 2014.






 9. The crux of the appeal turns upon when the appeal was instituted,  that
    is to be gauged as far as possible  by  reference  to  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules  2005  (hereinafter  the  "2005
    Rules")which both parties accept was in force  at  the  relevant  time.
    According to those Procedure Rules, Rule 6 which  is  entitled  "Giving
    Notice of Appeal" and sub-paragraph 1 of that rule states as follows:






         "An appeal to the Tribunal may only be instituted by giving  notice
         of appeal against a relevant  decision  in  accordance  with  these
         Rules".






10. According to Rule 55 of the 2005 Rules entitled "Filing and Service  of
    Documents", under sub-paragraph 1, a Notice of Appeal can be  filed  by
    post, document exchange, fax or  e-mail  specified  for  that  relevant
    purpose.  Miss Cooke relied on Rule 55 sub-paragraph (5)  which  states
    that any document that is served on a person  in  accordance  with  the
    Rule shall, unless the contrary be proved, be deemed to be served:






         (a)  where the document is sent by post or document  exchange  from
         and to a place within the United Kingdom on the second day after it
         was sent.






11. In that regard Miss Cooke submits that the Notice of Appeal was sent on
    24 September 2014 and should be deemed to  have  been  received  on  26
    September 2014.  Ms Fijiwala on the other hand highlights that the IAFT-
    3 is stamped as  being  received  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  24
    September 2014, the day after it was sent.






12. However, in my view, nothing turns  upon  Rule  55.   This  is  because
    receipt of the application is not to be conflated with the  institution
    of proceedings.  This is easily illustrated by the fact that receipt of
    the IAFT-3 on 24 September 2014 (based  upon  the  stamp  seen  on  the
    appeal form) did not result in the institution  of  an  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  This is because after receipt of the appeal on 30
    October  2014,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  wrote  to  the   Appellant's
    solicitors stating that the appeal appeared to have not been lodged  in
    time, to which the Appellant's solicitors replied  by  letter  dated  4
    November 2014 that it was sent by them on 23 September 2014 by  special
    delivery after several failed attempts to fax the Grounds of Appeal the
    same day.






13. However, following the Appellant's solicitors'  letter  of  4  November
    2014, the First-tier Tribunal again wrote to the Appellant's solicitors
    on 15 December 2014 directing both the Appellant's representatives  and
    the Respondent to confirm if or when  the  Appellant  left  the  United
    Kingdom.  The Respondent does not appear to  have  engaged  with  those
    directions at all, however the Appellant's solicitors did  and  replied
    by letter dated 22 December 2014 stating that the  Appellant  left  the
    United Kingdom voluntarily on 25 September 2014.






14. According to the notes held on the Tribunal's file, which  neither  the
    Appellant nor  the  Respondent  had  a  copy,  the  appeal  nonetheless
    proceeded  despite  the  Tribunal  being  on  notice   of   the   above
    jurisdictional issues. This is clear due to the  following  later  note
    which appears on the Tribunal's file dated 12  March  2015.  This  file
    note proceeds directly from  the  manuscript  note  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 4 December 2014 and  15  December  2014  and  again  on  22
    December 2014 directing the parties to engage with  the  jurisdictional
    issues.  The note on the Tribunal's file of  12  March  2015  reads  as
    follows:


             *Proceed


             He lodged his appeal after he left the UK so its valid.


             D Burrell


             12/3/15






15. That decision demonstrates that the First-tier Tribunal was aware  that
    there was an issue in relation to the validity of the appeal as to when
    the Appellant left the United Kingdom.  In my view the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal on 12 March 2015  indicates  the  clear  date  upon
    which the Tribunal accepted the Appellant's IAFT-3 form and Grounds  of
    Appeal and Notice of Appeal as being  validly  lodged  and  the  appeal
    proceedings   being   instituted   for   the   first   time.    Neither
    representative was able to point me  to  any  definition  of  the  term
    "institution of proceedings", however to my mind  and  without  further
    guidance, this decision of the First-tier Tribunal does appear  to  fit
    that description given the jurisdictional queries from  the  First-tier
    Tribunal as to the validity of the appeal and  when  the  appeal  would
    have become valid de facto.  This is in keeping with section 104 of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  (hereinafter  the  "2002
    Act")  which  makes  clear  that  an  appeal  is  pending  when  it  is
    "instituted".






16. I am furthermore of the view that the First-tier  Tribunal  would  have
    been aware of the file note  and  this  jurisdictional  issue,  despite
    objection not being raised by any party in that regard. This is obvious
    because paragraph 5 of the determination states as follows:


         The Appellant returned to India on 26th September  2014.   However,
         he presented a Notice of Appeal on 24th September 2014 which is the
         basis of the present hearing before this Tribunal.


17. I am fortified in my decision and  am  mindful  in  particular  of  the
    overriding objective of dealing  with  cases  "fairly  and  justly"  in
    reaching my decision and  in  my  above  interpretation  of  the  rules
    against the instant facts, pursuant to Rule 2 of the Tribunal Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.






18. Miss Cooke highlights that this appeal is an extremely important one to
    the Appellant given that by virtue of this decision he has  established
    that he did not use deception in his  previous  ETS/TOEIC  examinations
    and consequently did not use deception as  previously  alleged  by  the
    Respondent and successfully challenged on appeal.  Indeed,  given  that
    the  Respondent  did  not  seek  to  challenge  any  finding   in   the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal other than this jurisdictional
    point, the deprivation of the  appeal  outcome,  and  the  unchallenged
    findings  on  appeal  in  particular,  would  have   immensely   severe
    consequences  for  the  Appellant  given  the  serious  accusations  of
    deception.






19. Were the determination to be overturned and set aside, according to  Ms
    Fijiwala there would be no jurisdiction to hear the appeal  given  that
    the appeal was brought according to her  submissions  on  24  September
    before the Appellant left the United Kingdom on 25 September this would
    make the appeal invalid under Section 82 and under Section  92  of  the
    2002 Act.






20. It seems to me that even if I am wrong in  my  above  analysis  of  the
    appeal, the findings  on  appeal  and  the  appeal  outcome  should  be
    preserved in light of the overriding objective under Rule  2(2)(a)  and
    (b)  and  the  need  to  "(deal)  with  the  case  in  ways  which  are
    proportionate to the importance of the  case,  the  complexity  of  the
    issues, the anticipated  costs  and  the  resources  of  the  parties",
    "avoiding  unnecessary  formality  and  seeking  flexibility   in   the
    proceedings". Notwithstanding the reasons I have already given that  Ms
    Fijiwala's submissions are misguided, I am  further  exercised  by  the
    overriding objective and in my view fairness and justice  demands  that
    the determination of the appeal remain undisturbed, particularly  given
    that the appeal represents the only independent adjudication of whether
    the Appellant used deception or not in his English language tests,  the
    benefit of which he should not be deprived of, given that his Notice of
    Appeal even if received on 24 September 2014 before his  departure  was
    not considered valid until the decision  of  12  March  2015  when  the
    proceedings were instituted.





Decision


21. The decision of the First-tier shall stand and is hereby affirmed.






22. The First-tier Tribunal did not make a fee award and I  have  not  been
    asked to depart from that decision.





Signed                                  Date 01/06/2016





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini

