


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/36861/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 20 September 2016                 |On 22 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                RABIA KANWAL
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms K Joshi (Denning Solicitors)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The respondent is a citizen of Pakistan born on 13 August  1989.  She
       applied on 11 June 2014 for a residence card as  an  extended  family
       member of an EEA national under regulation 8(1)  of  the  Immigration
       (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006.  The  Sponsor  is  the
       respondent's maternal uncle, a Spanish national.

    2. The Secretary of State refused the application on 4 July 2014 as  the
       respondent had not provided any evidence of dependency on her sponsor
       either in the United Kingdom or in Pakistan  or  that  she  had  been
       residing with him in the United Kingdom.

    3. The respondent appealed and her appeal came before a First-tier Judge
       on 21 May 2015. The judge heard oral evidence from the respondent and
       her sponsor. The Secretary  of  State  was  not  represented  at  the
       hearing.

    4. The judge made favourable credibility  findings  in  respect  of  the
       parties and found in their favour on all  the  disputed  issues.  She
       found  the  respondent  was  entitled  to  a  residence  card   under
       regulation 8(2)(a) and (c) and allowed the appeal.

    5.  The  Secretary  of  State  applied  for  permission  to  appeal  and
       permission was granted by the First-tier  Tribunal  on  10  September
       2015 on the basis that the judge had erred  in  allowing  the  appeal
       outright in the light of Ihemedu  (OFMS  -  meaning)  Nigeria  [2011]
       UKUT. The matter should have been left to the Secretary of  State  to
       exercise discretion under regulation 17(4).

    6. At the hearing reference was made to a recent unreported decision  of
       the Tribunal chaired by the Vice President - Shemsi Sala IA44409/2013
       - in which the Tribunal had decided that there was no right of appeal
       against the decision to refuse a residence card as an extended family
       member.

    7. The decision is authoritative on the position pending any decision of
       the Court of Appeal. It follows that I have no jurisdiction  in  this
       matter and, although it was  not  then  appreciated,  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had no jurisdiction either. While  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       made favourable credibility findings the status of those  findings  -
       which were not the  subject  of  challenge  in  the  application  for
       permission to appeal - is at best doubtful. It  is  regrettable  that
       there has been delay in dealing with  this  appeal  which  has  ended
       without positive resolution so far as the respondent is concerned.

    8. However in the light of the decision in Shemsi Sala I can  only  hold
       that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction in this case.

    9. Appeal dismissed for want of jurisdiction.




  Signed
                               G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               21 September 2016




