
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number IA/36139/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 25th July 2016                    |On 30th August 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                           Olalekan Asiru Abiodun
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: No appearance
For the Respondent: Mr N Bramble (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant applied for a residence card as  the  spouse  of  an  EEA
    national. The application was refused as the Secretary of State did not
    accept that the Appellant had shown that he was  a  spouse  within  the
    meaning of the EEA Regulations  or  that  he  was  an  extended  family
    member. His appeal was, at his request, considered on the papers  which
    were placed before Judge Shepherd  at  Taylor  House  on  the  12th  of
    November 2015.

 2. The Judge found that the Appellant had not  shown  that  the  customary
    marriage to the Sponsor met the requirements for validity as  explained
    in the case of Kareem (proxy marriages - EU law) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 24
    (IAC). In addition the Judge found that the evidence, which did show co-
    operation between the Appellant and his named  Sponsor,  did  not  show
    that they were in  a  durable  relationship.  He  noted  that  had  the
    Appellant attended the hearing then that might have assisted  but  that
    was their decision and  the  appeal  was  decided  on  the  information
    available.

 3. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the basis that  the  Judge
    had failed to consider his length of residence and had  not  considered
    article 8. Permission was granted on  the  basis  that  the  Judge  had
    indicated that there was no Respondent's bundle  and  it  was  arguable
    that it was not enough for the Judge to have concluded that  there  was
    sufficient evidence on the file to justly determine the appeal.

 4. The Appellant did not  attend  the  hearing  listed  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal. The case was put back to nearly lunch time for him to  attend
    but there was no attendance and no explanation for his  absence  or  an
    application for the  case  to  be  heard  later  or  adjourned.  I  was
    satisfied that the relevant notices had been served on the Appellant at
    the address given in the IAFT-4 form he had completed. I was  satisfied
    that the Appellant had had sufficient notice and would have been  aware
    of the hearing and that I could properly consider  the  appeal  on  the
    basis of the information that was available.

 5. At the hearing I indicated to the Respondent's  representative  that  I
    did not need to hear from him I indicated that I would be finding  that
    there was no error in the First-tier Tribunal decision. I now  give  my
    reasons for that decision.

 6. The grounds as drafted by the Appellant  are  completely  misconceived.
    The conclusion at page 7 of the Refusal Letter of the 3rd of  September
    2014  informed  the  Appellant  that  the  application  had  only  been
    considered on the basis of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations  2006.  If
    he wished to have his application considered on any other basis he  was
    advised to go  the  Home  Office  website  and  submit  an  appropriate
    application. There was no notice under section 120 of the 2002 Act.

 7. By paragraph 400 of the Immigration Rules the  Secretary  of  State  is
    entitled to require a paid application to be made  by  individuals  who
    wish to have their application considered on  private  or  family  life
    grounds. TY (Sri Lanka) [2015] EWCA Civ 1233 is recent authority  which
    approves the limitation of the matters that can be  considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal in the absence of a  notice  served  under  section
    120.

 8. So far as the grounds as drafted are concerned  they  are,  as  I  have
    indicated, misconceived. The Judge was only legally  able  to  consider
    the application under the EEA Regulations and so committed no error  in
    limiting himself in that way.

 9. So far as the grant of permission itself is concerned I regret  to  say
    that I do not follow the reasoning of the grant of permission.  In  EEA
    marriage cases the leading case is Kareem and the case is clear that it
    is for an Appellant to show that the marriage is valid under the law of
    the country in which it was celebrated and also that it  is  recognised
    as valid by the state of which the EEA Sponsor is a national.

10. The decision shows that the  Judge  gave  full  consideration  to  this
    issue. The Appellant had not provided  any  evidence  that  would  have
    justified a finding that the marriage was valid following the  guidance
    in Kareem and as no there was no other decision open to the  Judge  the
    presence of absence of the Respondent's bundle was irrelevant.

11. With regard to the absence of the Respondent's bundle it is  not  clear
    how that could have undermined the Appellant's case. The burden on  all
    issues was on the Appellant and  the  Appellant's  representatives  had
    provided  a  bundle  on  the  21st  of  October  2015  which   provided
    information that was more up to date than anything that would have been
    in the Respondent's papers.

12. Despite having the benefit of legal representation that bundle did  not
    address the legal issues relating to the validity of the marriage.  The
    Appellant's bundle was properly and fully considered by the Judge  when
    considering the issue of whether the Appellant and claimed Sponsor were
    in a durable relationship. As he was obliged to focus on the most up-to-
    date evidence, and did so, I can see  no  errors  in  his  decision  to
    continue with his consideration of the appeal, the reasoning applied or
    the findings made. The grounds and grant of permission  have  no  merit
    and the appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision  and  so  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal stands as the final decision on the merits in this case.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  and  I  make  no
order.

Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.


Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)
Dated: 16th August 2016
