

                                    [pic]



The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: IA/36980/2014




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Promulgated                 |
|On March 31, 2016                    |On April, 13 2016           |
|                                     |                            |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MISS ISMA SADDIQUE
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bramble (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The respondent in these proceedings was  the  appellant  before  the
       First-tier Tribunal. From hereon I have referred to the  parties  as
       they were in the First-tier Tribunal so that for  example  reference
       to the respondent is a reference to the Secretary of State  for  the
       Home Department.

    2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan. The  appellant  was  granted
       leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  as  a  Tier  1  Entrepreneur
       between December 30, 2013 and December 30, 2016. She  returned  from
       Pakistan from a visit on August 6, 2014 and following questioning by
       immigration officers was given temporary  admission.    Following  a
       further interview the respondent refused  her  leave  to  enter  and
       curtailed her existing leave under paragraph 321A(1) HC 395 and took
       a decision to remove  her  under  section  47  of  the  immigration,
       Nationality and Asylum Act 2006 on September 12, 2014.

    3. The appellant appealed that decision  under  section  82(1)  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on September 25, 2015.

    4. The appeal came before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Kamara
       (hereinafter referred to as the Judge) on August 3, 2015  and  in  a
       decision promulgated on August 26, 2015 she allowed the  appellant's
       appeal under the Immigration Rules.

    5. The respondent  lodged  grounds  of  appeal  on  September  8,  2015
       submitting the Judge had erred. Permission to appeal was refused  by
       Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Kelly on December 28, 2015  on  the
       basis the grounds amounted to nothing more than a disagreement  with
       the Judge's findings. Permission to appeal was renewed to the  Upper
       Tribunal and Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein  granted  permission  on
       January 18, 2016 on the grounds the Judge's  reasoning  in  allowing
       the appeal was flawed.

    6. The matter came before me on the above date  and  on  that  occasion
       there  was  no  appearance  by   either   the   appellant   or   her
       representatives. I was satisfied that both had been properly  served
       with due notice of the hearing having been sent  to  them  by  first
       class post on February 18, 2016.

    7. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity  direction  and  I
       see no reason to make one now.


SUBMISSIONS

    8. Mr Bramble  acknowledged  the  Judge's  decision  was  thorough  and
       considered the evidence presented. In adopting the grounds of appeal
       he tentatively suggested the Judge may have erred in her approach in
       paragraph [26] of her decision when she found  "the  respondent  had
       not satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the appellant had
       practised deception". He argued that this conclusion  went  contrary
       to the findings in R (Gazi) v SSHD (ETS-judicial review) IJR  [2015]
       UKUT 00327 (IAC) because the Tribunal had found in  that  case  that
       the evidence submitted (identical in this appeal) just satisfied the
       burden of proof. However, he acknowledged that any error may not  be
       material in light of the Judge's further findings in paragraph [27].
       He further submitted that as there was a final decision due  in  the
       test case on ETS cases I could adjourn it to that date.


DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

    9. The  Judge's  decision  contained  robust  reasons  to  support  her
       findings and those findings included a detailed examination  of  the
       respondent's evidence as well as the appellant's  own  evidence-oral
       and written.

   10. For reasons contained in paragraphs [10] to [30] of her decision the
       Judge considered  the  various  elements  of  the  appeal  including
       consideration of both of the respondent's  witness  statements,  the
       appellant's own test scores in both this test and  others  taken  at
       that time and the appellant's interview  record  and  she  concluded
       that whilst there was evidence to show deception had taken place  in
       the system the respondent had failed, in this  case,  to  show  this
       appellant had practised deception.

   11. Mr Bramble handed to me a copy of the court's summary  of  judgement
       in linked appeals recently heard by the President, the Honourable Mr
       Justice  McCloskey  and  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Saini.  The
       preliminary conclusions included the following:

      a.  The  respondent's  evidence  (the  two  witness   statements)   is
         intrinsically  limited.  Neither  witness  possesses  any  relevant
         qualification, credentials or expertise in  what  is  ultimately  a
         scientific field.
      b. There was no direct evidence from the ETS organisation.
      c. The appellant's expert evidence was persuasive and impressive.  His
         opinion was not challenged by any  competing  expert  witness.  The
         tribunal accepted his evidence in all material matters in full.
      d. The Secretary of State had  not  discharged  the  legal  burden  of
         establishing that either appellant procured his  TOEIC  certificate
         by dishonesty.

   12. Nothing in that decision in my view impinges on the  decision  taken
       by the Judge in this case.  If  anything,  the  Judge,  without  the
       benefit of expert evidence, carried out  a  similar  assessment  and
       concluded the respondent had  failed  to  prove  the  appellant  had
       cheated.

   13. There was therefore no error in law.

   14. I did not adjourn the matter because I was  satisfied  that  on  the
       facts of this case an adjournment for the full text  of  the  "test"
       case would not have assisted me.

DECISION

   15. The making of the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
       involve the making of an error on a  point  of  law.  I  uphold  the
       original decision and dismiss the appeal.


Signed:                                 Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




FEE AWARD

I uphold the fee award as I have dismissed the appeal.

Signed:                                 Dated:

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
