


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/36363/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 24th November 2015               |On: 30th November 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                              Teriphias Mujuru
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     -
For the Respondent:    Ms Savage, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                 DECISION TO ADJOURN AND FURTHER DIRECTIONS

      1. Further to my directions of  7th  September  2015,  this  case  has
         advanced to the following extent:

          i) The Secretary of State has now made a decision  to  refuse  to
             grant asylum, dated 14th October 2015. This  is  a  protection
             decision which attracts a right of appeal  under  s82  of  the
             Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended).

         ii) On the 20th October 2015 the Appellant exercised his right  of
             appeal and lodged an appeal with the First-tier Tribunal. That
             appeal is now pending.

        iii) The Appellant has provided a further bundle of evidence, and a
             rebuttal statement, under cover of letter dated 20th  November
             2015. The Respondent has a copy of this material.

         iv) The items  (i)-(iv)  set  out  in  my  earlier  directions  at
             paragraph 3 have not proved to be available. In particular the
             port landing records from Gatwick in 1997 and the  Appellant's
             old student visa records are too old to be accessible, and may
             not even exist any longer. The  Appellant's  passport  is  now
             available and I understand that a copy has  been  provided  to
             the Appellant.

          v) In respect of the file relating to Telphanus Mujuru Ms  Savage
             advised that its contents cannot be disclosed with the written
             consent of Telphanus Mujuru. The determination of  his  asylum
             appeal has been provided.

      2. In light of (ii) above I propose that this matter be disposed of by
         way of a final determination remitting the Appellant's  outstanding
         appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

      3. The parties have ten working days from the date of receipt of  this
         decision to make any representation that they might  wish  to  make
         about this course of action. If no submissions to the contrary  are
         received I will remit  the  outstanding  appeal  before  the  Upper
         Tribunal to the First-tier Tribunal.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce

                                                          24th November 2015
