
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/36689/2013
                                                               IA/36674/2013
                                                               IA/20759/2013
                                                               IA/36718/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 June 2014                               |On 30 June 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART

                                   Between

                        MR GOODWIN GULAMPINGO ZIGONA
                              MRS MERCY ZIGONA
                        MISS ETHEL GULAMPINGO ZIGONA
                      MASTER EMMANUEL GULAMPINGO ZIGONA
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Jaisri of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of Malawi born respectively on  16  October
    1972, 27 August 1963, 2 February 1994 and 11 September 1998.

 2. They applied for variation of their leave to remain which  was  refused
    by the respondent in a decision dated 20 August  2013  because  it  was
    considered they failed to satisfy Appendix  FM  and  paragraph  276ADE.
    The appellants' appeals against the respondent's refusal  were  allowed
    by Judge Parker in a determination promulgated  on  12  February  2014.
    The grounds claim the judge arguably made a misdirection in  law.   The
    grounds argued that the judge's reasons for allowing the appeals  under
    the Rules in respect of the first and  second  appellants  (mother  and
    father of the third and fourth appellants), although unclear,  appeared
    to be based on the fourth appellant  Emmanuel  and  his  success  under
    paragraph 276ADE.  The grounds claimed the  judge's  findings  on  that
    point  were  inadequate  and  did  not  properly  establish  that   the
    appropriate reasonableness test had been applied.  The judge was  wrong
    to conclude that the success of  Emmanuel  under  the  Rules  meant  by
    extension that it would be unreasonable for him  to  return  to  Malawi
    with his family.  The family would be removed together such that  their
    right to family life would be  protected.   Emmanuel's  best  interests
    were served by having access to both parents and his sibling and  those
    needs could be met whether  the  family  were  in  the  UK  or  Malawi.
    Further, that the appellants' rights under Article 8 did not  confer  a
    choice as to where  they  wished  to  enjoy  their  family  life.   The
    respondent relied upon Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74 at [24]:

         "There is no irrationality in the conclusion that  it  was  in  the
         children's best interests to go with their parents to the  Republic
         of Congo.  No doubt it would have  been  possible  to  have  stated
         that, other things being equal, it was in the best interests of the
         children that they and their parents stayed in the  United  Kingdom
         so that  they  could  obtain  such  benefits  as  health  care  and
         education which the decision-maker recognised might be of a  higher
         standard than would be available in the Congo.   But  other  things
         were not equal.  They were not British citizens.  They had no right
         to future education and health care in  this  country.   They  were
         part of a close-knit family with highly educated parents  and  were
         of an age when their emotional needs could only be fully met within
         the immediate family unit.  Such integration as had  occurred  into
         United Kingdom society would have been predominately in the context
         of that family  unit.   Most  significantly,  the  decision-  maker
         concluded that they could be removed to the Republic  of  Congo  in
         the care of their parents without serious detriment to their  well-
         being.  We agree  with  Lady  Dorrian's  succinct  summary  of  the
         position in para 18 of the Inner House's opinion. "

 3. Nasim and others (Article 8) [2008] UKUT 00025 (IAC) held that:

         "The judgments of the Supreme Court in Patel and Others v Secretary
         of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 72 served to  re-focus
         attention on the nature and purpose of Article 8 of the  ECHR  and,
         in particular, to  recognise  that  Article's  limited  utility  in
         private life cases that are far removed from the protection  of  an
         individual's moral and physical integrity.

         A person's human rights are not enhanced by not committing criminal
         offences or not relying on public funds.  The only significance  of
         such matters in cases concerning proposed or  hypothetical  removal
         from the United Kingdom is to preclude the Secretary of State  from
         pointing to any public interest justifying removal, over and  above
         the basic importance of maintaining a firm and coherent  system  of
         immigration control."

 4. Judge Chohan granted permission to appeal on 13 March 2014.   He  found
    it was not absolutely clear from the determination on which  basis  the
    fourth appellant's appeal was allowed.  At [30] and [31]  although  the
    judge said he was not at that point considering Article  8,  it  seemed
    that an Article 8 consideration had been undertaken in respect  of  the
    fourth appellant.  The judge concluded that the fourth appellant  could
    not relocate to Malawi and on that basis he allowed the appeals of  the
    parents, the first and second appellants under Section EX.1 of Appendix
    FM.  Judge  Chohan  said  it  seemed  the  judge  had  considered  that
    paragraph in isolation although he said at [32] "There is no suggestion
    that the relationship and the suitability paragraphs are not  satisfied
    ......".  However, at [25] Judge Chohan found it  was  clear  that  the
    respondent's representative made a submission to the  effect  that  the
    appellants did not meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules  and
    it is now established that Section EX.1 is  not  free  standing  (Sabir
    (Appendix FM - EX.1 not free standing) [2014] UKUT 00063 (IAC)).  Judge
    Chohan found further that in respect of the Article 8 assessment it was
    open to argument that the judge failed to give adequate reasons  as  to
    why the family as a whole could not return to Malawi.

 5. I found the judge's reasoning and conclusions inadequate  and  gave  my
    reasons at [9] - [12] of my determination promulgated on 28 April 2014.



 6. Thus the matter came before me to be re-made.  Mr Jaisri and Mr  Tarlow
    confirmed that there were no issues arising from the  facts  such  that
    none of the appellants gave oral evidence.  Their evidence is contained
    in two bundles prepared for the first hearing in January of  this  year
    plus an updated bundle which in some regards duplicates what  was  said
    before.  I will summarise the evidence as necessary in  the  course  of
    explaining the reasons for my decision.  I have considered each item of
    evidence and have reviewed that evidence in the round.  The fact that I
    have not specifically referred to any particular piece of  evidence  in
    my  determination  does  not  mean  that  the  evidence  has  not  been
    considered in the manner I have described.

 7. Mr Tarlow made submissions on behalf of the respondent and Mr Jaisri on
    behalf of the appellants.  I have made a note of their  submissions  in
    my Record of Proceedings and have taken them into consideration.

Findings and Conclusions

 8. In this appeal, the burden lies with the appellants to prove the  facts
    and matters they rely upon.  Their case was advanced on the basis  that
    because Emmanuel  satisfied  paragraph  276ADE(iv)  and  because  those
    particular circumstances where he satisfies the Rules but the  rest  of
    his family do not are not covered by the Rules, then the  circumstances
    are compelling and/or  extraordinary  such  that  I  should  go  on  to
    consider Article 8 in terms of the proportionality of the  respondent's
    decision.  The standard of proof is that of a balance of probabilities.
     (See the determination in EH (Iraq) [2005] UKIAT 00065).

 9. To make a decision regarding the appellants' particular  circumstances,
    it is instructive to set out the development of Article 8 case  law  in
    MF in the Upper Tribunal and the Court of Appeal.  MF (Article 8 -  new
    Rules) Nigeria [2012] UKUT 00393 (IAC) found that the  new  Immigration
    Rules were not a "complete code" when it came to Article  8  claims  as
    decisions still had to be compliant with Section 6 of the Human  Rights
    Act 1998 [25].  The  assessment  remained  in  two  stages,  first  the
    application of the Rules and second, the application of Article 8 [32]-
    [41].  In one important respect, the  new  Rules  affected  the  second
    stage Article 8 assessment because they  gave  greater  specificity  to
    which  circumstances  attracted  the  greatest  weight  in  the  public
    interest.  The degree to which the new Rules changed the interpretation
    of the public interest should not be exaggerated.   Previous  case  law
    held that the proportionality  assessment  did  not  treat  the  public
    interest as immutable such that the Upper Tribunal found that  in  most
    cases, the new Rules established an "exceptionality threshold" for  the
    public interest to be outweighed [42]-[45].

10. MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 held it was not in dispute  that  the
    case law provided that an appeal  in  a  removal  or  deportation  case
    involved two stages.  First, to assess whether  the  decision  appealed
    against was in accordance with the Immigration  Rules  and  second,  to
    determine whether the decision was contrary to the appellant's  Article
    8 rights [7].  The Court of Appeal found  that  the  picture  that  had
    emerged  from  the  Secretary  of  State  as  to  what  was  meant   by
    "exceptional circumstances"  under  paragraph  398  was  "by  no  means
    entirely clear" [15].  In Izuazu (Article 8 - new  Rules)  [2013]  UKUT
    00045 the Secretary of State argued that the  new  Rules  restored  the
    "exceptional circumstances" test that was disapproved by the  House  of
    Lords in Huang but the Court of Appeal  found  that  was  a  surprising
    submission bearing in mind that the House of  Lords  had  rejected  the
    exceptionality test [31] - [32].

11. The Rules are a detailed expression of government policy on controlling
    immigration and protecting  the  public  and  the  Article  8  sections
    reflect the Secretary of State's view as  to  where  the  balance  lies
    between the individual's rights and the  public  interest.   The  judge
    must consider proportionality in the light of that expression of public
    policy.  Various cases have confirmed this approach Gulshan (Article  8
    - new Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC),  Shahzad  (Art
    8: legitimate aim) [2014] UKUT 00085 (IAC) in particular headnote (vi):

         " (vi)   Where an area of the rules does not have such  an  express
             mechanism, the approach in R (Nagre) v Secretary of State  for
             the Home Department [2013]  EWHC  720  (Admin)  ([29]-[31]  in
             particular) and Gulshan (Article  8  -  new  Rules  -  correct
             approach) [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC) should be followed: i.e. after
             applying the requirements of the Rules, only if there  may  be
             arguably good grounds for granting  leave  to  remain  outside
             them is it necessary for  Article  8  purposes  to  go  on  to
             consider  whether  there  are  compelling  circumstances   not
             sufficiently recognised under them."

12. Iftikhar Ahmed v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWHC
    300 (Admin) held it is settled law that considerations under Article  8
    are embedded in the Immigration Rules such that  if  the  Secretary  of
    State applied those Rules then  ordinarily,  Article  8  considerations
    would have been fully catered  for.   In  the  instant  case,  no  good
    arguable  grounds  had  been  advanced  that  there  had  been  factors
    particular to the claimant that had not been capable of being  assessed
    from within the existing framework of Rules and which therefore  needed
    to be assessed outside of the Rules.  Further the  Secretary  of  State
    had taken into account all of the factors and matters  which  had  been
    relevant to the claimant.  Finally, there had been no error of  law  in
    the approach adopted by the Secretary  of  State  to  the  question  of
    whether there had been insurmountable obstacles to relocation.

13. What Mr Jaisri says  is  that  the  appellants'  circumstances  can  be
    distinguished from those in Iftikhar Ahmed.  That is because the  Rules
    failed to envisage a situation  where  a  child  of  the  family  might
    satisfy paragraph 276ADE (iv) such as in Emmanuel's case, but the other
    members of the family failed to satisfy paragraph 276ADE.  The view  of
    the respondent was that the appellants could  return  to  Malawi  as  a
    family unit but the refusal did not take into  account  the  fact  that
    firstly Emmanuel satisfied the Rules and secondly  that  there  was  no
    separate assessment of his best interests in those  circumstances.   Mr
    Tarlow relied upon Gulshan at [24].  He told me that there needed to be
    compelling circumstances which were not dealt with under the  Rules  to
    engage Article 8 and there was nothing compelling  in  the  appellants'
    circumstances.

14. I find that Mr Tarlow's  submission  fails  to  take  account  of  this
    particular  family's  unusual  circumstances.  As  regards  the   three
    appellants who did not satisfy the  rules,  there  were  arguably  good
    grounds for granting leave  to  remain  outside  the  rules.  That  was
    because Emmanuel satisfied the Rules, whereas the rest  of  his  family
    did not; that was a situation not  recognised  under  the  Rules.   See
    Nagre at [28] - [29]:
    "As appears from the new guidance issued by the Secretary of State in
    relation to exercise of her residual discretion to grant leave to
    remain outside the Rules, as set out above, and as Mr Peckover makes
    clear in his witness statement, the new rules contemplate that there
    will be some cases in which a right to remain based on Article 8 can be
    established, even though falling outside the new rules. Therefore, the
    basic framework of analysis contemplated by Lord Bingham in Huang
    continues to apply, as was recognised by the Upper Tribunal in Izuazu.
    Nonetheless, the new rules do provide better explicit coverage of the
    factors identified in case-law as relevant to analysis of claims under
    Article 8 than was formerly the position, so in many cases the main
    points for consideration in relation to Article 8 will be addressed by
    decision-makers applying the new rules. It is only if, after doing
    that, there remains an arguable case that there may be good grounds for
    granting leave to remain outside the Rules by reference to Article 8
    that it will be necessary for Article 8 purposes to go on to consider
    whether there are compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised
    under the new rules to require the grant of such leave."

15. I find as regards this particular  family's  circumstances  that  there
    were arguably  compelling  circumstances  not  sufficiently  recognised
    under the Rules as envisaged in Nagre. I proceed to  consider  what  Mr
    Tarlow referred to as the second stage of the Article 8 considerations.

16. Article 8 of ECHR states:

    (i)  Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family life,
         his home and his correspondence.

    (ii) There should be no interference by a  public  authority  with  the
         exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with the law
         and is necessary  in  a  democratic  society  in  the  interest  of
         national security, public safety or the economic wellbeing  of  the
         country,  for  the  prevention  of  disorder  or  crime,  for   the
         protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights
         and freedoms of others.

17. In Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 Lord Bingham gave guidance at paragraph 17  as
    to the correct approach when dealing with Article 8 as follows:

         "In considering whether a challenge to  the  Secretary  of  State's
         decision to remove a person must clearly fail, the reviewing  court
         must consider:

         (i)  Will the proposed removal  be  an  interference  by  a  public
             authority with  the  exercise  of  the  applicant's  right  to
             respect for his private or family life?

         (ii) If so,  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such
             gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

         (iii)    If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

         (iv) If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic  society
             in the interest of national security,  public  safety  or  the
             economic wellbeing of  the  country,  for  the  prevention  of
             disorder or crime, or the protection of health or  morals,  or
             for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others?

         (v)  If so, is such interference proportionate  to  the  legitimate
             public end sought to be achieved?"

18. LD (Article 8 - best interests of child) Zimbabwe [2010] UKUT 278 (IAC)
    provided that the best interests of  children  have  to  be  a  primary
    consideration, meaning that they have to be considered first.   Broadly
    speaking, the best interests of the child mean  the  wellbeing  of  the
    child.  ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC  4  provided  that  the  over-arching
    issue is the weight to be given to the best interests of  children  who
    are affected by the decision to remove or deport one or both  of  their
    parents and in what circumstances it is permissible to do so where  the
    effect will be that a child who is a British citizen will also have  to
    leave.  See also Omotunde (Best Interests - Zambrano applied -  Razgar)
    Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00247 (IAC).  There is  no  substantial  difference
    between a human rights  based  assessment  of  proportionality  of  any
    interference considered in ZH and the approach  required  by  community
    law in Zambrano [2011] EUECJ Case C-34/09  OJ  2011  C130-2.   In  this
    particular context the Article 8 assessment questions set out in Razgar
    should be tailored as follows,  placing  the  assessment  of  necessity
    where it most appropriately belongs in the final question dependent  on
    the outcome of proportionality and a fair balance, rather than as  part
    of the identification of the legitimate aim:

      a) Is there family life enjoyed between  the  appellant  and  a  minor
         child that requires respect in the context of immigration  decision
         making?

      b) Would deportation of the parent interfere  with  the  enjoyment  of
         that family life?

      c) Is such an interference in accordance with the law?

      d) Is such an interference in pursuit of a legitimate aim?

      e) Is deportation necessary, proportionate and a fair balance  between
         the rights to respect for the family life of the appellant and  the
         child and the particular public interest in question?

19. E-A (Article 8 - Best Interests of Child)  Nigeria  [2011]  UKUT  00315
    (IAC) Mr Justice Blake and SIJ Jarvis said:

         "(i) The correct starting point in considering the welfare and best
             interests of a young child would be that it  is  in  the  best
             interests of a child to live with and be brought up by his  or
             her parents, subject to  any  very  strong  contra-indication.
             Where it is in the best interests of a child to live with  and
             be brought up by his or her parents, then the child's  removal
             with his parents does not involve  any  separation  of  family
             life.

         (ii) Absent other factors, the reason why a period  of  substantial
             residence as a child may become a weighty consideration in the
             balance of competing considerations is that in the  course  of
             such  time  roots  are  put  down,  personal  identities   are
             developed, friendships are formed and links are made with  the
             community outside the family unit.  The degree to which  these
             elements of private life are forged and therefore  the  weight
             to be given to the passage of time will depend upon the  facts
             in each case.

         (iii)    During a child's very early  years,  he  or  she  will  be
             primarily focused on self and the caring parents or guardians.
              Long residence once the child is likely to have  formed  ties
             outside the family is likely to have greater impact on his  or
             her well being.

         (iv) Those who have their families with them  during  a  period  of
             study in the UK must do so in the light of the expectation  of
             return.

         (v)  The Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania) was  not  ruling  that  the
             ability of a young child to readily adapt to  life  in  a  new
             country was an irrelevant factor, rather that the adaptability
             of the child in each case  must  be  assessed  and  is  not  a
             conclusive consideration on its own."

20. See the  headnote  in  Azimi-Moayed  and  Others  (Decisions  Affecting
    Children; Onward Appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197 (IAC):

         "Decisions affecting children

         (1)  The  case  law  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  has  identified  the
             following principles to assist in the determination of appeals
             where children are affected by the appealed decisions:

             i)   As a starting point  it  is  in  the  best  interests  of
                  children to be with both their parents and if both parents
                  are  being  removed  from  the  United  Kingdom  then  the
                  starting point suggests that so should dependent  children
                  who form part of their household unless there are  reasons
                  to the contrary.

             ii)  It is generally in the interests of children to have both
                  stability  and  continuity  of  social   and   educational
                  provision and the benefit of growing up  in  the  cultural
                  norms of the society to which they belong.

             iii) Lengthy residence in a country other than  the  state  of
                  origin can lead to development  of  social,  cultural  and
                  educational  ties  that  it  would  be  inappropriate   to
                  disrupt, in  the  absence  of  compelling  reason  to  the
                  contrary.  What amounts to lengthy residence is not  clear
                  cut but past and present policies  have  identified  seven
                  years as a relevant period.

             iv)  Apart from the terms of published policies and rules, the
                  Tribunal notes that seven years from age four is likely to
                  be more significant to a child that the first seven  years
                  of life.   Very  young  children  are  focussed  on  their
                  parents rather than their peers and are adaptable.

             v)   Short periods of  residence,  particularly  ones  without
                  leave or the reasonable expectation of leave to  enter  or
                  remain, while claims are promptly considered, are unlikely
                  to give rise to private life deserving of respect  in  the
                  absence of exceptional factors.  In any event,  protection
                  of the economic  well-being  of  society  amply  justifies
                  removal in such cases.

21. In VW [2009] EWCA Civ 5 the Court of  Appeal  held  that  in  assessing
    proportionality and whether an appellant's family should return to  his
    country of  origin  with  him,  the  test  is  not  whether  there  are
    insurmountable obstacles to prevent  their  going  but  whether  it  is
    reasonable  to  expect  them  to  go.   If  there  are   insurmountable
    obstacles, they will succeed but  if  there  are  not,  they  will  not
    necessarily fail.

22. As I indicated, the facts were not in dispute.  The family came to  the
    United Kingdom in the autumn  and  winter  of  2004  as  dependants  of
    Goodwin Zigona who studied for a Degree in Theology  and  Masters.   Mr
    Zigona had leave until April 2013 when his Tier 4 visa expired.   Prior
    to its expiry there was an application  for  further  leave  to  remain
    based upon the family's private and family life in the  United  Kingdom
    and in particular the fact that as of December 2013, Emmanuel had seven
    years' residence.  Mr Zigona works as a carer with Dimensions.  He said
    that in February 2013 he had a seizure and  sees  a  neurologist  every
    four months.  As I understand  it,  there  have  been  no  implications
    arising although Mr Zigona said that there are very few neurologists in
    Malawi and it would be difficult for  him  to  obtain  treatment  there
    leaving aside the fact that it would be financially costly.

23. Mercy Zigona works for Care UK helping the elderly and also with Jigsaw
    Creative  Care,  as  a  support  worker  for   people   with   learning
    difficulties.  The family rent a three bedroomed home in Bracknell  and
    are active members of the Living Waters Global Church  which  is  of  a
    Pentecostal denomination.  Mrs Zigona explained that when she  and  her
    husband came to the United Kingdom they anticipated they  would  return
    to Malawi but after living here for upwards of nine  years,  they  have
    all made the United Kingdom their home.

24. Ethel Zigona came here aged 11.  She is involved in her parents' church
    as is Emmanuel but also helps out at the Amazing Grace Church  and  the
    Reading Community Soup Kitchen.  Her statement says that she is in  the
    process of applying for an apprenticeship in business marketing,  sales
    or finance and has had various employment.  She has been educated to  A
    Level standard in the United Kingdom.

25. Emmanuel is studying for his GCSEs.  He is a keen school  sportsman  as
    well as being a member of AFC Warfield Football Club.  Like his parents
    and sister, he is a committed member of his church  and  sings  in  the
    choir.  He came here aged 6.  He is now 15.

26. It is clear that all the family are worried about Mr  Zigona's  health,
    however, there was no evidence before me that his seizure has ever been
    diagnosed conclusively and there was no suggestion from Mr Jaisri  that
    his medical circumstances were significant in terms  of  the  balancing
    exercise I must carry out.

27. Mr Tarlow did not dispute any of the claims made  in  the  appellants'
    statements. The appellants' statements make it clear that they consider
    their lives to be here in the United Kingdom.  Mr and Mrs Zigona  speak
    the native  language  Chichewa.   Ethel  said  that  she  cannot  speak
    Chichewa well.  Emmanuel claimed not  to  speak  Chichewa  at  all.   I
    accept that all four appellants would find it difficult to re-establish
    themselves in Malawi.  I accept from what they say in their  statements
    that they find life here considerably more desirable  both  as  regards
    education for the children,  employment  opportunities  and  lifestyle.
    They have put down roots, made friends, have relatives here and  wholly
    integrated themselves into British society.  Nevertheless, it is  trite
    law that they cannot choose where in the world they  wish  to  live.  I
    will consider the implications.

28. There was no suggestion put to me that the family would ever  be  split
    up. That is,  there was no suggestion that because  Emmanuel  satisfies
    the Immigration Rules, that he might remain and the rest of the  family
    return to Malawi.  This is a stable and cohesive  family  unit,  inter-
    dependent and mutually supportive.  I take into account  the  case  law
    affecting children I have set out above and consider the circumstances.
     I find the interdependency of this family is such that it is in all of
    their interests and certainly in the best interests  of  Emmanuel  that
    they live together.

29. I bear in mind headnote (ii) of E-A.  See [19]  above.  The  fact  that
    Emmanuel has been here so long and from such an early age is a  weighty
    consideration in the balance of competing considerations.  He  has  put
    down  roots.  His  personal  identity  has  developed.  He  has  formed
    friendships and links with the community outside the family  unit.  The
    same applies to Ethel although she is no longer a child  but  an  adult
    young woman.  Emmanuel and Ethel have grown up in the  United  Kingdom.
    Whilst their primary focus in early years was upon their parents, given
    the length of  time  they  have  both  lived  here,  they  have  formed
    extensive ties with the wider community.  See Azimi headnotes (ii)  and
    (iii) at [20] above. The considerable testimonies from those they  have
    come  across  whether  via  education,  social   activities,   sporting
    activities, church and employment are  testament  to  their  successful
    integration into British society.  I take into account the  benefit  of
    stability and continuity of Emmanuel and Ethel's social and educational
    provision. There was no evidence before me regarding  what  educational
    provision might be made for Emmanuel in Malawi,  however,  I  find  the
    potential disruption of his studies at a  time  when  he  is  about  to
    embark upon GCSEs to be considerable and  certainly  not  in  his  best
    interests. I find the upheaval would inevitably  adversely  affect  his
    ability to settle into a new educational regime  and  adversely  affect
    his ability to learn. I find he is unlikely to be able to take  up  his
    education in Malawi where he left off in the United Kingdom.

30. This is a family who have lived lawfully in the United  Kingdom  for  a
    long time. They have never been reliant upon  state  benefits.  Leaving
    aside the respondent's duty to maintain immigration control, there  was
    no suggestion by Mr Tarlow that there  are  any  public  policy  issues
    requiring their removal.  Of course, Mr and Mrs Zigona have lived  the
    majority of their lives in their own country but that is not  the  case
    with regard to Emmanuel and Ethel whose lives have  been  fundamentally
    moulded by their experiences here.  I have  no  doubt  that  this  very
    stable family would make the best of any forced return to Malawi but  I
    am not satisfied bearing in mind particularly  the  best  interests  of
    Emmanuel, but also taking into account VW [2009] EWCA Civ 5 that it  is
    reasonable to expect them to go. After a ten  year  effluxion  of  time
    they now have no home to return to in Malawi.  They now have  no  close
    relatives there whereas there are various close family members  in  the
    United Kingdom who they see on a regular basis. The instability  of  Mr
    and Mrs Zigona in terms of no home or employment to return to,  will  I
    find adversely impact upon Emmanuel and Ethel.

31. The family might have initially come here as the dependants of  student
    Mr Goodwin Zigona  with  no  expectation  of  remaining,  however,  the
    passage of time has inevitably changed their circumstances which can be
    distinguished from those considered by the Supreme Court in Patel  UKSC
    72 ; in particular at [57].  Mr Zigona is  no  longer  a  student.  The
    respondent was content to  grant  this  family  leave  over  a  decade.
    Inevitably that approach by the  respondent  has  had  implications  in
    terms of the family's integration here and expectations for the future.



32. Their circumstances can be distinguished from those  in  Zoumbas  where
    the needs of the children because of their tender years, could only  be
    fully met  within the family unit; the circumstances  of  Emmanuel  and
    Ethel are very different as I have set out above at [27]-[29].

33. For all of these reasons, I find it is not reasonable to expect them to
    return to Malawi.

Conclusion

34. I accept that removing the appellants would interfere with their  right
    to respect to family and private life of such gravity as to potentially
    engage Article 8.  Of course, such interference would be in  accordance
    with the law in the interests of maintaining immigration  control.  The
    issue for me must be the proportionality of the  respondent's  decision
    insofar as the refusal affecting Mr and Mrs Zigona and Ethel bears upon
    the circumstances of Emmanuel.  For all of the reasons I have set  out,
    I find that looking at the situation in  the  round,  the  respondent's
    decision is disproportionate.   I  make  that  finding  respecting  the
    balance between the public interest and family and private  rights  and
    finding that the appellants' circumstances are such on these particular
    facts to demand an outcome in their favour.  I re-make the decision  by
    allowing the appeal.







Decision

35. Appeal allowed on human rights grounds - Article 8.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                              Date 27 June 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  whole  fee
award of �140.00





Signed                              Date 27 June 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart

