
IAC-YW-LM-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/36374/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 29 April 2015                              |On 13 May 2015                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                               MR WASEEM WAQAR
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Singh of Malik Law Chambers Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on 11 October 1986.

 2. He appealed against the  respondent's  refusal  to  issue  him  with  a
    residence card dated 2 September 2014.  The appeal was heard  by  Judge
    Holder who, in a decision promulgated on 7 January  2015,  allowed  the
    appellant's appeal "...... on immigration grounds".  Further, the judge
    said that the appellant was entitled to a  residence  card  subject  to
    production of his original passport.

 3. The respondent's grounds claim that the judge materially erred  in  law
    by allowing the appellant's appeal outright  instead  of  remitting  it
    back to the respondent for consideration under Regulation 17(4) of  the
    2006 EEA Regulations.  That was because the judge failed to follow  the
    correct approach as indicated in headnote  (iii)  of  Ihemedu  (OFMs  -
    meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00340 (IAC).

Submissions on Error of Law

 4. Mr Singh conceded the judge erred and asked me to remit the  appeal  to
    the respondent, which submission was supported by Mr Kandola.

Conclusion on Error of Law

 5. The judge erred in allowing the appeal outright.  See Ihemedu  headnote
    (iii):

         "Regulation 17(4) makes  the  issue  of  a  residence  card  to  an
         OFM/extended family member  a  matter  of  discretion.   Where  the
         Secretary of State has not yet exercised that discretion  the  most
         an Immigration Judge is entitled to do is to allow  the  appeal  as
         being not in accordance with the law leaving the matter of  whether
         to exercise this discretion in the appellant's favour or not to the
         Secretary of State."

 6. I remake the decision by allowing the appeal as being not in accordance
    with the law so that the Secretary of State  can  consider  whether  to
    exercise her discretion.

Decision

Appeal allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 6 May 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart
