
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/36989/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 27th May 2016                          |On 4th July 2016                  |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                        MS ROSEMARY TOYIN OGUNBUSOLA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Stedman, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 18th November 1982.   The
    Appellant first arrived in the UK on 31st October 2005  with  leave  to
    remain until 31st October 2008 subject  to  the  condition  restricting
    employment and recourse to public  funds.   Her  leave  to  remain  was
    extended on two subsequent occasions until 30th July 2013.  On that day
    a further application for leave to remain as the  spouse  of  a  person
    present and settled in the UK was made and that application was refused
    by Notice of Refusal dated 3rd September 2014.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Black sitting at Taylor House on 20th October 2015.  In a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 27th October 2015  the  Appellant's
    appeal was allowed under the Immigration Rules.

 3. On 3rd November 2015 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds of Appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal.  The Grounds of Appeal noted that  the  Appellant's
    application was for leave to remain as a partner under Appendix FM  and
    that this had been refused on the basis that the Appellant's  partner's
    immigration leave had been invalidated as a consequence of fraud.   The
    First-tier Tribunal Judge found the Respondent had failed to  discharge
    the burden of  proving  fraud  as  the  unsigned  and  undated  witness
    statement of Chief Immigration Officer Pearce was not carefully drafted
    and was not accompanied by a statement of truth or  exhibits.   It  was
    submitted in the Grounds of Appeal that while the  burden  was  on  the
    Respondent to prove fraud, the burden was on  the  Appellant  to  prove
    that he had indefinite leave to remain.  In  detailed  grounds  it  was
    submitted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had erred  by  failing  to
    attach any weight at all to the Secretary of State's evidence  and  had
    reversed the burden of proof to paragraph E-LTRP 1.2 of the Immigration
    Rules.

 4. On 12th April 2016 Immigration Judge Mark Davies granted permission  to
    appeal.  Judge Davies noted that the burden of  proof  rests  upon  the
    Appellant to satisfy the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules.   He
    noted that in this case that meant the Appellant must satisfy the judge
    on the balance of probabilities that her husband had  indefinite  leave
    to remain and that it was not for the Respondent to  prove  that  fact.
    He accepted that it was arguable that the judge had reversed the burden
    of proof in this case and that there appeared to have been no  evidence
    put before the judge that established  that  the  Appellant  had  valid
    leave to remain.

 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  No Rule 24 response appears  to  have  been
    served or filed by the  Appellant's  legal  representatives.   For  the
    purpose of continuity throughout the appeal process  the  Secretary  of
    State is referred to herein as the Respondent and Ms Ogunbusola as  the
    Appellant.  The Appellant appears by her instructed Counsel Mr Stedman.
     Mr Stedman is familiar with this matter, having  appeared  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The Secretary of State appears by her Home Office
    Presenting Officer Mr Wilding.

Submissions/Discussion

 6. Mr Wilding relies on the Grounds of Appeal  submitting  that  it  is  a
    question of fact as to whether  or  not  the  Appellant's  husband  had
    indefinite leave to remain and that whilst fraud was  relevant  to  the
    issue of suitability, it is irrelevant  to  the  issue  of  eligibility
    under Appendix FM.  He points out there was nothing before the Tribunal
    to say that the Appellant's spouse had indefinite leave to  remain  and
    the judge made the mistake in that she misunderstood how the  case  was
    put.  He points out this was not a classic deception case but one  that
    the Appellant's spouse's indefinite  leave  to  remain  claim  was  not
    recognised by the Secretary of State.  It is the Secretary  of  State's
    submission that the Appellant's spouse does not have  indefinite  leave
    and that there was no evidence before the Tribunal to say that he  has.
    He points out the judge does not deal with this issue and looks at  CO1
    statement instead.  It is consequently his contention  that  the  judge
    has addressed the wrong issue which is a material error of law  and  he
    asked me to set the decision aside and to remit the matter to the First-
    tier Tribunal.

 7. In response Mr Stedman points out that the Tribunal should be  cautious
    with interfering with any finding  of  fact  and  points  out  that  at
    paragraph 9 the judge has indicated that she  understands  the  correct
    burden of proof.  He notes that the judge has given six reasons set out
    at paragraphs 17 to 22 as to why the judge did not like the evidence of
    the Respondent (albeit that I note that this has to be from the  Notice
    of Refusal as the Respondent was not represented before the  First-tier
    Tribunal) and that she has looked at all the issues.  He  submits  that
    the judge made findings on the evidence that was available to  her  and
    that save for the sentence in paragraph 9  with  regard  to  where  the
    burden of proof lies, the judge's decision is well balanced.

 8. Mr Wilding responds by stating it is not just paragraph 9  where  there
    has been a misdirection but from paragraph 14 onwards reference is made
    by the judge to the  burden  of  proof  being  on  the  Respondent  and
    therefore the starting point is on the wrong footing  even  before  the
    judge gets to paragraph 23 where she again states that the burden rests
    with the Respondent.  He submits that the judge has, to use his  words,
    got the burden of proof back to front and that this is clearly material
    and infects the judge's findings.

The Law

 9.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

10. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

11. The way in which the burden of proof should be  approached  is  clearly
    acknowledged  and  accepted  by  both   legal   representatives.    Any
    allegation of fraud, the burden of proof  rests  on  the  Secretary  of
    State to prove.  Any question of fact such as in this  instance  as  to
    whether there has been a grant of  indefinite  leave  to  remain  is  a
    question of fact and the burden of proof lies on the Appellant  and  to
    produce evidence accordingly.   I  note  that  the  evidence  that  was
    produced  included  the  witness  statement  of  Matthew  Pearce  which
    confirmed that the Home  Office  had  never  served  any  paperwork  or
    letters confirming  indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  the  Appellant's
    partner.  And I also accept the submission that was  made  that  whilst
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge accepts the  reasonable  explanation  for
    the non-availability of the passport, that is irrelevant whether or not
    her husband actually has or has not indefinite leave to remain.

12. The issue is a narrow one.  I am satisfied that  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge does show that she has reversed the burden of
    proof and that there has been no evidence put  before  the  judge  that
    establishes the Appellant's spouse had valid leave to remain.  In  such
    circumstances the finding of the judge must be  materially  flawed  and
    the correct approach is to set aside the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge and to remit the  matter  back  to  the  First-tier  for
    rehearing.

Findings and Decision

 1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains material  errors
    of law and is set aside.  None of the findings of fact are to stand.

 2) The matter is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing at
    Taylor House on the first available date 28 days hence with an  ELH  of
    two hours before any judge other than Immigration Judge A M Black.

 3) That there be leave to either party to file  and  serve  an  up-to-date
    bundle of evidence upon which they seek to rely  at  least  seven  days
    prior to the restored hearing.

 4) I am advised by the parties that no interpreter is  required.   However
    in the event of an interpreter being required, it is the responsibility
    of the Appellant's representatives  to  advise  the  administration  at
    least fourteen days prior to the hearing.





No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date: 4th July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.






Signed                              Date: 4th July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
