
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/36008/2013
     IA/36043/2013
     IA/36048/2013
     IA/36056/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th January 2015                          |On 10th February 2015         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     mK
                                     uI
                                     kIK
                                     qMK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms Smith
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellants' appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Saffer
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 7th January 2014.

Background

 2. The Appellants are  citizens  of  Pakistan.   The  principal  Appellant
    arrived in the UK on 4th May 2004 as a  student  and  was  subsequently
    granted leave, first as a student and then as  a  Tier  1  (Post-Study)
    visa until 5th July 2013.  Her husband joined her  as  a  dependant  on
    25th January 2005 and the two children were born in the UK on 12th June
    2006 and 8th June 2008 respectively

 3. Their applications for leave to remain  were  refused  on  14th  August
    2013.  The  Respondent  said  that  the  Appellants  do  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules with respect of private life and,
    although the elder child, was born in the UK and  has  lived  here  for
    over seven years, it was reasonable to require the family to leave.

 4. The judge dismissed the appeal and, in doing so, wrote as follows:

         "I do not accept  the  submission  that  the  children  are  almost
         British.  They are not British at all and have never been.   It  is
         clear from Zoumbas that the best interest test  in  ZH  relates  to
         British  children.   These  children  do  not  have  the   lifetime
         entitlement to education and  health  care  that  British  children
         have.  They are Pakistani children who  have  been  raised  in  the
         false hope that they may be able to stay here.  The fact  that  the
         parents choose not to speak to them in their mother tongue of  Urdu
         is a failure of parental responsibility to seek  to  cut  them  off
         from  their  cultural  heritage   and   presumably   diminish   the
         relationship they would, could, and should have with  their  family
         in Pakistan.  That omission is easily rectified."

 5. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had wrongly stated that ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4 did  not  apply  to
    children in the UK.  Since the judge failed to apply the  correct  test
    he had erred in law.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted on that basis by Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Jordan on 13th March 2014.

 7. The Respondent served a reply on 24th November 2014 and  accepted  that
    the  judge  may  have  misunderstood   whether   the   best   interests
    consideration applied to non-British children in  the  UK.  However  in
    fact the judge did give detailed consideration to their best  interests
    and the error was immaterial.

Submissions

 8. Ms Smith relied on the grounds and said that the judge had not properly
    considered the best interests of the children and had  he  done  so  he
    would have found that removal would be a  breach  of  their  Article  8
    rights.  They were fully integrated into the UK, both having lived here
    since birth.  English was their  first  language  and  the  culture  of
    Pakistan was alien to them.  Although they  had  been  to  Pakistan  on
    holiday for brief periods of time the bonds which tie them  to  the  UK
    were far stronger.

 9. She relied on ZH, in which the Supreme Court stated:

         "It is not enough to say that a young child may  readily  adapt  to
         life in another country.  That may well be so, particularly if  she
         moves with both her parents to a country which they know  well  and
         where they can easily re-integrate into  their  own  community  (as
         might have been the case for example in Poku, paragraph 20  above).
         But it is very different in the case of  children  who  have  lived
         here all their lives and are being expected to remove to a  country
         which they do not know and will be separated  from  a  parent  whom
         they also know well."

10. Mr Diwnycz defended the decision and submitted that there was  no  real
    barrier to integration and it was entirely  reasonable  to  expect  the
    children to return with their parents to Pakistan.

Findings and conclusions

11. First, it has to be acknowledged that the judge was wrong to state that
    the best interests of the children was not  a  relevant  consideration.
    Nevertheless, the conclusions which he reached are wholly  sustainable.



12. This is not a case, as in ZH (Tanzania), where British  children  would
    be removed from a parent who remains in the  UK.   These  children  are
    Pakistani nationals and would be removed with both of their parents.

13. The test here is set out in  paragraph  EX.1  of  Appendix  FM  to  the
    Immigration Rules and applies here because the older child has lived in
    the UK continuously for at least seven years immediately preceding  the
    date of application. It is whether it would be reasonable to expect the
    child to leave the UK.

14. The judge carefully  considered  all  of  the  relevant  circumstances,
    including the fact that the older child has friends at school  and  has
    many  social  activities.   He  also  accepted  that  English  was  the
    children's first language but that he speaks and understands  a  little
    Urdu, and would be able to  learn  quickly.    Suitable  education  was
    available to the children in Peshawar. They could reasonably  re-settle
    there in school where the children's ability to speak English  will  be
    an asset to them. He was also satisfied that the parents would be  able
    to find employment in Pakistan with their qualifications and  would  be
    able to provide for the children.  The family have a network of support
    available to them and the children would be able  to  make  friends  in
    Pakistan as they have in the UK.  The three surviving grandparents  and
    other members of the immediate family are there.

15. The judge's overall conclusions on proportionality are unassailable.

Decision

16. The judge's decision stands.  The Appellants appeals are dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed        Date: 20th January 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

