
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/36361/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|Judgment given orally at hearing              |On 08th July 2014            |
|On 6th June 2014                              |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                             Mr Edison Lawrence
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of State.  However,
    for convenience I refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 2. Thus, the appellant is a citizen of India born on 26th  February  1969.
    He made an application on 14th November 2012 for a  residence  card  as
    confirmation of his right to reside in the UK as the family  member  of
    an EEA national, his spouse being a French national.  That  application
    was refused in a decision dated 29th June 2013.

 3. Before  me  there  was  no  appearance  by  the  appellant  or  by  his
    representatives, who are A. Bajwa & Co., solicitors.  Enquiries made by
    court staff revealed that a letter was said to have been written by the
    solicitors asking that the appeal be 'withdrawn'.  A copy of the letter
    that was sent was faxed again and it refers to the  appeal  listed  for
    today, 6th June.  It is from the solicitors and is dated 27th May  2014
    stating that the appellant wishes to withdraw his appeal  and  that  he
    had signed as confirmation of his withdrawal. The letter  sent  to  the
    Tribunal on 6th June 2014, confirmed the same.

 4. The Upper Tribunal procedure rules do not make provision for a party to
    withdraw an appeal before the Upper Tribunal.  They make  provision  in
    rule 17 for a party to withdraw his or her case or part  of  the  case,
    subject to the consent of the Upper Tribunal.

 5. It is not necessary for me to elaborate on what is the appellant's case
    before the Upper Tribunal, except to say that his case is  that  he  is
    entitled to a residence card. I do not consider that it is  appropriate
    for consent to be given to a withdrawal of the case at this stage  even
    if the appellant and his solicitors did write to the Upper Tribunal  on
    27th May 2014. This is because there is  an  issue  that  needs  to  be
    resolved in relation to the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.   So
    consent is not given and I will explain why I am satisfied  that  there
    is an error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  why
    the decision needs to be set aside.

 6. The appeal against the Secretary of State's decision came before First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Ghaffar, who dealt with the appeal on  the  papers,
    that is to say without an  oral  hearing  because  that  was  what  the
    request was by or on behalf  of  the  appellant.   In  determining  the
    appeal he allowed it because he was satisfied that  the  appellant  and
    his spouse were validly married and alternatively concluded  that  they
    were in a durable relationship.

 7. The Secretary of State's  decision  refusing  the  application  raised,
    aside from the question of the validity of the marriage, the  issue  of
    the sponsor's exercising Treaty rights in relation to  her  employment.
    That issue was resolved in favour of the appellant for the reasons that
    appear in the determination at paragraph 5.  No complaint is made about
    that aspect of the judge's decision.

 8. Mr Melvin relied on the grounds of appeal.  The grounds make  reference
    to the decision in Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT  00024
    (IAC).  It seems to me that the effect of that decision is that for the
    appellant to be able to establish that he is  validly  married  to  the
    sponsor he has to establish that the marriage is valid in  France,  the
    country of which his sponsor or spouse is a national.

 9. The headnote to Kareem, perhaps, does not make that entirely clear  but
    the decision itself does, at paragraphs 17 and 18. That decision is  of
    significance in this case because it is said that this case is a  proxy
    marriage that took place in Burkina Faso.  The documents in relation to
    the marriage on one view are ambiguous as to  whether  it  is  a  proxy
    marriage but that is the way the case is presented  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant and that is the way in which I will determine the issue.

10. Although the decision in Kareem was promulgated prior  to  the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal, that  decision  was  not  referred  to.
    Kareem establishes what the true position is in relation  to  arguments
    about the validity of a marriage.

11. So, in terms of the judge having found that  the  parties  are  validly
    married, I am satisfied that he erred in  law  with  reference  to  the
    decision in Kareem. There is no evidence of the validity, under  French
    law, of their marriage. That  conclusion  would  not  necessarily  have
    mattered in one sense given that the judge found that  they  are  in  a
    durable relationship. However, the evidence in relation  to  a  durable
    relationship is slim in the extreme.

12. I allowed permission for Mr Melvin to amend the grounds  of  appeal  at
    the start of these proceedings to include  a  ground  that  relates  to
    evidence of a durable relationship, the ground  contending  that  there
    was insufficient evidence for the judge to find that the  parties  were
    in a durable  relationship.  I  do  not  consider  that  there  is  any
    prejudice to the  appellant  in  allowing  the  amendment.  As  already
    indicated, a request had been made in writing  for  the  appeal  to  be
    'withdrawn'. However, neither the  appellant  nor  his  representatives
    were entitled to assume that consent would have been given by the Upper
    Tribunal for the appellant's case to be withdrawn, and that there would
    therefore not be a hearing, and that  the  attendance  of  neither  the
    appellant nor his representatives was necessary. I would in  any  event
    have allowed the grounds to be amended even if there had been objection
    on behalf of the appellant, the question of evidence in support of  the
    claim of a durable relationship being a matter that would clearly  have
    needed to have been resolved.

13. At paragraph 6 of the determination Judge Ghaffar refers to the  couple
    maintaining that they are in a durable  relationship.   The  conclusion
    that they are in such a relationship is to be found at paragraph 13  of
    the determination.  It is a conclusion that is made in the alternative.

14. Having stated that there is no evidence to support the assertion by the
    respondent that the marriage is not valid the judge stated as  follows:
    "In any event, I find that they  are  in  a  durable  relationship  and
    nothing to the contrary has been put before me to  suggest  otherwise."
    That is  the  judge's  analysis  of  whether  they  are  in  a  durable
    relationship.  It is an analysis which, it seems to  me,  is  light  on
    facts and the facts in turn here are difficult  if  not  impossible  to
    discern.  The bundle of documents put before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    includes evidence of the  sponsor's  address  and  her  employment  but
    little, if any, evidence that the appellant resides with  her  at  that
    address.

15. There is a photograph of the appellant  and  his  partner  together;  a
    single photograph, seemingly taken in a park whereby they are  standing
    side by side.  That evidence,  it  seems  to  me,  is  insufficient  to
    establish that they are in a  durable  relationship  and  the  marriage
    certificate does not establish it either.

16. The witness statements of the appellant and his partner  are  identical
    in the sense that the only differences between them are  the  necessary
    changes as between one making the witness statement or the other;  male
    or female and so forth; husband/wife.

17. There is no other evidence as to their being in a durable relationship,
    for example in terms of where the appellant  lives,  or  evidence  from
    other people, written or oral evidence.  The fact that it was a  'paper
    case' means that there could at least have been  some  further  written
    evidence  in  support  of  the  claim  that  they  are  in  a   durable
    relationship. Of course, the fact that it was an appeal that was  dealt
    with on the papers meant that neither the  appellant  nor  the  sponsor
    attended to give evidence, thus  allowing  for  their  evidence  to  be
    tested.

18. So, in all those  circumstances  I  am  not  satisfied  that  there  is
    sufficient evidence of a durable relationship.  I am satisfied that the
    judge erred in law in that respect also.   It  follows  then  that  the
    conclusion that the appellant is either (a) a family member or  (b)  an
    extended family member under regulation 8(5) of the EEA Regulations, of
    a person exercising Treaty rights, is a conclusion that is erroneous in
    law.

19. I set the decision aside and in the light of the  observations  I  have
    made about the  state  of  the  evidence  I  re-make  the  decision  by
    dismissing the appeal.

20. In any event, even if they were in a durable relationship  the  judge's
    conclusion that the appellant is entitled to a residence card  is  also
    not correct because the grant of a residence card to an extended family
    member is discretionary, under regulation 17(4) of the EEA Regulations.
    The Secretary of State "may" issue a residence  card,  if  in  all  the
    circumstances it appears to the Secretary of State appropriate to issue
    one.

21. So, at best in terms of  "durable relationship" and an extended  family
    member, all that could have been  achieved  was  a  decision  that  the
    Secretary of State's decision was not in accordance with  the  law  and
    for it to be remitted for consideration of a grant of a residence  card
    in the Secretary of State's discretion.  But in any event, one does not
    get to that point in this appeal because I am not  satisfied  that  the
    evidence establishes a durable relationship.









Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                 7/07/14
