
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/36080/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 November 2015                  |On 9 February 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                AH HON HUANG
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Singer, Counsel instructed by Adam Bernard
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I see no need for and do not make an order restricting reporting  about
    this case.

 2. This is an appeal brought by the Secretary of State against a  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal  allowing  the  appeal  of  the  respondent,
    hereinafter "the claimant", against the decision of  the  Secretary  of
    State on 21 August 2014 to remove him as an illegal  entrant.   It  was
    the claimant's case that he is a refugee and that  removing  him  would
    interfere disproportionately with his private and family life.

 3. Before the First-tier Tribunal he abandoned his claim to be  a  refugee
    but persuaded  the  judge  that  his  appeal  should  be  allowed  with
    reference to Article 8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights  and
    under the Immigration Rules.

 4. The Secretary of State was given permission to appeal by  a  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  The grounds complain of a  failure  to  give  adequate
    reasoning and an alleged material misdirection in law.

 5. The grounds (not drawn by Mr Walker) are of varying quality and I  have
    had to ask myself carefully  if  they  do  in  fact  address  the  real
    mischief  identified  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   who   gave
    permission. It was alleged that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  did  not
    apply properly paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM to the  Immigration  Rules
    and  did  not  decide  rationally  that  there   were   "insurmountable
    obstacles" to the appellant's sponsor returning to China to live  their
    life together.

 6. The criticism of the direction at paragraph 32 is that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge states "that EX.1 is a sort  of  fallback  position  for
    those who fail to satisfy the eligibility criteria".  This is described
    as a misdirection of the law and a failure "to  engage  with  the  fact
    that there is a route to EX.1".

 7. Paragraph 2 contends that the finding that there are "very  significant
    obstacles to reintegration" is unsustainable because the judge:

         "... failed to have regard to the SSHD's guidance ...  in  relation
         to what she considers to be insurmountable  obstacles'.   The  fact
         that the sponsor is now British and may  not  wish  to  uproot  and
         relocate halfway across the world, and it may be very difficult for
         them to do so, does not amount to an insurmountable obstacle.  ECHR
         Article 8 does not oblige the UK to accept the choice of the couple
         as to which country  they  would  prefer  to  reside  in.   A  non-
         exhaustive list of factors can be considered to  be  insurmountable
         obstacles have been outlined in the guidance, none of  which  apply
         to this case and have not been considered".

 8. This I find both muddled and  alarming.   It  is  muddled  because  the
    grounds complain  that  the  judge  did  not  consider  factors  which,
    according to the grounds, could  not  have  led  to  the  appeal  being
    allowed.  It is worrying because I can think of  no  reason  whatsoever
    why an appeal should be dismissed because the judge  did  not  consider
    how the Secretary of State interpreted the Rules.  The judge's  job  is
    to apply the Rules and make up his or her own mind.  The  Secretary  of
    State might choose to give guidance which is  more  generous  than  the
    Rules require and that can lead to an appeal being  allowed  on  public
    policy grounds but a judge does not err  in  law  by  interpreting  the
    Rules in a way that does  not  agree  with  the  Secretary  of  State's
    guidance.  What matters is whether or not the interpretation was  right
    in law.

 9. I am unsure to the target aimed at by points 3 through to 6.  I hope it
    is not being suggested that  the  Judges  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    should follow the increasingly irritating practice of the Secretary  of
    State of considering every aspect of every Rule that  might  apply  and
    then explaining that it does not when no one ever thought that it  did.
    I do agree that a judge in deciding an appeal on Article 8 grounds must
    first see if the Rules determine the issue and only if they do  not  is
    it then necessary to see if there are still proper reasons to allow the
    appeal outside the Rules.

10. The core facts are that  the  appellant  was  born  in  1968.   He  had
    certainly entered the United Kingdom by December 1999  because  he  had
    applied for asylum on that day but the asylum claim was  not  processed
    because he did not attend for interview.  There were various spurts  of
    correspondence leading to  submissions  dated  18  August  2011  and  a
    refusal in August 2014.

11. The claimant is not married but it is accepted that he has married  his
    partner, a British national of Chinese origin who  entered  the  United
    Kingdom as an asylum seeker and who  was  eventually  given  indefinite
    leave to remain under a policy.  She did not  prove  herself  to  be  a
    refugee.

12. The appellant had met his partner in 1999 and they have cohabited since
    June 2007.  There are no children in the relationship.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge assumed that the claimant was not  eligible  to  satisfy
    the requirements for leave to remain as a husband because  he  did  not
    have an  English  language  qualification.   Additionally  he  was  not
    lawfully in the United Kingdom.  However although not proved in  a  way
    that would be required under the Immigration  Rules,  it  seemed  clear
    that the  claimant's  partner  had  sufficient  money  to  satisfy  the
    maintenance Rules and accommodation does not seem to be an issue.  When
    deciding that there were insurmountable obstacles in the path of family
    life continuing outside the United Kingdom, the judge  noted  that  the
    claimant and his partner had lived in the United  Kingdom  for  fifteen
    years which he described as "a very substantial period" and  that  they
    had built up ties in the United Kingdom.  The  claimant's  partner  had
    taken advantage of the opportunities of living in the  United  Kingdom.
    By her endeavours she had purchased a  house  and  he  regarded  it  as
    "wholly unrealistic and unreasonable to expect her to abandon all  that
    she had acquired in this country to make a fresh  start  in  China  all
    over again".

13. The judge then said "on the basis of the finding above  I  would  allow
    the [claimant's] appeal under the Immigration Rules".

14. He then considered Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  rights  and
    allowed the appeal under the Convention.

15. Although the description of EX.1 of Appendix FM as "a sort of  fallback
    position for those who fail to satisfy the eligibility criteria"  would
    not impress an examiner, I do not find the judge erred in law in  using
    the phrase.  The judge followed the example of the Secretary  of  State
    and moved swiftly to considering EX.1.  EX.1 is  relevant  because  the
    applicant does have  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
    partner in the UK who is a British  citizen  but  before  he  can  come
    within the scope of the exception he will have to show that  there  are
    "insurmountable obstacles to family life with that  partner  continuing
    outside the  UK".   Further  the  phrase  insurmountable  obstacles  is
    defined in EX.2 and is said to mean:

         "... the very significant difficulties which would be faced by  the
         applicant or their partner in continuing their family life together
         outside the UK and which could not be overcome or would entail very
         serious hardship for the applicant or their partner"

16. Mr Singer argued strongly that the  judge  had  applied  the  test  and
    reached a conclusion open to him.  I do not agree.  The finding is that
    the claimant and his partner do not want to  return  to  China.   There
    would be some personal frustration for the  claimant's  wife  but  they
    cannot be described  properly  as  "very  serious  hardship"  or  "very
    significant difficulties".  I have perused the statements  provided  by
    the claimant and his wife but they do not take matters any further than
    were taken by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

17. I have to say that it is clear to me that  the  findings  do  not  come
    within the scope of the Rule and the judge  erred  in  law  by  finding
    otherwise.  The  difficulties  identified  are  just  not  sufficiently
    severe.

18. It follows therefore that I must and do set aside the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

19. It follows from the finding I have made above I cannot accept that  the
    appeal ought to be allowed under the Rules.  It will only be in unusual
    circumstances that an appeal can be allowed properly outside the Rules.
     This is not because exceptionality is a requirement.   Rather,  it  is
    because the Rules make a serious attempt to  encapsulate  and  preserve
    people's rights and usually achieve that end.  It  is  always  possible
    that they do not which  is  why  the  underpinning  provisions  of  the
    Convention have to be considered.  There is  nothing  here  that  would
    support a decision to allow it outside the Rules.  There are no special
    circumstances that are not reflected fully in the  Rules.   I  have  no
    hesitation  in  saying  that  removing  the  appellant  would   be   an
    interference with the private and family life of him and  his  partner.
    The point is that it would be lawful and proportionate.  This is not  a
    deportation case where the very strong interest in deporting a criminal
    applies but the maintenance of effective immigration control is in  the
    public interest.  If there were any doubt about that it is  made  clear
    by Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002.
    The Act also requires that little weight should be given to  a  private
    life or relationship formed with a qualifying partner when the person's
    status was precarious.  The claimant's case has always been precarious.

20. Nevertheless a decision maker must always stand back and just ask  what
    is being achieved by breaking up what appears to a happy union  between
    two people who, requirements  of  immigration  law  aside,  are  living
    industriously and quietly.  The problem is  that  the  requirements  of
    immigration law cannot be set aside.  Either there is a free for all or
    there is a system of  control  and  a  system  of  control  has  to  be
    enforced.

21. It is entirely open to the claimant to return home and see  if  he  can
    satisfy the Rules.  There are strong reasons to think that many of  the
    points could be satisfied.  It is for him to  decide  if  he  wants  to
    knuckle down and learn English.  There is a suggestion  in  the  papers
    that he could.  Similarly, although  there  was  a  suggestion  to  the
    contrary, there was no reason to think the authorities in  China  would
    prevent him returning to the United Kingdom if that is what  he  wanted
    to do.  Nothing has been advanced to show that the claimant  could  not
    satisfy the Rules, if not immediately in the  reasonably  near  future.
    This is not a case where the life of a child will be disrupted.

22. With respect to Mr Singer he knew his best point and he pushed it  hard
    I have to come to the conclusion that I have.

23. For all these reasons I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge and I substitute a decision dismissing the appeal on all
    grounds.

    Decision

24. I allow the Secretary of State's appeal. I set aside  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal and I  substitute  a  decision  dismissing  the
    claimant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 8 February 2016                |

