
IAC-TH-WYL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/36028/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 May 2015                               |On 8 June 2015                |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MUHAMMAD UZMAN SHAFIQ
                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Manjit Dogra, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this case is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department.  However, for the sake of clarity, I shall use  the  titles
    by which the parties were known before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  with
    the Secretary of State referred to as "the respondent" and Mr Shafiq as
    "the appellant".

 2. No  application  for  anonymity  has  previously  been  made  in  these
    proceedings and no material has been put before  me  today  to  suggest
    that such an order is required.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born 10 December 1989.  He first
    entered the United Kingdom on a Tier 4 student visa on 30 May  2011  to
    study an English language course at B2 Level at West End  College.   He
    completed this course on 13 May 2012.  Subsequently he passed a  TOEIC
    examination at Level B2.  He took the two components of this course  on
    25 August 2012 and 20 June 2012 and then applied for further  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 4 General Student.  He was granted this  in  order  to
    study a Diploma in  Business  Management  at  Westlink  College.   That
    course began on 26 February 2013.  His leave was due to  expire  on  10
    January the following year.  However on 15 September 2013 after a  trip
    to Pakistan for a holiday he  was  detained  at  Heathrow  Airport  and
    interviewed.  The entry clearance that he had previously obtained which
    operated as leave to enter was curtailed on the basis that his  English
    language skills were inadequate.  He was refused  leave  to  enter  but
    granted temporary admission into the United Kingdom.  This was  by  way
    of paragraph 321A of the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended).  It was
    on the basis that  he  had  made  false  representations  or  that  his
    circumstances had changed since  his  leave  was  granted.   A  further
    explanation for this was that he was  unable  to  answer  questions  in
    English that were put to him by the Immigration Officer.  Not only  did
    the appeal turn on the issue of the appellant's language  ability  when
    seeking re-entry but also on the basis that his TOEIC certificates  had
    been obtained by fraud.  This was on the basis  that  produced  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge was a printout  of  TOEIC  results  with  the
    candidate ID number 5180431 and the date of birth 10 December 1989  and
    that this states "No examination results were found".

 4. The appellant appealed the respondent's decision.  Following a  hearing
    at Taylor House  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Wilshire,  in  a
    decision promulgated on 16 January 2015 allowed the appellant's appeal.
     His conclusions are to be gleaned from paragraph  5  of  his  decision
    where he states he does not accept that an  oral  discussion  with  the
    Immigration Officer at the airport is sufficient in itself to establish
    that the appellant obtained his certificates by fraud.  An  Immigration
    Officer is not a skilled expert and the level of  English  required  is
    only B2 which is only basic.  The judge found  that  it  was  plausible
    that the appellant might find it difficult to  speak  English  after  a
    long flight and that there were all sorts of explanations as to why  he
    found it difficult to answer the questions put to him.  In the  absence
    of evidence that the TOEIC results were  indeed  obtained  fraudulently
    the Judge concluded that he was not prepared to accept that the  burden
    of proof had been discharged.

 5. The respondent sought permission to appeal which was granted  by  Judge
    of the First-tier Davidge in  a  decision  dated  7  April  2015.   Her
    reasons for so doing are:-

         "1.  The Respondent seeks to appeal a decision  of  the  First-tier
             Tribunal, Judge Wilsher, promulgated on 16th January 2015,  in
             which the Appellant's appeal, determined at  an  oral  hearing
             where both parties were represented, was allowed.   The  judge
             found that the Respondent had failed  to  establish  that  the
             Appellant had obtained his  English  language  certificate  by
             fraud or that the Appellant's circumstances had changed so  as
             to justify curtailment.

         2.   The grounds assert that the judge  failed  to  deal  with  the
             conflict  in  the  evidence  that  was  put  before  him.   In
             particular the judge failed to recognise  that  the  print-out
             from TOEIC revealed that the examination results reflected  by
             the alleged  two  certificates  must  be  forged  because  the
             organisation had confirmed that those results did  not  exist.
             The judge has missed  the  import  of  that  position  and  is
             mistaken in apparently expecting further documentary  evidence
             by the  Respondent  or  a  letter  from  TOEIC  referring  and
             comparing the certificates adduced by the Appellant.

         3.   I find that it is at least arguable that the judge  failed  to
             appreciate the nature and weight of evidence.

         4.   The grounds are arguable."

 6. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 7. Mr Walker relied on the grounds for seeking permission to appeal.   The
    main thrust of which was that at interview the appellant's  command  of
    English was very poor and  after  three  attempts  by  the  Immigration
    Officer to speak to him in English the appellant stated that he did not
    understand and requested that the Interviewing Officer speak to him  in
    the Urdu language.  The appellant was not only unable  to  speak  to  a
    level required to study but was also unable  to  give  details  of  his
    course and that in failing to accept this evidence the judge materially
    erred.  Likewise the judge further erred in finding that the respondent
    had not demonstrated that the TOEIC certificates were obtained  through
    fraud.  The judge had a printout from  TOEIC  to  show  no  examination
    results were found against the appellant's name and date of  birth  and
    coupled with his inability to speak or understand English  to  a  basic
    level there was ample evidence for the judge to conclude that the  very
    high score TOEIC certificates were obtained by fraud.

 8. Ms Dogra argued that there was no material error  as  asserted  by  the
    respondent.  The judge was able  to  take  into  account  that  it  was
    plausible after a long flight that the appellant would  fail  to  speak
    English and need to revert to Urdu.  This did not mean that  he  failed
    to satisfy the  English  language  requirements.   The  judge  has  not
    disregarded the additional material  from  TOEIC  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's certificates and examination results.  He was  entitled  to
    conclude that there were insufficient  evidence  when  looking  at  the
    totality of  the  material  to  support  the  burden  placed  upon  the
    respondent to prove forgery.  She relied on the authority of RP  (Proof
    of forgery) Nigeria [2006] UKAIT 00086.

 9. The appellant was refused under the general ground  of  refusal  namely
    paragraph 321A of the Immigration Rules.  It states:-

         '321A.   The following grounds for the cancellation of  a  person's
               leave to enter or remain which is in force  on  his  arrival
               in, or whilst he is outside, the United Kingdom apply;

                (1)    there has been such a change in the circumstances  of
                    that person's case since the leave was  given,  that  it
                    should be cancelled; or

                (2)    false representations were made  or  false  documents
                    were  submitted  (whether  or  not   material   to   the
                    application,  and  whether  or  not  to   the   holder's
                    knowledge), or material facts  were  not  disclosed,  in
                    relation to the application for leave; or  in  order  to
                    obtain documents from the Secretary of State or a  third
                    party required in support of the application or,

                (3)    save in relation to a person settled  in  the  United
                    Kingdom  or  where  the  Immigration  Officer   or   the
                    Secretary of State is satisfied that  there  are  strong
                    compassionate reasons justifying admission, where it  is
                    apparent that, for medical reasons, it is undesirable to
                    admit that person to the United Kingdom; or

                (4)    where the Secretary of State has personally  directed
                    that the  exclusion  of  that  person  from  the  United
                    Kingdom is conducive to the public good; or

                (4A)   Grounds which would  have  led  to  a  refusal  under
                    paragraphs 320(2), 320(6), 320(18A), 320(18B) or 320(19)
                    if the person concerned were making  a  new  application
                    for leave to enter or remain  (except  where  this  sub-
                    paragraph applies in respect of leave to enter or remain
                    granted under Appendix Armed Forces it is to be read  as
                    if for paragraphs 320(2), 320(6), 320(18A), 320(18B)  or
                    320(19)" it said "paragraph 8(a), (b), (c)  or  (g)  and
                    paragraph 9(d)"); or (5) The Immigration Officer or  the
                    Secretary of State deems the  exclusion  of  the  person
                    from the United Kingdom to be conducive  to  the  public
                    good.  For  example,  because   the   person's   conduct
                    (including  convictions  which  do   not   fall   within
                    paragraph 320(2)),  character,  associations,  or  other
                    reasons, make it undesirable  to  grant  them  leave  to
                    enter the United Kingdom; or

               (5)    The Immigration Officer or  the  Secretary  of  State
                    deems the  exclusion  of  the  person  from  the  United
                    Kingdom to be conducive to the public good. For example,
                    because  the  person's  conduct  (including  convictions
                    which do not fall within paragraph  320(2)),  character,
                    associations, or other reasons, make it  undesirable  to
                    grant them leave to enter the United Kingdom; or

               (6)    where that person  is  outside  the  United  Kingdom,
                    failure  by  that  person  to  supply  any  information,
                    documents, copy documents or medical report requested by
                    an Immigration Officer or the Secretary of State.'

10. The headnote to RP (Proof of forgery) Nigeria [2006] UKAIT 00086 relied
    upon by Ms Dogra states:-

         "An allegation of forgery needs to be proved by evidence and by the
         person making it.  The procedure under s108 of the 2002 Act remains
         available to respondents.  A bare  allegation  of  forgery,  or  an
         assertion by an  Entry  Clearance  Officer  that  he  believed  the
         document to be forged can in these circumstances carry  no  weight.
         The Tribunal treats a document as forged only on the basis of clear
         evidence before it. KS (Allegations by respondent: proof required?)
         Pakistan [2005] UKAIT 00171 should not  be  read  as  implying  the
         contrary."

11. The judge's decision is a relatively short one  running  to  some  five
    paragraphs.  His findings of fact and reasons are to be  found  in  the
    latter two.

12. The key to the issue of the appellant's language skills at interview is
    an analysis of the interview record which was provided  to  the  judge.
    That appears not to have happened and the judge simply  concludes  that
    he does not accept  that  an  "oral  discussion  with  the  Immigration
    Officer at the airport is sufficient in itself to  establish  that  the
    appellant obtained his certificates by fraud".  It  is  clear  from  an
    analysis of the interview record that the appellant's  language  skills
    were very poor and after three attempts the Immigration Officer had  to
    move from speaking English to Urdu.  The appellant said to him  "Please
    speak Urdu as I do not understand you.  I have been in Pakistan  for  a
    month and I forgotten my English".  The appellant went on to  say  that
    he had been in the United Kingdom since 2011 having  initially  entered
    to study an English language course.   The  appellant  then  was  asked
    about his course and was unable to give an expected level of detail  in
    relation thereto  The appellant was asked how he was able to study when
    he had great difficulty in answering questions in English and  speaking
    in English.  He said that  his  teacher  speaks  slowly  but  when  the
    teacher speaks "fast I don't understand".

13. The judge has materially erred in  his  assessment  of  this  evidence.
    Weight should have been given to the interview and  there  should  have
    been an analysis of the  specific  questions  and  answers.   Had  that
    occurred the outcome of the appeal  would  have  been  different.   The
    circumstances presented to  the  Immigration  Officer  at  the  airport
    amounted to a change in circumstances entitling him  to  conclude  that
    there had been such a change in circumstances of the  appellant's  case
    since his leave was given that it should be cancelled.

14. The judge had  similarly  erred  in  assessing  the  appellant's  TOEIC
    certificates.  Even if he had not, on the basis of the  above-mentioned
    change in circumstances, this appeal should have, in  any  event,  been
    dismissed.  There was ample evidence before the judge to conclude  from
    the printout from TOEIC that the appellant had not sat  an  examination
    as claimed.  This was particularly so when set into the context of  the
    appellant's inability to speak English as displayed when interviewed by
    the Immigration Officer.

15. In all the circumstances I find that the respondent has  made  out  her
    case that the First-tier Tribunal's decision contains an error  of  law
    requiring it to be set aside.

Conclusion

16. The making of the decision in the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

17. I set aside the decision.

18. I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.



Signed   Date 5 June 2015.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

