
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/36289/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On the 21st December 2015            |On the 11th January 2016              |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before:

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL MCGINTY


                                  Between:

                           MISS PREETI BHITRAKOTI
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant


Representation:
For the Appellant (Secretary of State): Mr Kandola (Home  Office  Presenting
Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr Mawla (Legal Representative)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Flynn promulgated on the 29th May 2015, in  which
       he found that the Appellant did have an in-country  Right  of  Appeal
       and allowed the Appellant's appeal  on  Human  Rights  grounds  under
       Article 8. Throughout this appeal, for the purpose of clarity, I will
       refer to the Secretary of State as "the Secretary of State",  and  to
       Miss Bhitrakoti as "the claimant", given that this is  an  appeal  by
       the Secretary of State.

    2. Within the Grounds of Appeal it is argued that  the  original  appeal
       had been certified as clearly  unfounded  under  Section  94  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,  thus  restricting  any
       appeal to an out of country appeal. It was further argued that  Judge
       Flynn had  failed  to  give  any  adequate  reasons  as  to  why  the
       certificate could not be upheld and that it was  not  incumbent  upon
       the Secretary of State to provide  evidence  that  the  certification
       decision was signed off by a senior caseworker and that  the  refusal
       letter had given clear reasons as to why the appeal could not succeed
       under the Rules and under the exceptionality provision.

    3. It was further argued within the Grounds of Appeal that the  decision
       in that regard was unreasoned and irrational.

    4. It was further argued within the Grounds of Appeal that the  decision
       of the First-tier Tribunal in respect of  the  substantive  issue  on
       Article 8 amounted to a material  misdirection  given  the  Court  of
       Appeal's decision in SS (Congo) and AM (Malawi) and that  the  First-
       tier Tribunal's conclusions on legitimate expectation and  the  grant
       of leave to finish her studies was irrational and should not stand.

    5. However, permission to appeal has  been  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal
       Judge Coker on the 23rd September 2015 on  one  ground  only,  namely
       that it is arguable that there was no jurisdiction for the First-tier
       Tribunal  to  hear  an  appeal  against  a  decision  that  had  been
       certified; such an appeal only being justiciable after that Appellant
       had left the UK. Permission to appeal was not granted in  respect  of
       the other grounds of appeal and I have therefore not considered  them
       in reaching my decision.

    6. In his submissions on behalf of the Secretary  of  State  Mr  Kandola
       argued that irrespective as to whether or not  the  matter  had  been
       rightly certified, the appeal having  been  certified  there  was  no
       jurisdiction for the First-tier Tribunal Judge to consider the appeal
       and that the question as to  whether  or  not  it  had  been  rightly
       certified was a matter for judicial review, rather  than  appeal.  He
       further argued that the Appellant could have made a fresh application
       based upon a change in circumstances,  had  she  so  wished.  Such  a
       course of action is of course still open to her,  but  he  sought  to
       argue that the Judge did  not  consider  whether  or  not  there  are
       compelling circumstances, but had simply  allowed  the  appeal  based
       upon the fact that there had been a recent earthquake in Nepal,  five
       days prior to the appeal hearing.

    7. Mr Mawla on behalf of the Claimant, sought to argue  that  the  Judge
       did have jurisdiction to hear the appeal under Article 8.  He  relied
       upon the court of appeal case of Anwar and Adjo v  The  Secretary  of
       State for the Home Department [2010] EWCA 1275 and  the  findings  of
       Lord Justice Sedley between paragraphs 19-23 of the judgement that it
       was only once the jurisdiction point  had  been  taken  by  the  Home
       Office that it operated as part of the proceedings. He argued that if
       one looked at the decision of Judge Flynn, he dealt with the question
       of the preliminary issue between paragraphs 7 and 11 of the  decision
       and that the  Secretary  of  State  had  sought  to  argue  that  the
       certification had been done properly and that the arguments were  not
       simply in respect of jurisdiction. He argued that prior to the appeal
       hearing date no objections had been taken on  a  jurisdiction  basis.
       However, he conceded that this did not stop the  Secretary  of  State
       raising jurisdiction at the appeal hearing, but argued  that  it  had
       not been raised substantially at the appeal  hearing  such  that  the
       First-tier Tribunal could properly proceed with the  appeal  hearing,
       as it had done and was entitled to hear submissions on  certification
       and in-country rights of appeal. However he conceded that in light of
       the case of TM (section 94 certificate-jurisdiction) Zimbabwe  [2006]
       UKAIT 0005, that the Tribunal was not able to consider if in fact the
       decision had been properly certified, and was only able  to  consider
       if in fact it had been certified. However,  he  did  argue  that  the
       First-tier Tribunal Judge did have jurisdiction.

    8. In reply, Mr Kandola referred me to a fax which had been sent to  the
       First-tier Tribunal on the 17th March 2015, in which  it  was  stated
       that the Notice of Decision had made  it  clear  that  by  virtue  of
       Section 94 (2) and 94 (1A) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
       Act 2002, the right of appeal can only be exercised from  abroad  and
       that ought to been presumed that the  Home  Office  was  raising  the
       jurisdiction point in the case and that it  should  never  have  been
       listed for a substantive hearing and the fax sought that  the  appeal
       be struck out as being invalid. That  fax  is  contained  within  the
       Tribunal bundle, and was sent to the tribunal at  2:15  p.m.  on  the
       17th March 2015. The Tribunal had applied asking for a  copy  of  the
       letter to be sent to the Appellant and the Tribunal to be written  to
       again thereafter.

My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

    9. It is clear having read the original refusal decision dated the  28th
       August 2014 at paragraphs 30 through to 32  inclusive,  that  it  was
       stated that the Appellant's Human  Rights  claim  was  one  to  which
       Section 94 (3) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002
       applied and that the Secretary  of  State  was  thereby  required  to
       certify that her claim was clearly unfounded unless satisfied that it
       is not clearly unfounded and that  after  consideration  of  all  the
       evidence it had been decided that the Appellant's claim  was  clearly
       unfounded and that it was certified  under  section  94  (2)  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  that  her  claim  was
       clearly unfounded. She was further told in paragraph 32 that she  may
       not appeal against the decision whilst in the UK.

   10. The decision  to  certify  was  therefore  clearly  made  within  the
       original Refusal Notice and the certification stated at paragraph  30
       that the Human Rights claim was clearly unfounded for the purposes of
       Section 94 (2). The Appellant was further told that she did not  have
       a right to appeal against that decision whilst in the UK.

   11. It is further clear following the case of TM (section 94 certificate:
       jurisdiction) Zimbabwe [2006] UKAIT 00005, in  the  decision  of  the
       Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  before  the  Deputy  President  Mr
       Ockelton that the Tribunal had no jurisdiction to question whether  a
       claim was properly certified and that only the question as to whether
       or not there had been a certification in any particular case, was the
       only matter before the Tribunal for the purposes of  Section  94.  In
       this case, therefore, although the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Flynn
       did have the power to consider  whether  or  not  there  had  been  a
       certification, he did not have jurisdiction to  question  whether  or
       not the claim was properly certified.

   12. I therefore find that First-tier Tribunal Judge Flynn did err in  law
       in considering between [28] and [33] the issue as to whether  or  not
       the appeal was correctly certified, rather than simply looking as  to
       whether or not there was a certification in place.  Once  the  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge had established from the Refusal Notice that  the
       claim had been certified, and  that  point  had  been  taken  by  the
       Secretary of State both in the fax and at the  appeal  hearing,  from
       that moment there was no longer jurisdiction to hear  the  appeal  in
       country. The Judge did not have jurisdiction to consider  whether  or
       not the appeal had been properly certified. That  was  a  matter  for
       judicial review, and not a matter for appeal.

   13. Although Mr Mawla seeks to rely upon the judgement  of  Lord  Justice
       Sedley in the case of Anwar and Adjo v Secretary  of  State  for  the
       Home Department [2010] EWCA Civ 1275, as meaning that the  Judge  did
       have jurisdiction to hear the appeal, it was in fact  made  clear  by
       Lord Justice Sedley at  between  paragraphs  [19]  and  [23]  of  the
       judgement, that once the point has been taken by the Home  Office  it
       operated  in  bar  of  the  proceedings  and  that  it  was  only  in
       circumstances where the point was not taken that the Judge would have
       been bound to proceed with the appeal. Although Mr  Mawla  sought  to
       argue that the Home Office had not sought  to  raise  a  jurisdiction
       point  before  the  appeal  hearing,  given  that  Ms  Bello-Omoubude
       submitted on behalf of the Secretary  of  State  at  the  appeal,  as
       recorded in [23] of the decision that the Appellant had no in-country
       right of appeal, I find that she had properly raised the jurisdiction
       issue within the appeal, and from the moment the Judge had checked if
       there was such a  certificate,  he  no  longer  had  jurisdiction  to
       consider the substantive merits of appeal.

   14. He did not then have jurisdiction to  consider  whether  or  not  the
       certificate had been issued correctly and whether or not the internal
       procedures had been followed. The fact that the  Secretary  of  State
       may have raised those arguments, does  not  give  then  the  Tribunal
       jurisdiction to consider a matter which it does  not  otherwise  have
       jurisdiction to consider. Under Section 94 (2)  of  the  Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 "a person may not bring an appeal  to
       which this section applies if the Secretary of State certifies  their
       claim or claims  mentioned  in  subsection  (1)  is  or  are  clearly
       unfounded" Section 94 (1) clearly states  "this  section  applies  to
       appeal's under Section 82 (1) when an Appellant has  made  an  asylum
       claim or human rights claim or (both)". Having  certified  the  human
       rights claim that the Appellant was clearly unfounded in the  refusal
       notice, and the  Secretary  of  State  having  raised  the  issue  of
       jurisdiction, the Judge no longer had jurisdiction  to  consider  the
       merits of the appeal as an in-country appeal.

   15. In respect of the argument that the Secretary of State did not  raise
       a jurisdiction argument until the appeal hearing, is irrelevant.  The
       Court of Appeal decision in Anwar and Adjo v Secretary of  State  for
       the Home Department is simple authority for the point that the  Judge
       has to proceed with the appeal, if the jurisdiction argument  is  not
       raised. It did not impose any  time  limit  before  raising  such  an
       argument and there is no authority that such an argument  has  to  be
       raised prior to the hearing or at  any  specified  point  before  the
       hearing. Such a jurisdictional point can  clearly  be  taken  at  the
       appeal hearing itself, and was taken by the  Secretary  of  State  in
       this case. In any event, I accept the submission from Mr  Kandola  on
       behalf of the Secretary of State that in fact the Secretary of  State
       sent a fax to the First-tier Tribunal on the 17th March 2015 pointing
       out that there was a jurisdictional point and  that  the  appeal  can
       only be sought from abroad.

   16. I therefore find that the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Flynn
       does contain a material error of law, in that the  case  having  been
       certified, there was no in country  right  of  appeal  and  that  the
       Appellant's appeal could only be continued by  her  from  abroad.  He
       therefore did not have jurisdiction to consider the appeal while  she
       was in the UK  and  therefore  did  not  have  jurisdiction  to  hear
       evidence from her. Although there had, on her account, been a  change
       of  circumstances  since  the  date  of  the  decision,   given   the
       earthquake, that does not in any way affect the  jurisdiction  issue,
       as the appeal before First-tier Tribunal Judge Flynn  was  an  appeal
       from the original decision of the Secretary of State in  the  Refusal
       Notice, from which there was no  in  country  right  of  appeal,  the
       appeal having been certified as clearly unfounded. The Claimant could
       have sought judicial review in respect of that decision or could have
       made a fresh application based upon the change of  circumstances  and
       indeed, can still do so, but this did not give rise  to  jurisdiction
       in respect of the appeal whilst the appellant was still in country..

   17. I therefore set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Flynn
       as containing a material error of  law  and  I  remake  the  decision
       dismissing the Appellant's appeal  on  Human  Rights  grounds,  there
       being no jurisdiction for the Tribunal to consider the appeal  whilst
       the Appellant is still in the United Kingdom, pursuant to Section  94
       (2) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Flynn  does  contain  a  material
error of law and is set aside;

I remake the decision, dismissing the Appellant's  appeal  on  Human  Rights
grounds, the Tribunal having no jurisdiction to consider the  appeal  whilst
the Appellant is still in the United Kingdom under Section  94  (2)  of  the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002;

No anonymity direction was made by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in  this
case, and it was not sought  to  be  argued  before  me  that  the  Claimant
requires anonymity. I therefore do not make  any  anonymity  order  in  this
case.


Signed      Dated 21st December 2015

[pic]
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal McGinty
