
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-     -V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/36533/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 November 2016                  |On 30 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MS MARIA POLLAKOVA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clark, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr K Hasan, counsel instructed by Kalam Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Majid, promulgated on 23 October 2016. Permission to appeal was granted
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes on 24 October 2016.



Anonymity

 2. No direction has been made previously, and there is no reason  for  one
    now

Background

 3. On 9 September 2014, a decision was taken to remove the respondent from
    the United Kingdom. Such action was considered justified on the grounds
    of abuse  of  rights  in  accordance  with  regulation  21B(2)  of  the
    Immigration(European Economic Area) Regulations 2016. The statement  of
    reasons stated that  the  respondent  "assisted  another  to  enter  or
    attempt to enter into a marriage or civil partnership of  convenience."
    Reference was made to the respondent's interview which also took  place
    on 9 September 2014, following which her marriage  was  deemed  one  of
    convenience. Attached to the decision was a reasons for refusal  letter
    concerning a Mr Anthony Chisom Brown,  a  Nigerian  national,  whom  it
    transpires is the respondent's husband.

 4. The appeal of the respondent's husband against an earlier  decision  to
    refuse a residence card on 29 November 2012,  was  dismissed  by  Judge
    Hamilton on 15 April 2013. On that occasion, the judge  heard  evidence
    from the respondent in this appeal, her husband and  her  brother,  but
    concluded that the relationship in question was casual and impermanent.



The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 5. At the hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid,  the  respondent
    was the only witness. Her husband, Mr Brown had apparently returned  to
    Nigeria.  Judge  Majid  allowed  the  appeal,  having  found  that  the
    respondent was in a genuine relationship  with  her  husband.  He  also
    departed from Judge Hamilton's findings because the latter "perhaps did
    not have a lot of  the  new  evidence  showing  that  the  (respondent)
    deserves EU treatment ..."

The grounds of appeal

 6. The grounds of appeal in support  of  the  application  were  on  three
    bases. Firstly, it was  argued  that  the  judge  failed  to  make  any
    findings under the Regulations, including whether the marriage was  one
    of convenience. He had  also  failed  to  consider  the  guidelines  in
    Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage of convenience)  Greece  [2012]  UKUT
    00038(IAC). Secondly, it was submitted that the judge  failed  to  make
    any findings on the marriage  interview,  why  he  had  discounted  the
    reasons for refusal or why he had departed from the findings  of  Judge
    Hamilton. Thirdly,  the  judge  failed  to  follow  the  guidelines  in
    Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the  grounds  raised
    arguable points.

 8. The respondent filed no Rule 24 response.



The hearing

 9. Mr Clark reminded me that this was an abuse of rights  case.  While  at
    [23] the judge was happy that the relationship was genuine, at [10]  he
    failed to mention Judge Hamilton's decision when referring to  evidence
    considered; he failed to deal with the substance of marriage  interview
    and made no findings in respect of either.

10. At [16] Mr Clark argued that the judge mentioned the issue of fertility
    treatment, but Judge Hamilton made contrasting findings regarding  this
    at [31] of his decision and a more reasoned determination was needed to
    depart from that finding.  Mr Clark argued that there was no engagement
    with this determination; no recognition that it was  a  starting  point
    and no explanation as to why the judge departed from it.

11. Mr Hasan asked me to note that the judge had recorded the evidence.  He
    argued that the issues were "probably" in the judge's mind but conceded
    that he failed to mention  Devaseelan  or  why  he  departed  from  the
    previous judge's findings. Mr Hasan argued that the judge gave  reasons
    for his findings which were based on the evidence  contained  in  a185-
    page bundle.  While he failed to mention the  discrepancies,  Mr  Hasan
    argued that this was not material because he gave adequate reasons.  He
    believed the appellant and it would not  make  any  difference  to  the
    outcome of appeal. He conceded that there was no reference to the issue
    of abuse of rights in the decision.

Decision on error of law

12. There were material errors of law  in  the  judge's  decision  for  the
    following reasons.

13. Firstly, there was no recognition by the judge as to the nature of  the
    appeal under the Regulations. At [1] the notes that the appeal concerns
    the refusal of "leave to remain" and at [24] that the case fell  within
    "the relevant immigration law."  There  is  no  mention  of  regulation
    21B(2) nor any reference to the allegation made against the respondent.
    He therefore failed to make any findings in relation  to  the  relevant
    Regulations.

14. The basis of the Secretary of State's conclusion  that  the  respondent
    had entered into a marriage of convenience was the conflicting  answers
    she and her husband gave  when  interviewed  on  9  August  2014.  Nine
    separate areas of concern were highlighted in the reasons  for  refusal
    letter relating to the EEA sponsor. In addition, the  entire  interview
    record, consisting of 168 questions and answers was before  the  judge.
    There is no mention in the judge's decision  of  either  the  interview
    record or even the nine matters identified by the  respondent.  Nor  is
    there any mention or assessment of the discrete findings made by First-
    tier Tribunal  Judge  Hamilton  in  the  appeal  of  the  EEA  sponsor.
    Accordingly, the judge's decision and reasons suffers from a failure to
    give  adequate  reasons  for  his  favourable  findings   as   to   the
    relationship in question.

15. Lastly, the judge ought  to  have  taken  the  determination  of  Judge
    Hamilton as the starting point, Devaseelan considered.  The  judge  did
    not mention the aforementioned case and nor did he apply it.  The  sole
    mention of the previous decision was a suggestion at  [23]  that  Judge
    Hamilton "perhaps did not have a lot of the new evidence." That comment
    did not suffice to address the previous judge's adverse findings, which
    were reached after the judge had the benefit of hearing  oral  evidence
    from the respondent, her spouse and brother. By contrast,  Judge  Majid
    heard only from the respondent.



Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Taylor House by any judge except First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

