
[pic]
IAC-HW-AM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/36847/2014
                                                               ia/36854/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 January 2016                    |On 15 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               md. nurul haque
                                munayem haque
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondents:   Ms A Radford of Counsel instructed by Waterstone
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Respondents

 1. The Respondents are father born on 8 October 1952 and son  born  on  12
    September 1994.  The father is married  to  Rezia  Akther  born  on  15
    October 1959.  They have two sons,  the  second  named  Respondent  and
    Murshed Haque born on 12 September 1996.   They  are  all  citizens  of
    Bangladesh.  The appeals of Rezia and Murshed have  been  found  to  be
    invalid because there is no relevant immigration decision against which
    there is any in-country right of appeal and  the  appeals  were  lodged
    while they were in the country.

 2. On 9 February 2014  the  father  arrived  with  entry  clearance  as  a
    visitor.  Out of time on 24 October 2005 he applied for leave to remain
    outside the Immigration Rules which on 7  October  2009  the  Appellant
    (the SSHD) refused.  He did not appeal that decision and on 24 December
    2013 he made a further application for leave to remain on the basis  of
    his private and family life in the United Kingdom.  His  wife  and  two
    children made similar applications as his dependants. The second  named
    Respondent at the date of the application was an adult and  a  separate
    decision was made because he could no longer be classed as a dependant.

 3. It appears that on 4 September  2014  the  SSHD  refused  each  of  the
    applications and considered that the wife and  younger  child  did  not
    have a right of in-country appeal but that the  two  named  Respondents
    did have such a right.

 4. On 18 September 2014 each of  the  four  applicants  lodged  notice  of
    appeal under Section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002 as amended (the 2002 Act).  By decisions promulgated on 6 November
    2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal North ruled that the  appeals  of
    the mother and younger child were not valid.

The Decisions under Appeal

 5. By letters of 2 September 2014 addressed to the applicants'  solicitors
    the SSHD gave reasons for the decision to refuse further leave.  In the
    case of the elder child the SSHD noted his immigration history and that
    he had not been resident for any of the  relevant  minimum  periods  of
    time referred to in paragraph 276ADE(1) of the  Immigration  Rules  and
    had not  shown  there  were  very  significant  obstacles  to  his  re-
    integration  into  Bangladesh.  Consequently,  he  did  not  meet   the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).   The  SSHD  noted  the  elder
    child had been in the United Kingdom since 2006 and that during much of
    that time he had in fact been a dependant  of  his  father.   The  SSHD
    considered  there  were  no   circumstances   justifying   a   separate
    consideration of the elder child's claim by way of reference to Article
    8 of the European Convention outside the Immigration Rules and that  he
    had since his leave to enter as a visitor expired on 2 May  2007,  like
    his parents overstayed without leave.

 6. The reasons letter addressed to the father also identified  the  mother
    and  younger  son  as  dependants.   The  father  failed  to  meet  the
    requirements relating to eligibility as a partner contained in  Section
    E-LTRP of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules because the mother was a
    Bangladeshi national who had had no valid leave to remain in the United
    Kingdom since expiry of her leave to enter as a visitor in 2006.

 7. He also did not meet the requirements of Section E-LTRPT of Appendix FM
    for eligibility as a parent because he did not have sole responsibility
    for any child and although the younger son  might  live  with  him  the
    household comprised both the father and mother and neither  parent  was
    British or settled in the United Kingdom.

 8. The SSHD went on to consider Section EX.1 of Appendix FM and noted  the
    father had no other family in the  United  Kingdom  with  whom  he  had
    established family life.

 9. The father did  not  satisfy  the  minimum  residence  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE(1) and could not succeed under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)
    because there were no obstacles to his return to  Bangladesh  with  his
    family.  The claim was also refused under paragraphs 276CE and  400  of
    the Immigration Rules.

10. The SSHD went on to consider the father's claim outside the Immigration
    Rules.  It was noted that although the younger child had been living in
    the United Kingdom for seven years he could return to  Bangladesh  with
    both his parents and the father had three brothers  in  Bangladesh  and
    had given no reason to think they would not be able to assist  him  and
    his family to re-integrate there.

11. Additionally, reference was  made  to  the  father's  statement  of  22
    October 2005 signed after his visit visa had expired on 9  August  2004
    stating:-

         "I became acquainted with someone who mentioned job opportunity  in
         the UK.  I have taken many different jobs from working in farms  to
         shopkeeper, these help me to save the money I needed  to  get  away
         and I was finally given the opportunity to escape from  Bangladesh.
         Finally I arranged all the  paperwork  to  face  interview  at  the
         British High Commission, Dhaka as a visitor and  I  got  the  visit
         visa."

    Further, the SSHD stated that in his application of  24  December  2013
    the father had failed to mention the younger son.  The SSHD referred to
    the circumstances in which the  mother  had  obtained  entry  clearance
    stating at paragraph 48 of the reasons letter that she had:-

         "... claimed to need a visit visa to care for a  relative  who  was
         pregnant.  This originally was refused but was allowed  on  appeal.
         However evidence submitted when (she) applied for  entry  clearance
         including a non-settlement form ... signed  27  December  2005  ...
         clearly states your client's name and date of birth and  states  he
         is in Bangladesh.  Further to this, in the interview  conducted  on
         29 December 2005 with regard to questions 21 and 22: "(21) Where is
         your husband? At home; (22) Why is he  not  travelling?  He's  busy
         with his business".  Evidence however shows your client was present
         in the UK."

12. The grounds of appeal are generic:  see  by  way  of  illustration  the
    manuscript insertion at paragraph 18.  Many of the  grounds  read  more
    like a skeleton argument or submissions than grounds of appeal.

First-tier Tribunal Proceedings

13. By a decision promulgated on  1  July  2015  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal M Symes allowed the appeals of the father  and  elder  son  on
    human rights grounds.  At paragraph 41 the Judge found the  father  and
    mother had each "arrived in this country with  a  deliberate  intention
    not to return to Pakistan".  He referred to "very significant delays in
    progressing their  cases  notwithstanding  documented  efforts  by  the
    family and their representatives to pursue the matter: the  (SSHD)  has
    permitted the family life to flourish for some years".   He  noted  the
    younger son had been in the United Kingdom throughout his teenage years
    and concluded that his removal would be unreasonable.  At paragraph  59
    he found:-

         "There is a relatively light burden on the  family  to  demonstrate
         that their removal would interfere with their private  life:  given
         the marked difference between their circumstances in this  country,
         where the sons are established  in  a  progression  from  education
         leading to careers, I accept there is a significant interference."

    The Judge then set out Section 117B of the 2002 Act and at paragraph 61
    addressed s.117B(6) which provides that the public  interest  does  not
    require a person's removal where he has a parental relationship with  a
    child who has lived in the United Kingdom for a  continuous  period  of
    seven years or more and it would be unreasonable to expect the child to
    leave.

14. The SSHD sought permission to appeal on the basis that  the  Judge  had
    mis-directed himself in his consideration of  the  Respondents'  claim.
    On 18 September 2015 Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  J  M  Holmes
    granted the SSHD permission to appeal on the basis that it was arguable
    the decision contained an error of law because the  Judge  had  assumed
    the mother or the younger son or both  either  had  immigration  status
    when they did not or that they would somehow and  in  some  unspecified
    way acquire it.  Further, it was arguable the Judge had failed properly
    to apply the principles set out in EV (Philippines) v SSHD [2014]  EWCA
    Civ.874 and had failed to follow the guidance on the treatment  of  the
    factors identified in Section 117B identified  in  AN  (s.117B)  Malawi
    [2015] UKUT 260.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

15. The Respondents together with the mother and the younger son  attended.
    There was an interpreter present for the father.  Ms Radford  confirmed
    the elder son had good English.  I explained the  purpose  of  and  the
    procedure to be adopted at the hearing.

SSHD's submissions

16. Mr Nath referred to the submissions before the First-tier Tribunal that
    the father and mother had blatantly  disregarded  immigration  control.
    Although the SSHD for the  hearing  had  no  evidence  of  the  refusal
    decision in 2009, the parents had  overstayed  and  "lied".   They  had
    obtained their sons' education at public expense and had no history  of
    working or paying taxes.  They were close knit with  the  local  mosque
    community but there were no exceptional circumstances.  Their sons were
    not a trump card and the family's presence had always been  precarious.
    He also relied on the grounds of  the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal.  He made no further submissions on the first two  grounds  that
    the younger son had no valid  appeal  and  therefore  could  not  be  a
    substantial or material reason for allowing the appeals of  the  father
    and the elder son.

17. The second ground challenged the Judge's  conclusion  that  the  public
    interest did not require the removal of the elder son.

18. The third ground complained of the Judge's  treatment  of  any  alleged
    delay.  The Judge had erred in treating any alleged delay as a means of
    penalising the SSHD and he referred to paragraphs 27, 48 and 57 of  the
    decision.

19. Fourth, the Judge had given inappropriate  weight  to  the  educational
    prospects of the younger son.  The European Convention did not  give  a
    right to secondary education which in any event  the  younger  son  was
    close to or had completed.  It had to be remembered that he was  not  a
    party to the appeal and the Judge had misdirected himself at paragraphs
    51 following in respect of the jurisprudence in EV (Philippines).

20.  Finally,  the  SSHD  considered  the  Respondents  had  no  legitimate
    expectation that they would  be  permitted  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom and they would be able to re-establish their private and family
    life in  Bangladesh.   Ms  Radford  interjected  to  confirm  that  the
    Respondents were  not  pursuing  the  question  whether  they  had  any
    legitimate expectation of remaining in the United Kingdom.

Submissions for the Applicants

21. Ms Radford noted the father had made an application for  further  leave
    outside the Rules on 24 October 2005 some fourteen and  a  half  months
    after his visa as a visitor had expired  on  9  August  2004.   He  had
    originally come as a visitor to care for his mother and his application
    had been granted following an appeal.

22. She then referred to the correspondence  and  the  Pre-Action  Protocol
    letter of 12 March 2014 sent by the Respondents' solicitors.  The  SSHD
    had originally declined to issue a removal  decision.   Eventually  the
    SSHD did issue removal directions for each of the applicants which were
    the decisions giving rise to the Respondents' present appeals.

23. She submitted that that when Judge North decided the appeals lodged in-
    country by the mother and younger son were not valid he was  not  aware
    they were linked to the Respondents' appeals.

24. The Judge had rightly  taken  into  account  at  paragraph  38  of  his
    decision the circumstances of the mother and younger son in  the  light
    of the learning in Beoku-Betts v SSHD [2008] UKHL 39.  At paragraph  44
    he had dismissed the claims by  reference  to  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)
    [insurmountable obstacles on return].  At paragraph 45 of his  decision
    he had commenced his consideration of the claims under Article 8 of the
    European Convention outside the Immigration Rules.  At paragraph 48  he
    had addressed the issue of delay and the jurisprudence in EB (Kosovo) v
    SSHD [2008] UKHL 41 and had quoted from paragraph 15 of  the  judgment.
    There had been a delay of some ten years which Ms Radford described  as
    "outrageous".  The Judge had taken this into account in  assessing  the
    situation of the younger son at paragraphs 49-54 of his decision.

25. In assessing the public interest,  the  Judge's  consideration  of  the
    weight to be given to the public interest was not irrational.   He  had
    taken into account the immigration histories of the father  and  mother
    at  paragraph  56  and  his  conclusions  at  paragraph  57  were   not
    irrational.  At paragraph 58 he had conducted a balancing exercising in
    respect of which nothing relevant had been omitted and nothing improper
    taken into account.  There was nothing to support the  submission  that
    the SSHD had been penalised.

26. The Judge had allowed the appeal because the younger son  in  fact  met
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules and his  private  life  could
    not be pursued if he remained in the United Kingdom and the rest of the
    family had to leave.  Consequently they should all stay.  At  no  point
    had the Judge assumed the mother and younger  son  had  or  would  have
    leave to remain.  Indeed the Judge had not addressed the  splitting  of
    the family.  He had referred only to  the  disruption  which  would  be
    caused to the younger son's private  and  family  life  if  he  had  to
    relocate to Bangladesh.

27. Ms Radford referred to the recent decision  in  Treebhawon  and  others
    (s.117B(6)) [2015] UKUT 00674 (IAC) and  without  citing  any  specific
    paragraphs submitted the public interest was in keeping the  family  of
    the applicants together as a unit.  It was inconceivable an experienced
    Judge would not have kept in mind the public interest as identified  by
    Article 8(2) of the European Convention or the duty to have  regard  to
    the  welfare  of  children  imposed  by  Section  55  of  the  borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

28. The Judge's treatment of the factors identified in s.117B of  the  2002
    Act was in accordance with the guidance given  in  Dube  (ss.117A-117D)
    [2015] UKUT 00090 (IAC).  The test set out in s.117B(6) was the same as
    the relevant test at paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) in the case  of  a  child.
    The decision should be upheld.

Further Submissions for the SSHD

29. Mr Nath submitted the Judge's treatment of the  nature  of  the  public
    interest at paragraph 61 of his  determination  was  problematic.   The
    decision as a whole was fragmented.  The Judge's decision rested  to  a
    substantial extent on the fact that during the time the younger son had
    been in the United Kingdom some of which might be attributable  to  the
    alleged delay he had been educated and it would be difficult for him to
    re-integrate into life in Bangladesh.  The fact was that the benefit of
    a British education would be an advantage to him on return.  The  Judge
    had failed expressly to consider whether the father  and  mother  could
    return to Bangladesh.  The decision contained errors of law and  should
    be set aside.

30. Ms Radford added that the Judge had given  no  weight  to  the  private
    lives of any of the family except the younger son.

Consideration

31. At paragraph 44 of the Judge's decision he dismissed the claim  by  way
    of reference to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  At paragraph 46 he considered
    the claim outside the Immigration Rules although there  appears  to  be
    some confusion because the Judge referred  at  paragraph  46  again  to
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  At paragraphs 51 and 52 the
    Judge cited EV (Philippines) and "the factors identified  at  paragraph
    35 of EV (Philippines) to be taken into account in assessing  the  best
    interests of the child.  However, the  Judge  omitted  specifically  to
    consider what the Court of Appeal  said  at  paragraphs  36-38  of  its
    judgment:-

         "36. In a sense the tribunal is  concerned  with  how  emphatic  an
             answer falls to be given to the question: is it  in  the  best
             interests of the child to remain? The  longer  the  child  has
             been here, the more advanced (or critical) the  stage  of  his
             education, the looser his ties with the country  in  question,
             and the more deleterious the consequences of his  return,  the
             greater the weight that falls into one side of the scales.  If
             it is overwhelmingly in the child's  best  interests  that  he
             should not return, the need to  maintain  immigration  control
             may well not tip the balance.  By contrast if  it  is  in  the
             child's best interests to remain, but only  on  balance  (with
             some factors pointing the other way), the result  may  be  the
             opposite.

         37.  In the balance on the other side there falls to be taken  into
             account the strong weight to be given to the need to  maintain
             immigration control in pursuit of the economic  well-being  of
             the country and the fact that, ex  hypothesi,  the  applicants
             have no entitlement to remain.  The immigration history of the
             parents may also be relevant e.g. if they are overstayers,  or
             have acted deceitfully.

         38.  The need to carry out this sort of assessment is considered in
             the judgment of the Upper Tribunal in MK India (Best interests
             of the child) [2011] UKUT 00475 (IAC):

                  23.  There is in our view a fourth point of principle that
                  can be inferred from the Supreme Court's judgments  in  ZH
                  (Tanzania).  As the use by Baroness Hale and Lord Hope  of
                  the adjective "overall" makes clear, the consideration  of
                  the best interests of the child involves a weighing up  of
                  various factors.  Although  the  conclusion  of  the  best
                  interests  of  the  child  consideration  must  of  course
                  provide a yes or no answer to the question, "Is it in  the
                  best interests of the  child  for  the  child  and/or  the
                  parent(s) facing expulsion/deportation to  remain  in  the
                  United Kingdom?", the  assessment  cannot  be  reduced  to
                  that.  Key features of the best  interests  of  the  child
                  consideration  and  its  overall  balancing  of   factors,
                  especially those which count for and against an  expulsion
                  decision, must be kept in mind when turning to  the  wider
                  proportionality assessment of whether or not  the  factors
                  relating to  the  importance  of  maintaining  immigration
                  control etc. cumulatively reinforce or outweigh  the  best
                  interests of the child, depending on what they  have  been
                  found to be.

                  24.  The need to keep in mind the "overall" factors making
                  up the best interests of the child consideration must  not
                  be downplayed.  Failure to do so may give rise to an error
                  of law although, as AJ (India) makes clear,  what  matters
                  is not so much the form of the inquiry but rather  whether
                  there has  been  substantive  consideration  of  the  best
                  interests of the child.  The consideration must always  be
                  fact-sensitive and  depending  on  its  workings-out  will
                  affect the  Article  8(2)  proportionality  assessment  in
                  different ways. If, for example, all the  factors  weighed
                  in the best interests of  the  child  consideration  point
                  overwhelmingly in favour  of  the  child  and/or  relevant
                  parent(s) remaining in the UK, that is very likely to mean
                  that only very strong countervailing factors can  outweigh
                  it.   If,  at  the  other  extreme,  all  the  factors  of
                  relevance to the best interests of the child consideration
                  (save for the child's and/or parent(s) own claim that they
                  want  to  remain)  point  overwhelmingly  to  the  child's
                  interests being best served  by  him  returning  with  his
                  parent(s) to his country of  origin  (or  to  one  of  his
                  parents being expelled leaving him to remain living here),
                  then very little by way of  countervailing  considerations
                  to do with immigration control etc. may  be  necessary  in
                  order for the conclusion to be  drawn  that  the  decision
                  appealed against was and is proportionate."

32. Of particular note is that the Court of Appeal approved MK in which the
    Tribunal made it clear that in appropriate circumstances the assessment
    might be properly based on  deciding  whether  the  child's  parent  or
    parents can be returned and the interests of the child then taken  into
    account and due weight given to the child's interests in continuing  to
    be part of the family unit.

33. The Judge did not have before him the appeal of  the  younger  son.   I
    accept his interests may well be a relevant  factor  in  the  light  of
    Beoku-Betts but the Judge erred in his  approach  in  his  decision  by
    first forming a view whether it was proportionate for the  younger  son
    to return with them before deciding whether it was appropriate for  the
    father and the mother to  return  to  Bangladesh  without  sufficiently
    explaining the approach he took in the light of what the  Tribunal  had
    said at paragraph 24 of MK. This is an error of law.

34. The younger son came to the United Kingdom on  18  November  2006:  see
    page 243 of the Appellants' bundle filed on  21  May  2015.   This  was
    seven years before the date of the application leading to the decisions
    under appeal as correctly noted by the Judge at  paragraph  33  of  his
    decision and being the relevant period: see paragraph 8 of the decision
    in Treebhawan which was promulgated more than  five  months  after  the
    Judge's decision was promulgated.

35. At paragraph 61 of the Judge's decision he addressed s.117B(6)  of  the
    2002 Act.  He stated that:-

         "... in relation to the direct statement of the public interest  at
         s.117B(6), which makes it perfectly clear that the public  interest
         does not require the removal of a parent where they have a  genuine
         and subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child, as  I
         accept that (the father)  has  with  his  son,  given  my  findings
         above."

    However, the Judge had  already  rejected  the  claim  under  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) [insurmountable obstacles]  but  failed  to  explain  why
    having reached that conclusion, it would not be  reasonable  to  expect
    the younger son despite being a qualifying child to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom being a factor to be taken into account in s. 117B(6)(b).  This
    is an error of law.

36. For these reasons, I conclude the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    contains errors of law such that it should be set aside.  Given that at
    any future hearing, the issue of the reasonableness will depend on  the
    particular facts: see paragraphs 35-38 of EV  (Philippines)  I  do  not
    consider it  appropriate  to  direct  that  any  findings  of  fact  be
    preserved.

37. Having regard to s.12(2)(B) Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act  2007
    and Practice Statement 7.2, the appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for hearing afresh.

Anonymity

38. There was no request for an anonymity direction and  having  considered
    the appeal and the issues raised, I find none is warranted.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained errors  of  law  such
    that it should be set aside in its entirety.  The appeal is remitted to
    the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh before any Judge other  than
    Judge Symes.

    Anonymity direction not made.


Signed/Official Crest  Date 10. ii. 2016

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
