
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/36349/2014
                                                               IA/36366/2014
                                                               IA/36370/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 4 May 2016                            |On 27 May 2016                      |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                               Mr H J E LATTER
                         DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     NAP
                                     ANP
                                     PP
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondents:   Mr Z Malik, Counsel.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    allowing the  applicants'  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision made on 4  September  2014  refusing  their  applications  for
    further leave and to remove them from the UK.  In this decision I  will
    refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    applicants as  the  appellants  and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
    respondent.

Background

2.   The appellants are all citizens of  India,  husband,  wife  and  child.
    The first appellant's date of birth is [ ] 1975, the second  appellant,
    his wife, [ ] 1980 and their daughter, the third appellant, [  ]  2008.
    The first and second appellants arrived in the UK as visitors  in  June
    2005 with leave to remain until 21 December 2005.  They  have  remained
    since that date without leave.  The third appellant was  born  in  this
    country on 14 May  2008.   On  31  May  2012  the  appellants  made  an
    application for leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of  exceptional  and
    compassionate  circumstances  for  a  purpose  not   covered   by   the
    Immigration  Rules  (see  the  letter  dated  31  May  2012  from   the
    appellants' representatives).

3.    This  application  was  refused  for  the  reasons  set  out  in   the
    respondent's decision letter of 18 July 2013 on  the  basis  that  they
    could not meet  the  requirements  of  the  Rules  and  there  were  no
    particular   circumstances   constituting   exceptional   circumstances
    justifying a grant of  leave  outside  the  Rules.   Subsequently,  the
    respondent agreed to reconsider the decision but it was  maintained  in
    the decision letter of 4 September 2014 and on the same  day  decisions
    were served refusing the application and indicating that a decision had
    been made to remove the appellants from the UK.

The Hearing Before the First-tier Tribunal Judge

4.   At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal on  5  October  2015  the
    first and second appellants gave oral evidence relying in substance  on
    the witness statements filed in support of the appeal.  In  submissions
    both  representatives  referred  to  para  EX.1  of  Appendix  FM,  the
    Presenting  Officer  arguing  that  the  appellants  could  not   bring
    themselves within the Rules and there was  nothing  exceptional  to  go
    outside the Rules to justify further  consideration  under  article  8.
    The appellants' representative based her submissions on the  fact  that
    the third appellant was a child who had always lived in  the  UK.   She
    submitted that the requirements set out in para EX.1 had been  met  and
    that,  taking  into  account  s.55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009 and s.117B(6)of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 as amended, the appeal should be allowed.

5.   The judge  was  satisfied  that  at  the  date  of  hearing  the  third
    appellant met the requirements of para EX.1(a) and on  that  basis  the
    appeal succeeded.

The Grounds and Submissions

6.   The respondent's grounds argue that it was not open  to  the  judge  to
    allow the appeal  on  the  basis  of  para  EX.1  as  this  was  not  a
    freestanding  provision  of  the  Rules  but  a   component   part   of
    requirements for leave to remain as a parent or partner.   The  grounds
    refer to Sabir (Appendix FM - EX.1 not freestanding) [2014]  UKUT  0063
    and argue that the judge  erred  in  law  by  finding  that  the  third
    appellant met the provisions of EX.1 without a proper consideration  of
    Appendix FM.

7.   Permission to appeal was granted by the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  the
    following reasons:

         "Given none of the  appellants  is  a  British  national  and  that
         paragraph EX.1 is not freestanding (Sabir (Appendix FM -  EX.1  not
         freestanding) [2014]  UKUT  0063  (IAC)),  and  despite  the  third
         appellant being born in the  UK  over  seven  years  prior  to  the
         hearing,  it  is  arguable  that  Judge  Wellesley-Cole  may   have
         materially erred in law in  allowing  the  appeal  under  paragraph
         EX.1.  That is because it is arguable that the requirements of  the
         Rules for leave to remain as a  parent  or  partner  were  not  met
         and/or because insurmountable obstacles were not established."


8.   Mr Tarlow relied on the grounds of appeal but conceded that  the  Upper
    Tribunal decision in Treebhawon and others (s.117B(6)) [2015] UKUT  674
    raised  issues  which  might  well  cast  a  different  light  on   the
    respondent's grounds of appeal.

9.   Mr Malik submitted that  Treebhawon  was  for  all  practical  purposes
    determinative of the appeal in the light of the fact that it held  that
    s.117B(6) reflected the distinction which parliament had chosen to make
    between those who were and those who were not liable to deportation. In
    the former case, when the conditions set out in s.117B(6) were met, the
    public interest did not require removal.

Consideration of Whether There is an Error of Law

10.  I accept, as Mr Malik submits,  that  the  decision  in  Treebhawon  is
    determinative of the outcome of the appeal  as  far  as  article  8  is
    concerned but this does not affect the issue of whether the judge erred
    in law by allowing the appeal under para EX.1.  In Sabir  the  Tribunal
    held that para EX.1 was not a freestanding provision but only  fell  to
    be considered when permitted by the provisions of Appendix FM.  Neither
    the first nor second  appellant  was  able  to  meet  the  relationship
    requirements for leave to remain as a partner as the provisions  of  E-
    LTRP1.2 could not be met.

11.  The provisions of para EX.1 only become applicable where the  Rules  so
    provide,  for  example  the  provisions  of  R-LTRP1.1  or  E-LTRP.2.1.
    Similarly, in respect of leave to remain as a  parent,  the  first  and
    second appellants could not meet the relationship requirements and  the
    subsequent rules do not provide a route through to para EX.1.  Finally,
    the third appellant cannot meet the requirements of the Rules for leave
    to remain as a child as  the  relationship  requirements  under  E-LTRC
    cannot be met.

12.  I am therefore satisfied that the judge erred in law  by  dealing  with
    the matter under para EX.1.  In consequence the  appeal  could  not  be
    allowed under Appendix FM. Nonetheless, the  judge  in  the  course  of
    considering para EX.1 accepted that as at the date of the  hearing  (as
    opposed to the decision) the first and second appellants had a  genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship with a child who had lived in  the
    UK continuously for at least seven years preceding the date of  hearing
    if not the application and, more significantly, that it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.

13.  The wording of para EX.1 is  reflected  in  the  wording  of  s.117B(6)
    which is as follows:

         "(6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where -


             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and


             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom."

14.  In [20] of Treebhawon the Tribunal said:

         "In section 117B(6), parliament has  prescribed  three  conditions,
             namely:


         (a)  the person concerned is not liable to deportation;


         (b)  such person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
             with a qualifying child, namely a person who is under the  age
             of 18 and is a British citizen or  has  lived  in  the  United
             Kingdom for a continuous period of seven years or more; and


         (c)  it would not be reasonable to expect the qualifying  child  to
             leave the United Kingdom.


         Within this discrete regime, the  statute  proclaims  unequivocally
         that where these three conditions are satisfied the public interest
         does not require the removal of the parent from the United Kingdom.
          Ambiguity there is none."

15.  As far as the third appellant was concerned this is not  a  case  which
    could have been allowed under para 276ADE(1)(iv) because the  provision
    refers to a person under the age of 18 living continuously  in  the  UK
    for at least seven  years  calculated  by  reference  to  the  date  of
    application: on this issue see [8] of Treebhawon.  However, as this was
    an in country appeal, article 8 fell to be assessed as at the  date  of
    hearing.  On the basis of the judge's  findings  of  fact  taking  into
    account the provisions of s.117B(6) it was clear  that  article  8  was
    engaged and that the only  relevant  issue  was  proportionality.  That
    issue is resolved by the provisions  of  s.117B(6)  as  interpreted  in
    Treebhawon.

16.  Whilst I am satisfied that the judge  erred  in  law  in  allowing  the
    appeal on immigration grounds, for the reasons I have given, the appeal
    should have been allowed under article 8.



Decision

17.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law.  I  set  aside  the  decision  to
    allow the appeal under the Rules and substitute a decision allowing the
    appeal under article 8.

18.  No application has been made to discharge or vary the  anonymity  order
    made by the First-tier Tribunal and that order accordingly  remains  in
    force.






Signed        H J E Latter                       Date: 22 May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter



