
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/36642/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |                   Decision & Reasons |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 5 August 2015                      |                   On 14 August 2015  |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARKUS QC


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         MUHAMMAD SHAFIQ AKBAR BUTT
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION nOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss E Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Yeo, Counsel, instructed by Legal Rights
Partnership


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a determination promulgated on 21 April  2015
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Adio.

 2. The  appeal  is  brought  by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department. Although she is formally the appellant before us  we  refer
    to her in this decision as the  respondent,  and  to  Mr  Butt  as  the
    appellant, reflecting their positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. Mr Butt wishes to remain in the UK with his partner who  is  a  British
    citizen. The decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Adio  allowed  his
    appeal under the partner provisions of Appendix FM of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 4. In particular, Judge Adio found that the provisions of EX.1. were  met,
    having concluded  that  there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
    appellant and his partner exercising their family life outside the UK.

 5. The respondent's challenge to that finding is twofold.

 6. Firstly, the respondent maintains that it was not open to the judge  to
    apply paragraph EX.1. This was because the appellant did not  meet  the
    suitability requirements of Appendix FM  and  where  that  was  so  the
    Immigration Rules did not  allow  for  a  freestanding  application  of
    paragraph EX.1; see Sabir (Appendix FM - EX.1 not free standing) [2014]
    UKUT 63 (IAC).

 7. The respondent's position was that  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    suitability requirement in paragraph S-LTR.2.2 which states:

         "Whether or not to the applicant's knowledge -

         (a)  false information,  representations  or  documents  have  been
             submitted in relation  to  the  application  (including  false
             information submitted to any person to obtain a document  used
             in support of the application) ... ."

 8. As set out at [9] in the refusal letter dated  5  September  2014,  the
    respondent submitted that the  appellant  fell  foul  of  paragraph  S-
    LTR.2.2  by practising deception by getting a   proxy  to  sit  an  ETS
    English language test.

 9. The respondent's second line  of  challenge  was  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in finding insurmountable obstacles where  the  evidence
    before him could not support such a finding.

10. We can give our view relatively succinctly. As indicated by Mr  Yeo  at
    the hearing, it would have been preferable for Judge  Adio  to  make  a
    clear finding on the matter of a proxy ETS test.  It remained the case,
    as conceded by Ms Savage, that there was  nothing  at  all  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal other than the assertion  at  [9]  of  the  refusal
    letter to support the respondent's case.  There was not  even  anything
    showing  that  the  respondent  had  ever  been  in  contact  with  ETS
    concerning this appellant.

11. It is well rehearsed case law,  for  example,  RP  (Proof  of  forgery)
    Nigeria [2006] UKAIT 00086, that the  burden  where  an  allegation  of
    forgery is made is on the respondent and that the allegation  needs  to
    be proved by evidence.  The head note of RP states:

         "A bare  allegation  of  forgery,  or  an  assertion  by  an  Entry
         Clearance officer that he believed the document to be forged can in
         these circumstances carry no weight. The Tribunal treats a document
         as forged only on the basis of clear evidence before it."

12. Those matters being so, it did not appear to us that there  could  have
    been any outcome before the First-tier Tribunal  other  than  that  the
    allegation of deception was not made out. There was no evidence at  all
    to support it. That meant that Judge Adio would have had to proceed  to
    consider paragraph EX.1., however regrettable his  failure  to  address
    the respondent's allegation of deception.

13. The test in EX.1 is one of "insurmountable obstacles".  Paragraph  EX.2
    elaborates the test, stating that "insurmountable obstacles" means:

         "The very significant difficulties to be faced by the applicant and
         their partner in continuing their family life together outside  the
         UK and which could not be overcome or  would  entail  very  serious
         hardship for the applicant and/or their partner ... ."

14. We noted also the guidance of the Court of Appeal in  Agyarko  v   SSHD
    [2015] EWCA Civ 440 at [21] that the test of  insurmountable  obstacles
    is "a high hurdle", "significantly more demanding than a mere  test  of
    whether it would be reasonable" and, at [23], "stringent".

15. The First-tier Tribunal  here  had  before  it  evidence  of  the  very
    difficult family circumstances of  the  applicant's  partner  prior  to
    their meeting. He also had before him evidence of further  difficulties
    arising from a miscarriage and serious and ongoing deterioration in her
    mental health  such  that  she  had  required  significant  psychiatric
    intervention, the appellant being a very important support for her.

16. The First-tier Tribunal considered that evidence [11] and [12]  of  the
    determination.  We saw nothing there that suggests he  took  the  wrong
    approach to the evidence or misunderstood it in any way. In  our  view,
    it was open to the First-tier Tribunal judge to  reach  the  conclusion
    that he did on "insurmountable obstacles" to family life continuing  in
    Pakistan given the seriousness of the appellant's partner's  condition,
    her need for stability in order to recover and her lack of  familiarity
    with Pakistan even if her time  there  was  limited  to  the  appellant
    seeking entry clearance. It was not arguable, in our judgement, that it
    could not have been open to Judge Adio, to find for  the  appellant  on
    the evidence before him.

17. Therefore we find, in essence, that the  Secretary  of  State's  second
    challenge is one of disagreement rather than legal error and we  uphold
    the findings of the First-tier Tribunal on paragraph EX.1.

18. For all those reasons we do not find the determination  of  Judge  Adio
    disclose legal error.



Decision

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
    point of law and shall stand.


Signed                                  Date





Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

