
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/36106/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 June 2014                               |On 31 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE SIMLER
                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS

                                   Between

                              Mrs Aminata Jarju

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Y Darboe, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is  an  appeal  from  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    comprised of Judge Carroll with permission given by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Brunnen on 1 May 2014.  The appellant challenges Judge  Carroll's
    decision on the basis that it contained material errors  of  law  which
    vitiated that determination.

 2. The appellant is represented by Mr Darboe who has, in clear and focused
    submissions, presented her case and said all that could  possibly  have
    been said on her behalf.  The Home Office is represented by  Mr  Duffy,
    and we are grateful to him for his concise submissions.

 3. The appellant was born on 27 March 1990 and is a  national  of  Gambia.
    On 13 August 2010 she married Mr Abdoulie Jarju in  Gambia.   Mr  Jarju
    first came to the United Kingdom in 2006 on a student visa and in  2008
    he joined the British Army.  He served in the British  Army  for  three
    years and his certificate of discharge dated 19 January 2012 shows that
    he became a naturalised British citizen on 28 March 2011.

 4. The appellant was issued with leave to enter the UK as a  spouse  of  a
    British national citizen valid from 2 February  2011  to  12  September
    2012.  She arrived in the UK on 27 September 2011 and has remained here
    living with her husband.  In 2012, following Mr Jarju's discharge  from
    the army earlier in that year, the appellant submitted  an  application
    for leave to remain which gives  rise  to  the   decision  subsequently
    dealt with on appeal by Judge Carroll. That  application  was  dated  7
    August 2012 and she sought a variation of her leave on the basis of her
    husband's status.

 5. The Secretary of State refused  her  application  by  letter  dated  21
    August 2013.  The Secretary of State indicated that the application had
    been considered under Appendix FM and under paragraph EX.1 of  the  new
    Rules in force from 9 July 2012.

 6. So far as the Rules were concerned  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraphs E-LTRP.1.2 to 1.12  and  E-LTRP.2.1  because
    the earnings requirement was a requirement that the sponsor  should  be
    earning a certain amount for a period of six months in the period up to
    the date of the application, hence consideration under EX.1.

       So far as EX.1 is concerned the refusal letter reads as follows:

         "In determining whether there are insurmountable obstacles we  have
         considered the seriousness of the difficulties which you  and  your
         partner would face in continuing your family life  outside  the  UK
         and whether they entail something that you could not or  could  not
         reasonably be expected to overcome, even with a degree of  hardship
         for one or  more  of  the  individuals  concerned.   Whilst  it  is
         acknowledged that your partner is a British citizen and has  served
         in the British Armed Forces this does not mean that you are  unable
         to live together in Gambia.  Your partner was born  in  Gambia  and
         prior to serving in the British Armed Forces he spent the  majority
         of his life there.  Although relocating there together may cause  a
         degree of hardship for your partner the Secretary of State has  not
         seen  any  evidence  to  suggest  that  there  are   insurmountable
         obstacles preventing  you  from  continuing  your  relationship  in
         Gambia.

         You therefore  fail  to  fulfil  EX.1(b)  of  Appendix  FM  of  the
         Immigration Rules."

 7. The refusal letter considered the question of the  appellant's  private
    life under Article 8 which fell to be dealt with under paragraph 276ADE
    of the new Rules and in that regard concluded that having entered  with
    leave as a spouse on 27 September 2011 valid until 1 October  2012  she
    had not lived continuously in the UK for at least twenty years  and  so
    did not meet (iii) of that Rule.

 8. The Secretary of State's letter went on to say that at the time of  the
    application she was aged 22 and did not therefore meet the  requirement
    of Rule 276ADE(iv) because she was not under the  age  of  18.   As  to
    paragraph (v) of Rule 276 ADE, the appellant was aged between 18 and 25
    at the date of the application but  the  Secretary  of  State  was  not
    satisfied that she had spent at least half of her life continuously  in
    the UK, having lived in Gambia until she was 21.   So far as  (vi)  was
    concerned, the Secretary of State said having spent 21 years in  Gambia
    and in the absence of any evidence to the contrary she did  not  accept
    that the appellant had lost ties to her home country and found that she
    did not therefore meet the requirement of that provision.

 9.  The  Secretary  of  State's  refusal  letter  considered  whether  the
    application  raised  or  contained  exceptional  circumstances   which,
    consistent with the right  to  respect  for  private  and  family  life
    contained in Article 8, might warrant consideration by the Secretary of
    State outside the requirements of the Immigration Rules  but  concluded
    that no such circumstances had been  identified.   On  that  basis  the
    application was refused.

10. The appellant appealed contending that the decision breached her  human
    rights under Article 8; and  that  she  met  the  requirements  of  the
    relevant Immigration Rules at the time of the application in any  event
    so that the decision was  not  in  accordance  with  the  law  and  was
    therefore unlawful.

11. That appeal was dealt with, as we have already indicated, by the First-
    tier Tribunal on 6 February 2014 with a determination promulgated on 17
    February 2014.   In  that  determination  Judge  Carroll  recorded  the
    appellant's case in these terms at paragraph 5.

         "Paragraph 13 read:

         "I state that I could not renew my spousal  visa  as  stated  above
         because my husband did not have active employment at the time, thus
         we could not meet the financial requirement in that category ...

         "Paragraph 15:

         "I state that I have established family life in the United  Kingdom
         with my husband, an ex-army officer,  who  is  a  British  citizen.
         Although my husband was discharged from the British Army he  served
         the Queen and country with an impeccable record ..."

         "Paragraph 16:

         "... My husband and myself are now in active  employment  and  even
         during our hard times we did not rely  on  the  state  handouts  to
         accommodation and maintain ourselves ..."

12. Judge Carroll then recorded that the  application  was  considered  and
    refused by reference to the provisions of Appendix FM which  of  course
    includes paragraph EX.1.

13.   The Judge implicitly accepted on that footing  that  the  application
    did not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules and went  on  to
    consider the application by reference to Article 8 and in particular to
    the proportionality assessment required under Article 8, and  we  shall
    return to that in a moment.

14. Ultimately the Judge concluded that  the  appeal  should  be  dismissed
    because she was satisfied as to the proportionality of the respondent's
    decision and found that the interference with the appellant's family or
    private life was not sufficiently serious to give rise to a  breach  of
    the rights protected by Article 8.

15. Against that decision Mr Darboe raises three grounds of appeal,  albeit
    that the second and third essentially overlap.   The  first  ground  of
    appeal is a challenge to the decision that the couple  failed  to  meet
    the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  as  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing.  He submitted that the Judge should have considered the up-to-
    date evidence by reference to  the  fact  that  the  couple  were  both
    working  and  had  between  them  earnings  that  would  have  met  the
    requirement within the  Rules  so  that  she  should  not  simply  have
    proceeded on concession made at paragraph 13 of the appellant's witness
    statement.

16. The difficulty with this argument is that the Rules  require  that  the
    earnings level must be met for  a  period  of  six  months  up  to  and
    including the date of the application.  In this case the earnings level
    required would have had to be demonstrated for the period from  January
    2012 until August 2012.

17. It is common ground that the couple could  not  meet  that  requirement
    because Mr Jarju  was  not  in  employment  at  that  time.   In  those
    circumstances Mr Darboe  realistically  conceded  that  the  Judge  was
    entitled to conclude that the requirement of the Immigration Rules  was
    not met at the date of the refusal decision and nor could it be met  at
    the date of the hearing unless the couple could  show  that  there  was
    actually evidence to  show  that  they  met  the  earnings  requirement
    between  January  and  August  2012,  which  plainly  they  could  not.
    Accordingly, so far as that ground is  concerned  we  cannot  find  any
    error of law in the Judge's conclusion or in her approach.

18. Grounds 2 and 3 concern an asserted material misdirection of law by the
    Judge or, so far as ground 3 is concerned, a failure to give weight  to
    a material matter and concern the proportionality assessment  conducted
    by the Judge under Article  8.   Mr  Darboe  contends  that  the  Judge
    materially misdirected herself in law because she  failed  to  consider
    the up-to-date evidence showing that the appellant and her husband were
    working and earning in excess of the  requirements  identified  in  the
    Rules and that the appellant was at the date of the hearing at  a  late
    stage of pregnancy so that any adverse decision would have  an  extreme
    impact upon her.  There was a failure to consider  the  fact  that  any
    child born to the family would be a British  citizen  child,  the  fact
    that she and her husband had been  here  lawfully  and  that  they  had
    complied with the Rules.  He submits that either there was  a  material
    misdirection in failing to consider these matters or the  Judge  failed
    to give weight to the wide range of circumstances,  both  personal  and
    family circumstances, and the likely developments in the future so  far
    as this family was concerned, in making the proportionality  assessment
    that she made.

19. The Judge dealt with the  assessment  of  the  appellant's  case  under
    Article 8 at paragraphs 7 to 12 of the decision.  At  paragraph  7  she
    gave herself a direction in law by reference to Razgar and the step  by
    step approach identified as reflecting the Article 8  assessment  under
    the established jurisprudence.

20. The Judge made clear that in carrying out an assessment of whether  the
    interference with family or private life would be proportionate to  the
    aims sought to be achieved by the Secretary of State, a wide  range  of
    circumstances must be considered  including  the  appellant's  previous
    family and  personal  circumstances  and  likely  developments  in  the
    future.  She also said that she must consider the consequences  of  the
    decision upon all members of the appellant's family unit.  She  clearly
    recognised therefore, contrary to what was said by Mr  Darboe  both  in
    writing and before us today, the importance of having regard to a  wide
    range of circumstances and also to likely developments in the future.

21. At paragraph 8 she set  out  the  fact  that  the  appellant  had  been
    educated in Gambia and had worked as a secretary there before coming to
    the United Kingdom.  She recorded  that  both  the  appellant  and  her
    husband had immediate family members consisting of parents and siblings
    living in Gambia and that following her marriage she had lived with her
    parents-in-law in Gambia.

22. The Judge recorded the fact that the appellant had accepted  in  cross-
    examination that it would not be a problem for her to live and work  in
    Gambia, albeit that she  said  that  now  that  she  was  pregnant  and
    expecting a baby in May, returning to Gambia,  "could be a problem  for
    the baby".  The Judge recorded that the appellant  confirmed  that  she
    continued to be in  very  close  contact  with  her  family  in  Gambia
    speaking to them on an almost daily basis.

23. So far as Mr Jarju's position was concerned, at paragraph 9  the  Judge
    dealt with this as follows.  She   recorded  that  Mr  Jarju  had  been
    educated and lived in Gambia until he came to the UK in 2006.   He  had
    joined the British Army in 2008 and served with the British Army  until
    he was discharged in 2012.  His service took  him  to  Afghanistan  for
    seven months from September 2009.  That had been an extremely stressful
    experience and in his  witness  statement  he  stated  that  after  his
    deployment he suffered from post-traumatic stress disorder.  The  Judge
    noted that there was no evidence to support that diagnosis of PTSD  but
    fully accepted  that  service  in  Afghanistan  would  have  been  very
    stressful.  She recorded that Mr Jarju had found it very  difficult  to
    adapt to civilian life after  his  discharge  from  the  army  and  had
    returned to Gambia for two months to spend time with friends and family
    there.

24. At paragraph 10 the Judge recorded the fact that both Mr Jarju and  the
    appellant were by that stage employed in the catering business.  So far
    as that is concerned, Mr Darboe has accepted that they could  not  even
    at that stage in February 2014 satisfy the earnings requirements in the
    Rules because they had not been employed for the six months required by
    those Rules.  Nevertheless we are entirely satisfied that the Judge was
    aware of the fact that they were employed in the catering business  and
    although  not  expressly  identified,  that  they  were  earning  as  a
    consequence of that employment.

25. At paragraph 11 the Judge dealt with the fact that  the  appellant  and
    her husband clearly enjoyed family life together and the appellant  had
    established a private life in the UK in her time here.  The Judge  went
    on to say  that  there  was  no  evidence  from  friends  or  community
    organisations about her private life but was satisfied that  there  was
    private life based on the fact that she had lived and worked in the  UK
    since September 2011.

26.  Having set out the relevant factual matrix the Judge held as  follows

         "She has in reality been in the UK for  a  very  short  period  and
         arrived with leave to remain as a spouse until September 2012.  And
         as she says in her witness statement her husband was  not  employed
         at the relevant time and she was  unable  therefore  to  renew  her
         leave to remain as a spouse.  All of the  evidence  points  to  the
         appellant and Mr Jarju continuing to have very close  family  links
         with Gambia where they have spent the great majority of their lives
         and where the appellant has also been  employed  doing  secretarial
         work.  As I have noted above she confirmed in the  course  of  oral
         evidence that it would not be a problem for her to live and work in
         Gambia.  There is equally no evidence to show that it  would  be  a
         problem for Mr Jarju or for the child due to be born in May 2014.

         I am satisfied  as  to  the  proportionality  of  the  respondent's
         decision under appeal and find  that  it  does  not  prejudice  the
         appellant's family or private life in a manner sufficiently serious
         to give rise to a breach of the  fundamental  rights  protected  by
         Article 8."

    It is clear therefore from that decision that the Judge was considering
    all the evidence up to and including that available at the date of  the
    hearing and was not restricting her assessment to the material that was
    available to the Secretary of State.  We are satisfied that  the  Judge
    was well aware, as we have already indicated, of the employment  status
    of the appellant and her husband and of the fact that they were earning
    at that time and had been for several months prior to the  hearing,  we
    are told from September 2012 as referred to  at  paragraph  11  of  the
    determination.

27. The Judge fully took account of Mr Jarju's status as having  served  in
    the British Army and took account of the  difficulties  he  experienced
    adapting to civilian life  after  a  traumatic  period  of  service  in
    Afghanistan from September 2009.  The Judge considered and took account
    of the family life established by the appellant with her husband in the
    UK and of the fact that she was pregnant and the baby  was  due  to  be
    born in May 2014.  The unborn baby could not be considered as  a  child
    but the  Judge  took  account  of  the  pregnancy  and  of  the  likely
    developments in the future.

28.  In all these circumstances, although the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge in this case may not  have  been  a  decision  we  would
    necessarily have come to, the fact  that  we  may  disagree  with  that
    decision is not and cannot amount to an error of law.  We are unable to
    find that the Judge materially misdirected herself in law or  that  she
    failed to give weight to  a  material  consideration  in  reaching  her
    decision.  In those circumstances, this appeal  must  fail  because  we
    cannot identify any error of law in the Judge's decision.

29. We note in reaching that conclusion that Mr Duffy  has  indicated  that
    the appellant will have a 28 day grace period following the  expiry  of
    her Section 3C leave so that a fresh application can,  and  we  suggest
    should, be made in this case, and every indication given  by  Mr  Duffy
    suggests that such an application would be considered.

30. Our decision accordingly is that there was no error  of  law  and  this
    appeal therefore fails and is dismissed.



Signed                                  Date


Mrs Justice Simler


