
IAC-TH-LW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/36543/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 5th September 2014             |On 12th December 2014             |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                              mr Zaka Guluzade
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Pease (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms L Kenny (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   It will be convenient to refer to the parties as they were  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The appellant is a national of  Azerbaijan.   The
    respondent is the Secretary of State.

2.   The appellant's appeal against decisions to refuse to  vary  his  leave
    and to remove him  by  way  of  directions  under  section  47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 was allowed by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hussain ("the judge") in a determination promulgated  on
    25th June 2014.

3.   The appellant applied for leave in form FLR(O), relying upon Article  8
    of the Human Rights Convention.  He claimed to be married to  a  person
    with discretionary leave.  His application was made on 9th August 2013,
    shortly before expiry of his Tier 4 student leave.   The  Secretary  of
    State refused the application on 22nd August that  year,  finding  that
    section D-LTRP of the rules was not met as the appellant's partner  was
    not a British citizen or present and settled in the United Kingdom or a
    refugee or a person with humanitarian protection.  Exception EX.1 could
    not benefit him as he did not meet the eligibility requirements of  the
    rules.  Moreover, there appeared  to  be  no  insurmountable  obstacles
    preventing the appellant from continuing family life with  his  partner
    in Azerbaijan.  Paragraph 276ADE of the rules was also not met, as  the
    appellant had not lived continuously in the United Kingdom  for  twenty
    years and had not spent at least half of his life here either.

4.   Before the judge, the Presenting Officer accepted  that  the  appellant
    and his wife enjoyed family life together.  The judge asked whether the
    Secretary of State had made  any  investigation  regarding  the  wife's
    circumstances, in the light of the grant of discretionary leave to her,
    in order to ascertain whether or not it was reasonable  to  expect  the
    couple to relocate.  Following  a  short  adjournment,  the  Presenting
    Officer told the judge that there was no record of the appellant's wife
    in the Home Office database.  In evidence, the appellant said that  his
    wife's discretionary leave would expire in 2015 but she would  be  able
    to apply for indefinite leave to remain.  Originally  from  Azerbaijan,
    his wife has been present in the United Kingdom for ten years.  She was
    last in Azerbaijan in 2006.

5.   In evidence given by the appellant's  wife,  she  said  that  she  left
    Azerbaijan as a minor.

6.   The judge expressed concerns about  the  quality  of  the  respondent's
    decision.  In the first place, the appellant was described as being "in
    a parental relationship" with his partner.  Secondly, the Secretary  of
    State maintained in the letter giving reasons for  the  decisions  that
    the appellant could not benefit from EX.1 because he failed to meet the
    substantive requirements of the rules and yet, on the  other  hand,  he
    could relocate  to  Azerbaijan  with  his  partner  as  there  were  no
    insurmountable  obstacles  preventing  them   from   continuing   their
    relationship there.  In other words, the  Secretary  of  State  applied
    EX.1(b).

7.   In the light  of  these  difficulties,  the  judge  observed  that  any
    reasonable reader of the Secretary of  State's  letter  could  have  no
    confidence that there had been any serious consideration as to  whether
    the  appellant's  circumstances  were  exceptional.    There   was   no
    engagement with the fact that he  was  married  to  a  person  who  had
    discretionary  leave  to  remain.   There  was  no  evidence  from  the
    respondent  showing  why  the   appellant's   wife   had   been   given
    discretionary leave in the first place.

8.   The judge found that there were good reasons for making  an  Article  8
    assessment outside the rules.  First, there  appeared  to  be  no  rule
    dealing with the appellant's circumstances, as a person who  wished  to
    remain here on the basis of marriage to  a  person  with  discretionary
    leave.  Secondly, the  grant  of  discretionary  leave  to  his  spouse
    suggested that there might be good reason why she was not  required  to
    return to Azerbaijan.  Proceeding with his Article  8  assessment,  the
    judge found that family life  was  present.   In  the  absence  of  any
    explanation for the leave granted to the appellant's spouse, the  judge
    found that the Secretary  of  State  had  not  justified  the  proposed
    interference with the appellant's right to respect for his family life.
     He allowed the appeal.

9.   The Secretary of State  applied  for  permission  to  appeal.   It  was
    contended that the judge erred  in  his  approach  to  Article  8.   MF
    (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 showed that the  rules  are  a  complete
    code that form the starting point for a decision maker.  The judge  did
    not have regard to the rules  and  so  his  subsequent  proportionality
    assessment was not sustainable.  Furthermore, as was clear from Gulshan
    [2013] UKUT 00640, an Article 8 assessment should only be  carried  out
    where there are compelling circumstances not recognised  by  the  rules
    but in this case the Tribunal  did  not  identify  such  circumstances.
    Moreover,  the  judge  failed  to  provide  adequate  reasons  why  the
    appellant's circumstances were either compelling or  exceptional.   The
    appellant's wife only had limited leave until 2015 and so there was  no
    guarantee that she would  be  permitted  to  remain  after  that.   Her
    reluctance to return to Azerbaijan was a matter of choice  rather  than
    necessity.

10.  Permission to appeal was granted on 14th July  2014.   The  grantor  of
    permission considered that  the  judge's  concerns  with  the  decision
    letter might be justified but it was arguable that his  brief  analysis
    and reasons for considering the matter outside the rules and thereafter
    his approach to insurmountable obstacles amounted to an error  of  law,
    given that the spouse only had limited leave to remain until  2015  and
    was in Azerbaijan as recently as 2006.

Submissions on Error of Law

11.  Ms Kenny said that there was an absence of  any  consideration  of  the
    case under the rules.  Paragraph 20 of the  determination  showed  that
    the judge simply moved to make an Article 8 assessment, without  giving
    adequate reasons why the case fell to be considered in this  way.   The
    appellant's wife had limited leave until 2015.  Even though details  of
    the wife's circumstances might have been helpful, she had discretionary
    leave, which undermined her claim to be unable to return to Azerbaijan.
     Her asylum claim had failed.  Paragraph 15 of the determination showed
    that the judge found that the wife did not wish to return to Azerbaijan
    but had not tried to obtain a passport.  Even though  she  intended  to
    apply for indefinite leave in 2015, she was not at present "settled" in
    the United Kingdom.  Insufficient reasons were put forward showing  why
    the Article 8  claim  should  succeed.   The  judge  had  not  made  an
    assessment and at paragraph 24 he appeared to speculate on reasons  why
    the appellant's wife could not return.  She had a wish  to  stay  here,
    rather than a legally relevant need to do so.

12.  Ms Pease said that although the determination  was  brief,  it  covered
    everything that  was  required.   The  judge  moved  to  an  Article  8
    assessment because it was accepted that the appellant  could  not  meet
    the requirements of the rules,  as  his  wife  only  had  discretionary
    leave.  The requirements of Appendix FM could not be met.   Thereafter,
    the judge clearly did provide good reasons why it  was  appropriate  to
    move to an Article 8 assessment.  These appeared at paragraph 24.   The
    fact that there was no rule covering the appellant's circumstances  was
    a good reason and the fact that his wife had  discretionary  leave  was
    another.  The Presenting Officer found no trace  of  her  in  the  Home
    Office records.  The proportionality assessment  at  paragraph  26  was
    free from error.  The judge was entitled to find that there  must  have
    been a good reason for the grant of leave and so it was not  reasonable
    to expect her to return to Azerbaijan with her husband.   It  was  true
    that the appellant's wife had not been granted asylum but the Secretary
    of State, in her decision letter, should have  given  reasons  for  her
    conclusion that the appellant and his wife could continue  family  life
    in Azerbaijan.  The judge was also entitled to note that the  Secretary
    of State had had ample time to find out  why  discretionary  leave  was
    given.  After all, the adverse decisions were made in August 2013.  The
    judge  was  entitled  to  take  all  of  this  into  account   in   his
    proportionality assessment.

Conclusion on Error of Law

13.  In the grounds in support of the Secretary of State's  application,  it
    is first contended that the rules are a complete code, in the light  of
    MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.  As is now clear, not least from the
    judgment of the Court of Appeal  in  MM  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  985,  which
    appeared shortly after those grounds were prepared,  the  rules  are  a
    complete code in the deportation context, in part 13, but probably  not
    elsewhere.  In any event, as Ms Pease submitted,  the  judge  took  the
    rules as a starting point and only proceeded  to  make  his  Article  8
    assessment  after  taking  them  into  account.   This  is  clear  from
    paragraph 24 of the determination.

14.  So far as Gulshan [2013] UKUT 640  is  concerned,  I  again  accept  Ms
    Pease's submission that the judge did carefully consider whether  there
    were good reasons for proceeding to make his Article 8 assessment.   It
    may now be doubted that good reasons or compelling circumstances amount
    to an intermediate threshold, between consideration under the rules and
    an Article 8 assessment outside them, in the light  of  paragraphs  128
    and 135 of the judgment in MM & Others, but  in  any  event  the  judge
    identified as a good reason the absence of a rule  applicable  in  this
    case, where the Secretary of State  accepted,  through  the  Presenting
    Officer, that family life existed but where the rules did not cater for
    a spouse with discretionary leave to remain.

15.  The judge maintained his focus on the  grant  of  discretionary  leave.
    He gave the respondent an opportunity to find out the reasons  for  the
    grant but was told that there was no record of  the  appellant's  wife.
    He was concerned at the reasons given for the adverse decisions, as the
    letter from the Secretary of State contained almost nothing  about  the
    appellant's spouse.  At paragraph 22, he  observed  that  a  reasonable
    reader of that letter  could  not  have  confidence  that  any  serious
    consideration had been given to whether the  appellant's  circumstances
    were exceptional.  There was no engagement with the  fact  that  he  is
    married to a person with discretionary leave.   A  careful  reading  of
    that letter shows that the judge's concerns here were justified.  There
    is an indirect reference to the appellant's spouse in the first part of
    the letter, concerning the "partner route".  She is  described  as  the
    appellant's partner, in relation to EX.1,  but  in  the  context  of  a
    curious error.  Their relationship  is  described  as  "a  genuine  and
    subsisting  parental"  one.   The  appellant's  wife  is  described  as
    "partner" again, in the short paragraph dealing with section D-LTRP and
    there is mention of relocating to Azerbaijan "together", so that  their
    relationship can be continued in that country.  There is no  detail  at
    all regarding the appellant's wife's  particular  circumstances  or  an
    explanation for the grant of leave to her and no consideration  of  the
    impact of that leave on  the  prospects  of  the  couple  returning  to
    Azerbaijan together.

16.   Similarly,  in  the   short   paragraph   dealing   with   exceptional
    circumstances which might "warrant consideration by  the  Secretary  of
    State of a grant of leave to remain ... outside the requirements of the
    Immigration Rules" there is no mention of the appellant's spouse at all
    and, more than that, no substantive reasons at all for  the  conclusion
    reached: "It has been decided that it does not" (meaning here that  the
    application does not raise or contain any  exceptional  circumstances).
    I find that the judge was  entitled  to  give  adverse  weight  to  the
    absence of reasons from the Secretary of State and to  factor  this  in
    when he came to his proportionality assessment.  In the absence of  any
    sensible consideration of the appellant's wife's circumstances, he  was
    entitled to weigh the competing interests  as  he  did.   In  referring
    (paragraph 26) to a burden upon the Secretary of State, he was  clearly
    not intending to refer to a formal burden of proof.   What  he  had  in
    mind here was  an  absence  of  any  justification,  contained  in  the
    decisions under appeal,  for  the  interference  with  the  appellant's
    family and private life.  His finding that there was no  justification,
    in the particular circumstances of the case, and more  particularly  in
    the absence of a fully reasoned decision, was open to him.

17.  The judge's decision to allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds does  not
    entail the grant of any period of leave to the appellant or confer  any
    substantive benefit on him.  The judge's decision simply means that the
    decisions under appeal do not, in present circumstances,  amount  to  a
    proportionate  response.   The  net  result  may  simply  be  that  the
    Secretary of State considers the appellant's circumstances,  and  those
    of his wife, in more detail and that she then makes a decision  in  the
    light of what may emerge.  I conclude, however, that no material  error
    of law has been shown in the judge's decision, which shall stand.

NOTICE OF DECISION

18.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no material  error  of
    law and shall stand.



Signed        Date 11th December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

