
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/36369/2014
                                                               IA/36373/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 18 February 2016                  |On 1 March 2016                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                               1) Aishat Sanni
                              2) [A A], a minor
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               The Secretary Of State For The Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellants:    No appearance
For the respondent:    Ms A. Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants' legal advisers have wisely accepted  that  the  correct
    route forward to secure a just result in this case is not to  pursue  a
    challenge to the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Veloso  but  to
    focus on securing British citizenship for  [AA]  who  was  born  on  14
    December 2005.

 2. On 2 February 2016, David A. Grand wrote to the Tribunal to say that Ms
    Sanni had submitted an application for [AA]'s registration as a British
    citizen and that she was  content  for  the  Tribunal  to  resolve  the
    outstanding appeal in her absence.  The  result  is  that  neither  the
    appellants nor their  representatives  were  present  to  pursue  their
    appeal.  Further on 10 August 2015 the appellants were directed to file
    and serve a skeleton argument within 21 days;  if  additional  evidence
    was to be filed, it  should  accompany  the  skeleton  argument.   This
    direction has not been complied with.  For these reasons, I dismiss the
    appeal.

 3. Although in granting permission to appeal, I pointed out that the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge failed to engage with the issue of  [AA]'s  British
    nationality, I  remained  open-minded  as  to  whether  the  error  was
    material.  What I had in mind was that, before  1  July  2006  a  child
    could only obtain citizenship through his or her father if the  parents
    were married. The law changed on 1 July  2006  to  allow  a  person  to
    acquire citizenship through his or her father, irrespective of  whether
    the parents were married, subject to proof of  paternity.  That  change
    was not made retrospective and therefore it did not operate  in  favour
    of [AA], born 14 December 2005 until 6 April 2015.  The new  provisions
    created a registration route for those born  before  1  July  2006  who
    would have become British citizens had their parents been married.

 4. Registration does not operate automatically but only  upon  application
    made on the child's behalf and subject to various conditions, including
    the formal parental consent of the father.   No  such  application  was
    permissible on 23 March 2015, the date of  the  hearing,  but  such  an
    application was available when the determination  was  made  (that  is,
    promulgated) on 10 April 2015.

 5. I am not satisfied the Judge's error was material since it was open  to
    the appellants (as they have  now  demonstrated)  to  apply  on  [AA]'s
    behalf for British citizenship either pursuant to s. 65 of the 2014 Act
    or s.1(4) of the British Nationality Act 1981, the  10  year  residence
    route.

 6. When I granted permission to appeal I was concerned with the  issue  as
    to whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  required  to  consider  the
    imminent entitlement to British citizenship of a non-national child  in
    the context of an Article 8 claim.  Clearly,  where  the  Secretary  of
    State retains discretion to  grant  registration,  there  could  be  no
    relevance to a merely prospective, speculative  grant  of  citizenship.
    Where, however, the facts established an  entitlement  to  citizenship,
    the requirements of which were capable of being established before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, an issue arises as to whether that is  a  relevant
    factor in an appeal or, if  entitlement  arises  only  on  application,
    whether the Tribunal should adjourn hearing the appeal  to  permit  the
    application to be made.

 7. Without hearing argument,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge erred in dealing with the appeal on  the  basis  of  the
    circumstances that then existed, at which point no application had then
    been made on [AA]'s behalf.

 8. In the absence of this issue, there  was  no  arguable  case  that  the
    appellants had a viable claim that their human rights were at  risk  of
    violation by reason of the Secretary of State's decision to refuse them
    further leave to remain and to issue removal directions.  They are both
    Nigerian citizens.  [AA] would be returning to Nigeria with her mother.
     It would not be unreasonable to expect her to do so.

DECISION

The Judge made no material error  and  the  original  determination  of  the
appeal shall stand.


                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                            19 February 2016
