
[pic]
IAC-FH

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/36067/2014
                                                               IA/36077/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22nd September 2015               |On 20th October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              DR ANTONIO MANZI
                               MS AIGUL ZHURYN
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Dr A. Manzi


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appeal

 1. Although the Secretary of State is the appellant in this case, for ease
    of reference I shall refer to the parties as they were before the First-
    tier Tribunal.

 2. The Secretary of State appeals against the decision promulgated on 17th
    April 2015  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Malcolm  who  allowed  the
    Appellants' appeal against the decisions of the Respondent  dated  28th
    August 2014 to refuse their  application  for  Permanent  Residence  in
    accordance  with  Regulation  15(1)(a)   of   the   Immigration   (EEA)
    Regulations 2006 ('the 2006 Regulations').

 3. Judge Malcolm allowed the appeals on  the  basis  that  the  Appellants
    qualified  under  Regulation  15(1)(a)  and   specifically   that   the
    presenting  officer  conceded  that  they  met  the   requirements   of
    Regulation 6(1)(d) and Regulation 4(1)(c)(ii) of the 2006  Regulations.
    The judge made findings that the Appellants  met  the  requirements  of
    Regulation 4(1)(c)(i).

 4. Permission to appeal on error of  law  grounds  was  granted  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Clive Lane on 4th August 2015.  This was  on  the  basis
    that the grounds of appeal detailed matters which  were  sufficient  to
    render arguable the extent and meaning of concessions  supposedly  made
    by the Presenting Officer before the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. The grounds submitted that: 1. The judge had misunderstood in recording
    that the Presenting Officer conceded Regulation 6(1)(d) as  this  would
    mean that it was conceded that the Appellant was  a  qualified  person.
    However this was not the case as  the  judge  also  recorded  that  the
    Presenting Officer did not accept that Regulation 4(1)(c)(i)  was  met.
    Ground 2 was that  the  judge  recorded  that  the  Presenting  Officer
    conceded that the appellant meet Regulation 4(1)(c)(ii)  as  they  both
    held Italian EHIC certificates.  It was the Secretary of  State's  case
    that the case of Ahmad [2014] EWCA Civ 988 held that NHS treatment does
    not establish  the  required  element  of  self-sufficiency  under  the
    Regulations and that as binding case law, the  Presenting  officer  has
    conceded a matter when she not in a position to do so  as  it  was  not
    lawful.

Ground 1

 6. Although Upper Tribunal Judge  Lane  had  directed  that  both  parties
    provide statements 14 days before the hearing from both parties  before
    the First-tier Tribunal on 31 March 2015 detailing the  exact  form  of
    any concessions which may have been made  by  the  Presenting  Officer,
    neither party complied with that direction.  I proceeded  therefore  on
    the basis of the information before me and indicated  to  both  parties
    that the Record of Proceeding before me from 31  March  2015  indicated
    that the concessions were in the terms recorded by  the  judge  in  the
    decision.

 7. Mr Clarke was of the view that the critical issue was  in  relation  to
    Comprehensive Sickness Insurance Cover (CSIC) and whether as  a  matter
    of fact EHIC could be considered to be CSIC (which it  was  agreed  was
    Ground 2).

 8. In relation to Ground 1, there is merit in the argument that  there  is
    inconsistency in the claimed concession on Regulation 6(1)(d) that  the
    appellant 'could be regarded as  self-sufficient'  yet  the  presenting
    officer was unable  to  concede  that  the  appellants  met  Regulation
    4(1)(c)(i) which provides that:

         'self-sufficient person' means a person who has-

          i) sufficient resources not to become  a  burden  on  the  social
             assistance system of the United Kingdom during his  period  of
             residence;....'

 9. To the extent therefore that the judge recorded, and appeared to accept
    unchallenged, this concession, there was an error of fact.   However  I
    am not satisfied that there is any error of law as it  was  clear  that
    the judge did not rely on this concession (which would have effectively
    meant that  no  findings  at  all  would  have  been  needed  on  self-
    sufficiency) as the judge  went  on  to  make  findings,  including  at
    paragraph 15 and 16 that Dr Manzi was  self-sufficient.   Although  the
    findings at paragraphs 15 and 16 might have been clearer it is  evident
    from the totality of the findings, that the judge accepted the evidence
    that Dr Manzi satisfied Regulation 4(1)(c)(i).

10. I am satisfied that there was no material error of  law  therefore  and
    there is no merit in Ground 1.

Ground 2

11. It was Mr Clarke's argument that the case of Ahmad  (above)  identified
    (including at  paragraph  36)  that  CSIC  cannot  include  the  public
    healthcare system of the host state as that 'would defeat the object of
    the Directive' and 'render the Directive meaningless since  the  burden
    on the host state can only arise if there is a health service.'

12. Mr Clarke therefore submitted  that  the  apparent  concession  by  the
    Presenting Officer before the First-tier Tribunal was not relevant as a
    strict application of the law, as set out in Ahmad (which  was  decided
    on 16 July 2014 and therefore before  the  hearing  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 31 March 2015) indicated that the possession of EHIC  cards
    does not constitute CSIC.  Mr Clarke relied on an NHS print  out  dated
    24 September 2014 in relation to the EHIC card which indicates that :

         'An EHIC will enable you to  access  state-provided  healthcare  in
         European Economic Area (EEA) countries and Switzerland at a reduced
         cost or sometimes for free.  It will cover your treatment until you
         return to the UK'.

13. However, although Mr Clarke relied on Ahmad the issue of EHIC  was  not
    specifically considered as the case before the Court of Appeal  related
    to a student who was entitled to NHS care.  Dr Manzi  therefore  sought
    to distinguish this from his own case and I am of the view  that  there
    is merit in the argument that the Ahmad  case  was  concerned  with  an
    individual who was entitled to NHS care.  I also note  that  the  print
    out provided by Mr Clarke refers to UK issued EHICs and  their  use  in
    other Member States which is not the case in this appeal.

14. Although as noted above, Ahmad did not specifically address  the  issue
    of EHIC, Mr Clarke relied on the  case's  identification  of  CSIC  not
    including the public healthcare system of the host state  because  that
    would defeat the object of the Directive.

15. Article 7.1.(b) of the Directive 2004/38/EC provides:

         'All Union citizens shall  have  the  right  of  residence  on  the
         territory of another Member State for a period of longer than three
         months if they:

         ...

         (b) have sufficient  resources  for  themselves  and  their  family
         members not to become a burden on the social assistance  system  of
         the host Member State during their period  of  residence  and  have
         comprehensive sickness insurance cover in the host Member State'.

16.  Dr Manzi made the point that the respondent's policies  make  it  clear
    that entitlement to NHS care is not and has never  been  considered  as
    CSIC.  I am satisfied that a distinction has been made by the Secretary
    of State between someone who (as in Ahmad) was entitled to  access  the
    NHS (which could not be considered CSIC) and possessing an EHIC  issued
    by another member state, as with the Appellants.

17.  Dr Manzi provided a copy of the EEA3  form,  similar  to  the  form  on
    which he made his application to the respondent.  The form before me is
    EE3 Version 06/2014. And to be used for applications on or after 2 June
    2014.  In section 11, documents to be provided it states:

         'You must provide either a private comprehensive sickness insurance
         policy document that covered for medical treatment in the  majority
         of circumstances, or a European Health Insurance Card  (EHIC)  that
         covered the 5-year period of residence in the UK.'

         The current EEA(PR) form also allows for the provision of  an  EHIC
         card as evidence of CSIC.

18.  The fundamental point in this case is that,  contrary  to  Mr  Clarke's
    submission, the evidence relied on  by  Dr  Manzi  indicates  that  the
    Secretary of State distinguishes between access to the NHS which is not
    acceptable and an  EHIC  issued  by  another  Member  State,  which  is
    acceptable as CSIC.

19.  There was no authority for Mr Clarke's submission  that,  although  the
    guidance  produced  by  Dr  Manzi   from   the   European   Directorate
    Instructions clearly supported the proposition set out at paragraph  18
    above (i.e., that an EHIC is acceptable to the respondent  as  evidence
    of CSIC on self-sufficiency permanent residence applications) this  was
    out of date post-Ahmad.  He produced  no  policy  in  support  of  this
    contention and although he contended in the alternative that Ahmad  and
    the Directive had to override  any  such  policy,  as  I  have  already
    indicated, Ahmad did not address the issue of  possession  of  an  EHIC
    specifically.  I am not satisfied that it has been shown that Ahmad  is
    authority for the proposition that an  EHIC  cannot  be  acceptable  as
    CSIC.

20.  Therefore there was no adequate evidence before me to suggest that  the
    second concession made by the Presenting Officer before the  First-tier
    Tribunal in March 2015, that the  Appellants  had  appropriate  Italian
    EHIC cards for the relevant periods (and therefore had CSIC),  was  not
    properly made and in line with then (and current) Home Office policy.

21.  Therefore there is no merit in Ground 2 and no material error of law.

22.  I also record that, subsequent to  the  hearing,  I  received  by  post
    further submissions from Dr Manzi including the  August  2014  European
    Operational  Policy  document  informing  caseworkers  of   the   Ahmad
    judgement and reiterating that whilst NHS access is not CSIC,  an  EHIC
    issued by another Member State remained acceptable.   However  as  this
    evidence was received post-hearing, not in compliance  with  directions
    and the respondent has not had an opportunity to comment, I have placed
    no  reliance  on  this  additional  evidence   and   the   accompanying
    submissions.

23.  In any event, for the reasons set out in paragraphs 6  to  21  of  this
    decision, the Secretary of State's appeal cannot succeed.

Notice of Decision

24.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  contain  an  error  of
law and shall stand.

Anonymity

25.  No anonymity direction was sought or made either before the  First-tier
    Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal.


Signed   Date: 28 September 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award was sought or made.


Signed   Date: 28 September 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
