
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/36476/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 6 November 2014                            |On 11 February 2015          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR GHULAM MURTAZA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M Niama, Berkshire Law Chamber


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1) This is an appeal by the Secretary of State with permission  against  a
    decision by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Devittie.  The respondent,
    Mr Ghulam Murtaza, is hereinafter referred to "the claimant".

 2) The claimant is a national of Pakistan and was born on 25  April  1974.
    On 30 March 2011 he was granted entry clearance as a Tier  4  (Student)
    Migrant.  In August 2012 he applied for an extension of his  leave  and
    it was the refusal of this that gave rise to the present  appeal.   The
    reason the application to the Secretary of State was  unsuccessful  was
    that the claimant did not have a valid Confirmation of  Acceptance  for
    Studies (CAS).  The CAS with the reference number  submitted  with  the
    application had been withdrawn by the sponsor.

 3) In evidence before the First-tier Tribunal the claimant stated that  he
    was surprised to learn that his sponsor had withdrawn his CAS.  He  had
    at all times complied with the  conditions  of  his  visa.   The  judge
    considered that it was not at all apparent that the claimant  bore  any
    responsibility for the loss of his CAS.  The judge considered  that  on
    the grounds of "common law  fairness"  the  claimant  should  have  the
    opportunity to vary his application and should be  given  a  reasonable
    time within which to find a suitable college for the purpose of  making
    a new application.  The judge allowed the appeal on the basis that  the
    decision by the Secretary of State was not in accordance with the  law.



 4) The application for permission to appeal on behalf of the Secretary  of
    State points out that it  was  not  disputed  that  the  CAS  had  been
    withdrawn.  The withdrawal of the CAS was a matter between the claimant
    and the institution which issued and then  withdrew  it.   It  was  not
    incumbent upon the Secretary of State to afford  the  claimant  further
    time to obtain a new CAS.  The case of  Patel  [Tier  4  -  No  "60-day
    extension"} India [2011] 00187 should be distinguished.  The  sponsor's
    Tier 4 licence had not been withdrawn in the current case.

 5) It  was  further  contended  by  the  respondent  that  the  judge  had
    disregarded relevant case law, namely Rahman [2014]  EWCA  Civ  11,  in
    which the Court concluded that fairness did not require  the  Secretary
    of State to give the appellant in that case an opportunity  to  address
    any deficiency in the CAS.  There was no question of the  Secretary  of
    State having obtained additional information without reference  to  the
    applicant and having relied upon it to  refuse  the  application.   The
    Secretary of State had applied the  terms  of  the  Immigration  Rules,
    under which it was the appellant who had the responsibility of ensuring
    that his application was supported by a valid CAS.  If the CAS did  not
    meet the requirements, it could not give him an entitlement  to  points
    under Appendix A.  If the deficiency in the CAS was  the  result  of  a
    mistake on the part of the sponsor,  that  was  a  matter  between  the
    appellant and the sponsor.  There was no obligation on the Secretary of
    State to give the appellant an opportunity to seek an amendment to  the
    CAS.

 6) On the basis of this decision of the Court of Appeal the  Secretary  of
    State submitted that fairness did not require the Secretary of State to
    give the claimant in the present appeal the opportunity to address  the
    deficiency in the CAS.

 7) Permission to appeal was granted on the basis of these grounds.

 8) Mr Armstrong relied on these grounds at the hearing before me.  For the
    claimant, Ms Niama submitted that there was no material  error  in  the
    determination.  The  claimant  did  not  bear  any  responsibility  for
    withdrawal of the CAS and the CAS did not  contain  wrong  information.
    It was withdrawn by the college through no fault of the sponsor.   This
    was unfair to the claimant, who had paid the fees.

 9) Ms Niama continued that if the college's licence had  been  revoked  it
    was the policy of the Secretary of  State  to  allow  60  days  for  an
    applicant to obtain  a  new  CAS.   The  claimant  was  not  given  the
    opportunity to do this, which went to the issue of fairness.   Reliance
    was placed upon the case of Patel, cited above.

10) Mr Armstrong responded that the Secretary of State's  policy  was  that
    where a college was taken off the  register  through  no  fault  of  an
    applicant then the applicant would be  granted  60  days  in  which  to
    obtain a CAS but this was not the situation here.  At the date  of  the
    refusal decision, 12 September 2013,  the  college  was  still  on  the
    register.  The CAS was withdrawn by the sponsor, who did not  tell  the
    Home Office why the CAS was withdrawn.   The  case  of  Patel  was  not
    relevant and reliance was placed instead on  the  decision  in  Rahman.
    Under the Immigration Rules the claimant either had a valid CAS or  did
    not.

11) Ms Niama further submitted that the Secretary of State's refusal letter
    was dated 12 September  2013  but  the  claimant  had  applied  for  an
    extension on 30 August 2012.  The Secretary of State had an  obligation
    to enquire why the CAS was withdrawn.  The  claimant  had  trusted  his
    college as it was on the register.  The Secretary of State should  have
    contacted the claimant at the time of his  application  and  not  after
    such a long delay.  Ms Niama said she was unaware whether the  claimant
    had sought  an  explanation  from  the  college  of  why  the  CAS  was
    withdrawn.

Discussion

12) It is clear from the decision of Court of Appeal  in  Rahman  that  the
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in finding  the  decision
    of the Secretary of State was not in  accordance  with  the  law.   The
    claimant did not have a valid CAS, as required under Appendix A of  the
    Immigration Rules, and  was  therefore  not  entitled  to  have  points
    awarded under this provision.  As Mr  Armstrong  pointed  out,  as  the
    sponsoring college had remained on the register there was no  basis  to
    invoke the Secretary of State's policy of allowing an applicant 60 days
    to obtain a further CAS.  The matter was one between the  claimant  and
    his college - it was not a case in which the college had  been  removed
    from the register.  As was pointed out in Rahman,  there  was  no  duty
    upon the respondent at common law to allow the claimant time to  obtain
    a new CAS in the interests of fairness.  This point has  recently  been
    stated again by the Court of Appeal in Kaur [2015] EWCA Civ 13.

13) It is surprising to note that even after the interval of  many  months,
    the claimant has not  furnished  an  explanation  of  why  the  college
    withdrew the CAS.  According to the claimant's submissions, he had paid
    his fees to the college.  It would have seemed an obvious question  for
    the claimant to have pursued with the  college,  as  envisaged  by  the
    Court in Rahman.  If the claimant has a remedy,  it  lies  against  the
    college and not against the Secretary of State.

14) The decision of the Secretary of  State  was  in  accordance  with  the
    Immigration Rules and there are no other grounds on  which  the  appeal
    might succeed.  Accordingly the decision is set aside  and  re-made  by
    dismissing the appeal.

Conclusions

15) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

16) I set aside the decision.

17) I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.

Anonymity

18) The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for anonymity and  I  see
    no reason why such an order should be made.

Fee Award   Note: this is not part of the determination.

As the appeal has been dismissed, no fee award can be made.



Signed      Date 6 November 2014

Judge of the Upper Tribunal
