
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/36856/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 4 April 2016                           | On 16 May 2016                   |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                          hemen namik abdullrahman
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Thornhill, of Thornhill Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant appeals, with permission granted by Upper  Tier  Tribunal
    Judge Storey, against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Ennals
    dismissing the appellant's appeal against the refusal by the  Secretary
    of State to grant him a residence card as a family member and a spouse.
     The appellant is a citizen  of  Iraq,  born  on  6  October  1978  and
    originally came to the UK to claim asylum and was removed to Germany on
    27 May 2002.  On 5 January 2009 he was served with removal  directions,
    having returned to the UK and claimed  asylum  again.   This  was  also
    refused and confirmed by the Tribunal on 6 April 2010.

 2. On 27 March 2014 he married a Latvian national and applied  for  an  EU
    residence card which was refused on 4 September 2014.

 3. The reasons for refusal referred to a number of  discrepancies  between
    the two interviews, that of the appellant and his  sponsor  wife.   The
    respondent regarded the marriage as a sham  and  the  judge  stated  at
    paragraph 13, "in the light of the appellant's immigration history  and
    the speed with which this relationship developed, it is not hard to see
    why the suspicion arose".

 4. The judge at paragraphs 15, 16, 17 and 18 found that both appellant and
    sponsor were able to give information about each other but  there  were
    inconsistencies.  However  he  accepted  that  the  discrepancies  were
    explainable  by  misunderstandings  either  by   the   interviewer   or
    interviewees. [16].  The discrepancy over  the  date  of  the  marriage
    certificate the judge accepted as  a  clerical  error.   He  did  place
    little weight on four letters from friends giving character witnesses

 5. In his oral submissions before me, Mr Thornhill pointed  out  that  the
    judge had not appreciated that the burden  of  proof  rested  with  the
    Secretary of State, had failed to make any findings on the evidence  or
    oral evidence of the appellant's wife and pointed out that although the
    Home Office had relied on the inconsistencies and discrepancies in  the
    interviews but that was not the case for the judge who found that there
    were plausible explanations.

 6. The answers to the  questions  as  he  indicated  were  such  that  the
    appellant and sponsor went through a Muslim marriage ceremony and  then
    a civil marriage but then undertook the Muslim  marriage  because  they
    were afraid of having a child out of wedlock and both  gave  a  similar
    answer in their interview responses. This was important.

 7. Mr Thornhill referred to Collins Agho v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2015] EWCA Civ 1198 and particularly paragraph 13.

          "13.    ...What it comes down to is that as a matter of  principle
             a spouse establishes a prima facie case that he or  she  is  a
             family member of an EEA national  by  providing  the  marriage
             certificate and the spouse's passport; that the  legal  burden
             is on the Secretary of State to show that  any  marriage  thus
             proved is a marriage of convenience; and that that  burden  is
             not discharged merely by showing 'reasonable  suspicion'.   Of
             course in the usual way the evidential burden may shift to the
             applicant by proof of facts which justify the  inference  that
             the marriage is not genuine, and the facts giving rise to  the
             inference may include  a  failure  to  answer  a  request  for
             documentary proof of the genuineness  of  the  marriage  where
             grounds for suspicion have been raised.  Although, as  I  say,
             the point was not argued before us, that approach seems to  me
             to be correct - as does the UT's statement that  the  standard
             of proof must be the civil standard, as explained by the House
             of Lords in Re B (Children) [2008] UKHL 35, [2009] IAC 11."

 8. Ms Johnstone relied on the Reasons for Refusal Letter and  stated  that
    the judge had taken into account the oral evidence and had  made  clear
    findings.

 9. The difficulty with the determination from Judge Ennals is that he sets
    out the burden and standard of proof at paragraph 9 stating that:

         "It is for the appellant to discharge the burden of proof  and  the
         standard of proof to be applied is the balance of probabilities."

10. That is not correct as can  be  seen  from  the  paragraph  cited  from
    Collins Agho above.  It was accepted that the appellant was married and
    thus the legal burden is on the Secretary of State  to  show  that  the
    marriage thus proved is  a  marriage  of  convenience.   As  stated  in
    Collins Agho the burden is not discharged merely by showing  reasonable
    suspicion. Indeed in this case it would appear that the judge did  find
    that there were plausible explanations for  the  discrepancies  in  the
    interviews. It is clear from the decision that the judge  did  approach
    the evidence on the basis that the burden was on the  appellant  rather
    than the Secretary of State, for example  the  judge  at  paragraph  18
    stated that he gave the character referee's letters "little weight" and
    with reference to the photographs at paragraph 19 the judge stated:

         "It was said that Mr Konosonka's father,  sister  and  brother  had
         visited the UK to attend the civil marriage in March 2014.   I  was
         shown photographs of the couple, with these family members.  I have
         no way of corroborating that the  people  in  the  photographs  are
         indeed the family members I am told they are.  Mrs  Fell  commented
         that it was noteworthy that no documentary evidence of these visits
         had been provided.  Nor were  there  any  witness  statements  from
         these family members, and none had attended court  to  support  the
         couple.  This was particularly remarkable  since  her  brother  was
         said to be visiting currently.  I certainly find this omission from
         the appellant's case surprising.  Evidence from his wife's  family,
         and their confirmation of the genuineness of  the  marriage,  would
         have been significant evidence."

11. At paragraph 21 the judge states:

         "In the photographs are people who could be  Ms  Konosonka's  close
         relatives, and the photographs of the  couple  together  appear  to
         show a happy couple.  I have to bear in mind that if  this  were  a
         marriage  of  convenience  then  one  might  expect  this  sort  of
         photograph to be created to support the 'story'."

12. Importantly the judge proceeded at paragraph 22 to state:

         "I do  not  find  the  minor  inconsistencies  in  their  interview
         accounts to be very significant.  I accept that in all  probability
         they did get married, both Islamically and in a civil ceremony, and
         they do live at the same address.  Is there any reason I should not
         accept the appellant's evidence?"

13. There is no doubt that the appellant has had  a  chequered  immigration
    history and he had been living in the  UK  since  2009  and  he  had  a
    history of being an untruthful witness.  The judge also remarked on the
    fact that they had met in an internet dating site.  The  judge  stated,
    "I find the circumstances of their meeting, commencing cohabitation and
    then marrying, within such a short time frame to be wholly implausible"
    [paragraph 24].

14. To my mind the approach by the judge was in legal error  on  the  basis
    that even if this constituted a reasonable suspicion the burden was not
    discharged merely by showing a reasonable suspicion and the  judge  had
    sought corroboration of evidence regarding  the  photographs.   I  also
    note that the judge had not taken into account the  appellant's  wife's
    evidence. As such the judge appeared to  have  shifted  the  burden  of
    proof to that of the appellant rather than the respondent which  is  an
    error in law.

15. I therefore set aside the decision.  Ms Johnstone  indicated  that  she
    considered the findings could not stand and owing  to  the  extent  and
    nature of the required findings the matter should be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Bearing in mind the judge appeared to approach an
    assessment of the evidence overall with the wrong burden of proof which
    would be fundamental to the findings, the matter should be returned  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

16. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.

Direction

    A specific direction to be respondent to serve on the appellant and the
    Tribunal by 10th June 2016 a copy of  the  interviewer's  comments.   I
    note that the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  and  the  interview  were
    undertaken by a different Immigration Officer.


Signed                                  Date 4th May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington




