
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/36739/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th May 2016                               |On 3rd June 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                                Mr HJE LATTER
                        (DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE)

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MD JIAUDDIN BABLU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Biggs, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal against by the Secretary of State a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing the applicant's appeal to the extent  that
    his application for leave remained before her for a lawful decision  to
    be made.  In this decision I will refer to the  parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal, the applicant as the appellant and  the
    Secretary of State as the respondent.

Background

2.   The appellant is a national of Bangladesh born  on  12  December  1989.
    On 8 December 2010 he entered the UK with valid entry  clearance  as  a
    Tier 4 Student valid from 24 November 2009 to 31 July 2012.  On 27 July
    2012 he submitted an application for  further  leave  to  remain  as  a
    student and this was granted until 30 June 2015.  On 6 August  2014  he
    applied for an extension of stay as the partner of a person present and
    settled in the UK but this application was refused on 1 September  2014
    for the reasons set out in the decision letter of the same  date.   The
    appellant was also served with notice of a person liable to removal  on
    the basis that he had sought leave to remain in  the  UK  by  deception
    following information from the Education Testing Service (ETS) that  on
    25 April 2012 there  was  an  anomaly  with  his  speaking  test  score
    indicating the presence of a proxy test taker.  As the English language
    test provided as part of his Tier 4 application  was  obtained  through
    deception, it was considered that he  had  attempted  to  obtain  leave
    through deception and his leave to remain was curtailed to expire on  1
    September 2014 after which he had no valid leave to remain in the UK.

3.   So far as the  application  for  leave  to  remain  as  a  partner  was
    concerned, the respondent accepted that his partner was settled in  the
    UK and that there was a genuine and subsisting relationship.   However,
    it was not accepted that the appellant met the suitability requirements
    and in particular S-LTR2.2(a).  The decision letter at para 15  records
    that the appellant did not meet the suitability requirements but if  he
    did,  the  eligibility  requirements  would  be  met   and   additional
    consideration would be given to the criteria of  para  EX.1.   On  this
    issue the respondent was not satisfied that the  appellant  could  meet
    the requirements of either para EX.1(a) or (b).  The respondent went on
    to find that the appellant could not meet the requirements for leave to
    remain under private life or under Article 8.

The Hearing Before the First-tier Tribunal Judge

4.   The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant and his partner.   She
    recorded  at  [39]  that  the  respondent  had   not   challenged   the
    relationship or raised  as  an  issue  in  the  refusal  the  financial
    requirements in the Rules.  She accepted that the appellant's wife  met
    the definition of partner because they  were  married  on  29  December
    2013.

5.   The judge then  went  on  to  consider  the  issues  arising  from  the
    curtailment of the appellant's leave as someone who had sought leave to
    remain by deception by submitting an English  language  test  taken  by
    proxy rather than by himself.  At [41]-[58] the judge dealt  at  length
    with the issue of whether a proxy had been used  to  take  the  English
    language test.  She found that the written evidence  provided  by  ETS,
    whose methodology had been checked by the Home Office,  was  sufficient
    evidence to discharge the burden and onus of proof upon the  respondent
    even if correctly stated as being at the high end  of  the  balance  of
    probability [52].  She was not persuaded by  the  appellant's  evidence
    that his certificate had  been  incorrectly  declared  to  be  invalid,
    describing his evidence as  not  convincing  and  that  the  scores  he
    claimed to have achieved seemed unfeasibly high, consistent  with  them
    being invalid.  [53].

6.   However, she held that the finding in relation to the ETS  test  result
    of 2012 was not  sufficient  to  dispose  of  the  appeal  because  the
    respondent had undertaken to consider all relevant  factors  including,
    for example, possible  human  rights  grounds  which  might  mean  that
    removal would not be appropriate.  She found that  the  respondent  had
    not followed her own guidance as the decision to  curtail  should  have
    been taken only after taking account of all relevant factors  including
    human rights, whereas in para 37  of  the  decision  letter  it  simply
    stated that returning the appellant to Bangladesh would not breach  his
    human rights.  The  failure  to  consider  discretion  in  relation  to
    curtailment infected the decision as a whole.   She  further  commented
    that on the face of the decision the respondent  had  sought  to  apply
    para S-LTR2.2(a) but that was only relevant  to  false  information  or
    representations submitted in relation to the application as opposed  to
    any previous application.  She said that this was an additional  reason
    for finding that the respondent's decision was not in  accordance  with
    the law.  The application should be returned to the  respondent  for  a
    lawful decision to be made.  Accordingly, the appeal was allowed to the
    extent that the application remained before the respondent for a lawful
    decision to be made.

The Grounds and Submissions

7.   In the grounds the respondent argues that the judge was wrong to  remit
    the matter to the respondent and had failed to note that  the  decision
    letter at paras 30 to 36 did consider the exercise of discretion.   The
    grounds maintain that the  appellant  does  not  meet  the  suitability
    requirements of Appendix FM and that ETS had identified  the  appellant
    after a lengthy and systematic investigation.

8.   The appellant submitted a rule 24 response dated 3 March  2016  arguing
    that the respondent's grounds raised no arguable error of law and  that
    it was open to the judge to conclude that the respondent had failed  to
    exercise her discretion before reaching her decision.   It  is  further
    argued that  the  impugned  English  language  test  was  submitted  in
    relation to the previous variation application and not in  relation  to
    the application for leave to remain as a partner.  The provisions of S-
    LTR2.2(a) mirrored the provisions of para 322(1A) of the Rules and that
    even if  deception  had  been  used  to  obtain  the  English  language
    certificate, it would not fall within the provisions of S-LTR2.2.

9.   The response raises a further issue in the light  of  the  decision  of
    the Upper Tribunal in SM and Qadir v Secretary of State (ETS - Evidence
    - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 229 in support of an argument  that  the
    written evidence relied on by the judge did not  provide  a  reasonable
    evidential foundation for the respondent's allegation of deception and,
    in consequence, the judge had erred  in  law  by  a  finding  that  the
    respondent had discharged the burden of proving deception on the  basis
    of the same generic evidence.

10.  Mr Tarlow adopted his grounds arguing that there was  no  proper  basis
    for the appeal to be remitted to the respondent.   Mr  Biggs  submitted
    that the judge had failed to give adequate reasons for finding that the
    appellant had resorted to deception when taking  the  English  language
    test but further submitted that this was immaterial to the  outcome  of
    the appeal insofar as it related to whether  the  appellant  should  be
    granted further leave to remain as a  partner.   However,  he  accepted
    that the issue was one of importance in  relation  to  the  curtailment
    decision and more generally to the appellant as he  strenuously  denied
    that the test had been taken by a proxy on his behalf.

Assessment of Whether the First-tier Tribunal Erred in Law

11.  I am satisfied in the light of  recent  Tribunal  decision  in  SM  and
    Qadir that there are properly arguable issues relating to the  way  the
    judge dealt with the issues arising from the English language test  and
    that it should be open  to  the  appellant  to  challenge  the  judge's
    decision for the reasons set out in  his  response.   If  necessary,  I
    treat the response as grounds of appeal and grant permission to appeal.
     No objection to this course was raised by Mr Tarlow.

12.  I am satisfied  that  the  judge  erred  in  law  as  asserted  in  the
    respondent's grounds.   The  judge  remitted  the  application  to  the
    respondent on the basis that she had not exercised  any  discretion  in
    deciding what decision to make.  However, the decision letter at  paras
    30 to 36 clearly indicates that the respondent  did  not  simply  state
    that returning the appellant to Bangladesh would not breach  his  human
    rights.  I am satisfied that  the  respondent  did  take  all  relevant
    factors including human rights grounds into account before reaching her
    decision even though the appellant might disagree with  that  decision.
    There was therefore no basis on which the  judge  could  properly  have
    referred the appeal back to the respondent.

13.  I also accept Mr Biggs' submission in the light of the decision  in  SM
    and Qadir that the judge  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  her
    finding that the information provided by ETS was sufficient evidence to
    discharge the burden and standard of proof or that  she  gave  adequate
    reasons for rejecting the appellant's evidence that he  had  taken  the
    test as opposed to it being taken by a proxy.  I am therefore satisfied
    that the decision to remit the matter to the respondent should  be  set
    aside.  Mr Biggs submitted that in the light of the fact that the judge
    had found that it was not open to the respondent to rely on S-LTR2.2(a)
    it must follow that the appeal should have been allowed particularly in
    the light of the judge's comment at [39] that the respondent considered
    that if the suitability requirements were  met,  then  the  eligibility
    requirements were met.   If  the  judge  had  taken  that  view  it  is
    difficult to see why she felt that any further decision  needed  to  be
    made by the respondent.  It may be because the judge took the view that
    there was an appeal against curtailment before her as well  as  refusal
    of leave: see the reference under Notice of Decision referring to  "the
    appeal against curtailment and refusal is allowed ...".

14.  I am also not satisfied that it can necessarily be  inferred  from  the
    decision letter that even if S-LTR2.2(a) is not applicable that  it  is
    not open to the respondent to rely on the appellant's use of deception,
    if that is established, when considering suitability.  It may  be  that
    this subparagraph was wrongly identified but prima facie  it  would  be
    open to the respondent to argue that S-LTR1.6 is applicable.

15.  This appeal cannot be resolved without further submissions  as  it  was
    to all intents only part-heard before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    parties should have an opportunity of  making  further  representations
    and, if appropriate, giving further evidence  about  the  relevance  of
    deception, if proved, to the application  for  leave  to  remain  as  a
    partner.  Mr Tarlow and Mr  Biggs  both  took  the  view  that  if  the
    decision was to be re-made that should be by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and that the appeal should be re-heard.  I agree.  This will  give  the
    parties the opportunity of clarifying their submissions both in respect
    of the appeal against the  refusal  of  leave  as  a  partner  and  its
    interrelation, if any, with  the  issues  arising  in  respect  of  the
    decision to curtail the appellant's leave.

Decision

16.  I am satisfied that the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law  and  the
    decision is set aside.   The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a full rehearing.






Signed        H J E Latter                       Date: 1 June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter



