
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/36063/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                 |Determination Promulgated |
|On 29 April 2016                       |On 11 May 2016            |
|Prepared on 3 May 2016                 |                          |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    S. K.
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Markus, Counsel instructed by Howells Solicitors
                       LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr Johnson, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant is a citizen of Germany,  now  aged  22.  She  has
           lived in the UK since the age of six. At the age of nine she was
           taken into the care of her local  authority,  and  she  has  not
           lived with her mother and step father  since.  She  now  has  no
           contact with them. She has been on medication for  a  number  of
           issues  for  many  years,  and  upon  completing  her  secondary
           education became a residential student with a trust who provides
           support to meet her needs, and some employment, and this remains
           her situation.

        2. On 7 August 2014 the Appellant  applied  for  a  residence  card
           asserting by reference to  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
           Area) Regulations 2006 ["EEA  Regulations"]  that  as  a  German
           national she had lived in accordance with the Regulations for  a
           continuous  period  of  five  years  in  her  own   right,   and
           alternatively, that she was under 21 and the  direct  descendant
           of a German national who had exercised treaty rights in  the  UK
           since 1999, and  was  thus  a  family  member  by  reference  to
           Regulation 7(1)(b) who  did  not  need  to  show  dependency  or
           membership of his household because she  was  herself  a  German
           national. The Respondent was invited  to  apply  her  policy  of
           pragmatism for victims of domestic violence  in  recognition  of
           the difficulties  victims  have  in  obtaining  the  documentary
           evidence necessary to make out their claims.

        3. That application was refused on 30 August 2014  on  both  limbs.
           The Respondent was not satisfied  that  the  Appellant  met  the
           requirements of Regulation 6 or 15(1) and  considered  that  she
           was not therefore a "qualified person" in her own right for  the
           requisite period, and, was not satisfied that she was related to
           the sponsor as claimed, or indeed,  that  he  was  a  "qualified
           person" for the requisite period of time as claimed.

        4. The Appellant appealed to the First Tier Tribunal  against  that
           refusal, and her appeal was heard on  29  June  2015,  and  then
           dismissed by Immigration Judge Cope in a decision promulgated on
           14 September 2015.

        5. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision  to  the
           Upper Tribunal in grounds  that  also  double  as  the  skeleton
           argument in support of the appeal.  Permission  was  granted  by
           First Tier Tribunal Judge Parkes on 8 February 2016 on  both  of
           the two grounds advanced. These sought to challenge the decision
           upon both of the two alternative limbs by which the  application
           was made, and appeal advanced.

        6. The Respondent has served no Rule 24 response, and has lodged no
           cross appeal against the Judge's finding that the Appellant is a
           German citizen, and that her mother and  step  father  are  also
           German citizens and resident in the UK, both of  which  appeared
           to  have  been  disputed  by  the  Respondent  in  her  original
           decision.

        7. Thus the matter comes before me.







      Article 8

        8. I note that an Article 8 appeal was advanced  before  the  First
           Tier Tribunal, and dismissed by Judge Cope on the  simple  basis
           that there was  no  removal  decision.  I  also  note  that  the
           decision under appeal did not  contain  a  s120  notice  to  the
           Appellant, and that it is not suggested by either party that one
           was served otherwise. In the light of the guidance to  be  found
           in Amirteymour [2015] UKUT 466, and, TY (Sri Lanka) [2015]  EWCA
           Civ 1233, I am  satisfied  that  the  Tribunal  was  obliged  to
           confine itself to the claim under the EEA Regulations, and  that
           the Appellant was not entitled to argue that the decision  under
           appeal was a breach of her Article 8 rights. I need say no  more
           about that aspect of the appeal.

      Was the Appellant a "qualified person" at any stage?

        9. It is common ground that by Regulation 4(1)(d)(iii) a student is
           defined (inter alia)  as  one  who  has  comprehensive  sickness
           insurance cover ["CSIC"], and that the Appellant has never  held
           CSIC. She has never had the financial resources to acquire  CSIC
           on her own account, and as a child of nine who  was  taken  into
           the care of her local authority it has clearly never occurred to
           that local authority that there was any obligation  upon  it  to
           provide her with CSIC in order to safeguard  her  interests.  No
           doubt the issue was never raised either because of her practical
           ability to access the resources of the NHS free of  charge,  or,
           because as a German citizen, no one ever considered  that  there
           was any need, or obligation, to consider further her immigration
           status, or, to seek to secure a permanent right of residence for
           her position by reference to the EEA Regulations.

       10. The first limb of the appeal raised therefore the short point of
           whether it was proportionate given  the  Appellant's  particular
           circumstances for the Respondent to refuse to treat her as  ever
           having been a "qualified person", notwithstanding  the  admitted
           lack of any CSIC. Absent that requirement, the  Appellant  would
           have acquired directly the right to reside permanently in the UK
           some considerable time ago, probably by the end of 2006, because
           the  Respondent  took  no  issue  before  the  Judge  over   the
           sufficiency of the resources available to the Appellant  as  one
           in the care of her local authority, and it was accepted that she
           was in full time education throughout her childhood in  the  UK.
           (I pause to note that it was precisely because she was  in  full
           time education that third parties  were  able  to  identify  and
           raise the concerns that ultimately led to the care  order  being
           made in relation to her.)

       11. It was not argued before the Judge that the Appellant's  ability
           to access the NHS was of itself, the equivalent to holding CSIC.
           That proposition has  been  repeatedly  rejected  by  the  Upper
           Tribunal and the Court of Appeal, most recently in Ahmad  [2014]
           EWCA Civ 988. To  the  extent  that  the  Judge  understood  the
           argument advanced on behalf of the  Appellant  (as  set  out  in
           paragraphs 22-24 of Counsel's skeleton argument) as being such a
           proposition [69-74], then I accept that  he  misunderstood  that
           argument.

       12. Before the Judge the Appellant had argued that in the  light  of
           the guidance to be found in Baumbast [2003] 3CMLR 23, whilst the
           exercise of the right of residence could be subordinated to  the
           legitimate interests of a member state,  the  national  measures
           adopted  to  safeguard  those  interests  must  be  applied   in
           accordance with the principle of proportionality; ie  they  must
           be necessary and appropriate to attain the objective pursued  by
           the member state. (The need to  comply  with  the  principle  of
           proportionality was also expressly recognised  in  Ahmad  [2014]
           EWCA Civ 988.) It was argued that the Respondent's  decision  in
           this case failed to do so given her circumstances as a child  in
           care, and  the  unnecessary  cost  to  the  local  authority  of
           providing CSIC when she was able  to  access  the  NHS  free  of
           charge, and thus that her decision  failed  to  demonstrate  any
           proper   consideration    of    the    Appellant's    individual
           circumstances,  or  any  application   of   the   principle   of
           proportionality to them.

       13. The Respondent has not challenged by way of any Rule 24 response
           the assertion made in  the  grounds  of  appeal  drafted  by  Mr
           Markus, that the Appellant's case was put in  this  way  by  him
           before the Judge. Certainly Mr Markus' assertion in the  grounds
           that he did put the case in this way is amply supported  by  the
           skeleton argument that he had supplied  to  the  Respondent  and
           Judge Cope in advance of the hearing [ApB p6].  The  absence  of
           any reference to the principle of  proportionality,  or  to  the
           decision in Baumbast in  the  course  of  the  Judge's  decision
           demonstrates that the Judge must somehow have misunderstood  the
           argument being advanced, and thus  failed  to  engage  with  it.
           Indeed the Judge's complaint that there was a failure in the EEA
           Regulations to provide for  a  means  of  recognising  the  very
           particular circumstances of  an  applicant  such  as  this  one,
           simply reinforces that view [75].

       14. The applicant in Baumbast succeeded in showing that in the light
           of his own particular circumstances, the refusal  to  allow  him
           the right of permanent residence on the ground that he  did  not
           hold CSIC, was a disproportionate interference with the exercise
           of the right of residence that he derived  from  Article  18(1).
           The Appellant  was  entitled  to  a  consideration  of  her  own
           particular circumstances in the same  way,  in  order  that  the
           Respondent might properly and lawfully decide whether to  refuse
           her the right of permanent residence on the simple  ground  that
           she had never  held  CSIC  was,  or  was  not,  a  proportionate
           interference in her Article 18 right of residence.

       15. Quite simply the letter  of  30  August  2014  which  gives  the
           Respondent's reasons for the refusal of the application does not
           demonstrate any appreciation of the Appellant's  own  particular
           circumstances,  or   any   consideration   of   the   issue   of
           proportionality to those circumstances. Thus in my judgement the
           decision under appeal was not made in accordance with  the  law,
           and in my judgement the failure of the Judge  to  identify  that
           decision as such, and thus to set that decision  aside  so  that
           the Appellant's application remained outstanding and  awaited  a
           lawful decision, amounted to an error of law on his part.

       16. Mr Johnson for  the  Respondent  argued  in  reliance  upon  the
           decision in Ahmad that even  if  the  Appellant's  circumstances
           were  to  be  considered  in  the  light   of   the   issue   of
           proportionality, her application was still one that was bound to
           be dismissed, so that the error was not a material one. I do not
           agree that the likely outcome is as  clear  and  obvious  as  he
           seeks to suggest, the Appellant's circumstances  are  compelling
           as the Judge recognised himself, and a situation such as hers is
           likely to be rare. In any event his argument rather  misses  the
           point; which is that the decision under appeal was  demonstrably
           not made in accordance with the law, and thus the Appellant  was
           entitled to succeed in  her  appeal  to  the  Tribunal  to  that
           limited extent.

       17. Whilst I note that Mr Johnson placed particular weight upon  the
           dismissal of the appeal in Ahmad I note that in  that  case  the
           applicant was an adult citizen of a non member state who claimed
           to derive a right of residence indirectly through the status  of
           his economically inactive EEA national  spouse.  There  were  no
           particular circumstances in  his  case  that  would  engage  the
           principle of proportionality, and the  argument  in  his  appeal
           therefore turned upon  the  quite  different  point  of  whether
           access to the NHS  should  properly  be  considered  to  be  the
           equivalent of CSIC. In dismissing his appeal the Court of Appeal
           made express reference to "the need to apply the CSIC  condition
           in accordance with the general principles of EU law including in
           particular the principle of proportionality", but on  the  facts
           of the case that simply did not arise as an issue [44-50]. To be
           fair to him I note that Mr Johnson accepts that the  Appellant's
           circumstances are in no way equivalent to those of the applicant
           in Ahmad.

       18. Accordingly in my judgement ground 1 is made out.

      Did the Respondent properly apply her own policy; 10/2011

       19. It is common ground before me  that  the  Respondent's  decision
           makes no reference to the existence of the European  Operational
           Policy 10/2011, "The Pragmatic Approach", or to any decision  as
           to whether or not to exercise any  discretion  the  case  worker
           derived from it. This was however a policy to which those acting
           on behalf of the Appellant  had  made  specific  reference,  and
           prayed in aid, asserting that she was  the  victim  of  domestic
           violence, and that as such she should not be expected to be able
           to produce  the  same  level  of  evidence  in  support  of  her
           application as would ordinarily be expected of her [J4].

       20. Mr Johnson has sought to argue before me that the Appellant  was
           not a victim of domestic violence, and so argued that the policy
           had no application  to  her,  thereby  justifying  the  approach
           adopted by the Judge [59]. I am satisfied  that  this  argument,
           and the Judge's approach, are misconceived for two reasons.

       21. First, the report of concerns about unexplained injuries by  the
           Appellant's school to the local authority, was the  trigger  for
           intervention. The reasons for the local authority acting  so  as
           to seek a care order were sufficient of themselves, even without
           the allegations that the Appellant had subsequently made herself
           once she was older, to establish her as  a  victim  of  domestic
           violence. The local authority and the  Family  Court  would  not
           have intervened as they did  without  good  reason,  and  it  is
           absurd to suggest otherwise. Moreover the  Appellant  had  given
           evidence of what had  occurred  to  the  Judge  in  her  written
           evidence. What was being challenged  before  the  Judge  by  the
           Respondent, if anything, was the absence  of  corroboration  for
           those allegations, although in my judgement corroboration  could
           be found if needed in the actions of the local authority and the
           Family Court.  Whilst  I  accept  that  the  Appellant  had  not
           produced documentary evidence in the form listed in paragraph  8
           of the policy, it is quite plain from the wording of the  policy
           itself that this was never intended by the Respondent to  be  an
           exhaustive list, and in  my  judgement  the  evidence  that  the
           Appellant did produce was overwhelming on the issue.

       22. Second, and in any event, the Respondent did not challenge  that
           the Appellant was a victim of domestic violence in her  decision
           to refuse the application, and indeed she made no  reference  to
           the policy in issue at all. Nor was the Appellant's claim to  be
           a  victim  of  domestic  violence  ever  challenged  before  the
           Tribunal.

       23. Mr Johnson's fall back position, which was also the line adopted
           by the  Judge  [58],  was  that  the  Appellant  had  failed  to
           demonstrate that she would be placed  at  risk  of  harm  by  an
           approach to the family member in question, and that as a  result
           the policy was not engaged. There is in my judgement no merit in
           this argument either, which takes far too narrow an approach  to
           the policy. An applicant is not required to demonstrate  a  real
           risk of future harm arising from an approach to  the  individual
           concerned in order for the policy to be engaged, and the  policy
           does not state that they are. The rationale  of  the  policy  is
           plainly to avoid situations  in  which  victims  are  unable  to
           provide the evidence to demonstrate  their  entitlement  to  the
           treaty rights that they have already acquired, either because of
           their distaste of making an approach for help  to  their  former
           abuser, or, because they have made  allegations  to  the  police
           against their former abuser and it would  be  inappropriate  for
           them to then seek that individual's help,  or,  through  a  well
           founded fear of further harm at the hands of their former abuser
           arising from doing so.

       24. As it happens, in this case the Appellant's solicitors had  made
           an approach to her step-father for copies of any records he held
           that would assist in  demonstrating  that  he  was  a  qualified
           person for the requisite length of time. They had not  disclosed
           her whereabouts in so doing. He had produced some  documents  in
           response, but recognising that these were incomplete,  and  that
           he could not be compelled to do any more than he had  done,  the
           Respondent's assistance had then quite properly been  sought  by
           specific reference to the policy. As Mr Johnson accepted  it  is
           very far from clear what,  if  any,  steps  were  taken  by  the
           Respondent in response to that request in order  to  pursue  the
           detailed  enquiries   envisaged   by   the   policy,   or   what
           consideration was given to the  terms  of  the  policy  and  the
           discretions set out therein.

       25. Given the arrival of the Appellant, her  mother,  and  her  step
           father in the UK in 1999, (and the Judge's acceptance  that  all
           were German citizens) the ability to identify whether  her  step
           father was a qualified person in the period 1999-04 was  central
           to establishing that he, and  therefore  she  as  a  child,  had
           acquired a permanent right of  residence  in  2004,  or  in  any
           period thereafter prior to 2009.

       26. The available evidence suggests that for much of  the  time  the
           Appellant's step father was a qualified person in the  period  7
           October 1999 to 15 May 2006, either because he was in employment
           or  claiming  job  seekers  allowance,  although  the  available
           evidence does not identify what his status was between May  2002
           and June 2004. The  Judge  declined  to  infer  that  he  was  a
           qualified person in  this  period  too,  and  pointed  out  (not
           unreasonably) that he could simply have been outside the  UK  in
           this period. Mr Markus does not challenge  that.  His  point  is
           that had the caseworker appreciated that the policy  applied  to
           the Appellant, then  a  senior  caseworker  would  have  had  to
           determine what, if any, further enquiries should  be  made  into
           this period, and/or, whether to exercise a discretion  to  allow
           the application in any event given the particular  circumstances
           of the case and the level of evidence provided. Since  there  is
           no evidence to suggest that the policy was  ever  considered  by
           the caseworker,  there  is  no  evidence  to  suggest  that  the
           existence of these discretions  was  appreciated,  or  that  any
           decision to exercise them  or  not  was  ever  taken.  There  is
           considerable force in that argument.

       27. For my part I am satisfied that the Judge did make an  error  of
           law in his approach to the policy. It was plainly engaged by the
           evidence  produced  to  the  Respondent  in   support   of   the
           application, yet the decision to refuse the application makes no
           reference to it, and fails to demonstrate that the  case  worker
           appreciated the existence of the discretions contained  therein,
           or, that they were exercised. Thus in my judgement the  decision
           under appeal was not made in accordance with the law, and in  my
           judgement the failure of the Judge to identify that this was the
           case,  and  thus  to  set  that  decision  aside  so  that   the
           Appellant's  application  remained  outstanding  and  awaited  a
           lawful decision, amounted to a material  error  of  law  on  his
           part.

      Disposal

       28. The parties were agreed that if  that  was  my  conclusion  upon
           either ground 1, or ground  2,  that  I  should  set  aside  the
           Judge's decision to dismiss the appeal, and that I should go  on
           to remake that decision so as to allow the appeal to the limited
           extent that the Respondent's decision to dismiss the application
           was not made  in  accordance  with  the  law.  That  leaves  the
           Appellant's  application  outstanding  and  awaiting  a   lawful
           decision.

   DECISION

      The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated  on
      14 September 2015 did involve the making  of  an  error  of  law  that
      requires that decision to be set aside and remade.

      I remake the decision so as to allow the appeal to the limited  extent
      that the Respondent's decision to dismiss the application was not made
      in accordance with the law.

Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008

      Unless and until the  Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
      granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings  shall  directly  or
      indirectly identify her. This direction applies both to the  Appellant
      and to the Respondent. Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could
      lead to proceedings being brought for contempt of court.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes
Dated 3 May 2016
