
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/36096/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31 August 2016                    |On 05 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    O S P
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person with the sponsor


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. I make an anonymity order under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI  2008/2698  as  amended)  in  order  to
    protect the anonymity of the respondent's child.  This order  prohibits
    the disclosure directly or indirectly (including by the parties) of the
    identity of the respondent.  Any disclosure and breach  of  this  order
    may amount to a contempt of court.  This order shall  remain  in  force
    unless revoked or varied by a Tribunal or court.

 2. The Secretary of State appeals against the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Ghani) allowing the appeal of the respondent (hereafter
    "the claimant") against a decision to refuse her a residence card under
    the Immigration (EEA)  Regulations  2006  (SI  2006/1003  as  amended).
    Although Judge Ghani dismissed the  claimant's  appeal  under  the  EEA
    Regulations, he allowed the appeal under Article 8.

 3. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  against  Judge
    Ghani's decision to allow the appeal under Art 8.  On 19  August  2015,
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Molloy) granted the Secretary  of  State
    permission to appeal on  the  basis  that  it  was  arguable  that  the
    claimant could not rely upon Article 8 where no s.120 notice  had  been
    issued and there was no removal decision.

 4. The appeal  was  initially  listed  before  me  on  24  November  2015.
    However, the appeal was adjourned pending the  final  determination  of
    the case of Amirteymour [2015] UKUT 00466 (IAC) which it was understood
    was being appealed to the Court of Appeal  and  which  would  determine
    whether, and if  so  in  what  circumstances,  an  appellant  appealing
    against a refusal of a residence card under the EEA  Regulations  could
    rely upon Art 8.

 5. The effect of the UT's decision in Amirteymour (McCloskey J; Ockelton V-
    P and UTJ Rintoul) is neatly summarised in the headnote as follows:

         "Where no notice under Section 120 of the 2002 Act has been  served
         and where no EEA decision to remove has  been  made,  an  appellant
         cannot bring a Human Rights challenge to removal in an appeal under
         the EEA Regulations."

 6. In the result, the Court of Appeal dealt with the issue in the case  of
    TY (Sri Lanka) v  SSHD  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  1233.   The  Court  approved
    Amirteymour.

 7. The present appeal was again listed before me on 31 August 2016.

 8. The claimant was unrepresented and was accompanied by her  partner,  MV
    (the 'sponsor').

 9. I explained at the outset  of  the  hearing  that  the  effect  of  the
    decisions in Amirteymour and TY (Sri Lanka) was that the  claimant  had
    not been entitled to rely upon Art 8 before Judge Ghani.  There was  no
    s.120 notice and no removal decision.  As a consequence, the judge  had
    made an error of law.  The claimant was not entitled to rely upon Art 8
    in her current appeal and therefore  Judge  Ghani  could  not  lawfully
    allow the claimant's appeal on that basis.  The  claimant  and  sponsor
    were, not  unexpectedly,  disappointed  by  this  outcome  but  it  was
    inevitable given the binding authority in TY (Sri Lanka).  I  explained
    that the proper procedure for the claimant to assert her Art  8  rights
    was to make an application based upon Art 8 to the Home Office.

10. The judge erred in law in allowing the claimant's appeal under Art 8 as
    the claimant could not properly rely upon Art 8 in this appeal.

11. I set aside that decision and  substitute  a  decision  dismissing  the
    appeal under Art 8.

12. The claimant has not sought to appeal Judge Ghani's decision  that  she
    could not establish her entitlement to a residence card  based  upon  a
    "retained right of residence" under reg 10 following her  divorce  from
    her EEA national  husband  on  15  June  2012.   Judge  Ghani  was  not
    satisfied that her ex-husband was, as required under  the  Regulations,
    employed at the date of divorce.  Judge Ghani's decision to dismiss the
    appeal under the EEA Regulations, therefore, stands.

Decision

13. For the above reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's decision to allow  the
    claimant's appeal under Art 8 involved the making of an error  of  law.
    That decision cannot stand and is set aside.

14. The appeal is dismissed on all grounds.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

