
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/36823/2013
                                                               IA/36832/2013
                                                               IA/36835/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 2 December 2014                         |On 16 December 2014            |
|Dictated on 9 December 2014                |                               |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GIBB


                                   Between

                  Adebola Seliat Babalola (first appellant)
                Hikmat Oyindamola Babalola (second Appellant)
               Abdulmalik Olaoluwa Babalola (third appellant)
                         (NO anonymity ORDERS MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr K Olalunbosun, Solicitor, of OA Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Rahman, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The first appellant, who is a Nigerian citizen, is the  mother  of  the
    second and third appellants, who are her daughters, and her dependants.
     The second appellant is a Nigerian citizen, and the third a citizen of
    the USA.  The first appellant (the appellant) is  also  the  mother  of
    another daughter, Faiida Aderinsola Babalola, who is a citizen  of  the
    Republic of Ireland.

2.   In 2012 the appellant made  an  application  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain on the basis of long residence.  In 2013 the  appellant  applied
    for residence cards for herself and the other two appellants, as family
    members of her other daughter, on the basis of her  Irish  nationality,
    and EU citizenship.  The long residence refusals  were  accompanied  by
    removal directions, under section 47 of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.  There was  no  right  of  appeal  against  these
    decisions, but there was one against the residence card refusals, under
    the 2006 Regulations.  These appeals were dismissed  by  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Dennis, in a determination promulgated on 2 October
    2014 (following a hearing at Taylor House on 1 August 2014).

3.   Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Levin on 5 November 2014.  In the  grant  of  permission
    Judge Levin considered grounds about the failure to consider Article 8,
    and the failure to consider the best interests  of  the  children  with
    reference to section 55 of the 2009 Act;  and  a  failure  to  consider
    Article 20 of the Fundamental Treaty of the European Union (TFEU)  (and
    Zambrano), were arguable.

4.   At the hearing before me  Mr  Olalunbosun,  for  the  appellants,  made
    submissions to the effect that the  Zambrano  decision,  and  a  direct
    application of section 20 of the TFEU, could cover all EU citizens, and
    not only  those  children  that  were  in  the  country  of  their  own
    nationality.  Based on this submission the appellant's other  daughter,
    an Irish citizen, would be  deprived  of  the  right  to  live  in  the
    European Union if the appellant were to be removed to Nigeria.

5.   On this point Ms Rahman, for the respondent, submitted that  Regulation
    15A of the 2006 Regulations had responded correctly to the decisions in
    Chen, and also in Zambrano.

6.   Mr Olalunbosun's second submission was that Article 8 should have  been
    considered by the judge.  He referred to the Court of  Appeal  judgment
    in JM (Liberia) v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1402.  In her response  on  this
    point Ms Rahman, for the respondent, made the point that the judge  had
    given reasons for not considering Article 8.  At paragraph  16  of  the
    determination the judge had said that no removal  directions  had  been
    made in the decisions before him on appeal, and that  any  analysis  of
    Article 8 or the best interests of the children was therefore otiose.

Error of Law

7.   I have decided that the  judge  did  err  in  law  in  not  considering
    Article 8.  This is far from a straightforward area, and it may be that
    some further guidance on this issue will be forthcoming soon  from  the
    Upper Tribunal.  As things stand at present, however, the principle  in
    JM (Liberia) remains good, and that is that there is  no  need  for  an
    actual removal decision for there to be a need to consider human rights
    arguments, based on the need of appellants to leave the UK as a  result
    of decisions that they may be appealing against.  The lack  of  removal
    directions in itself  is  not  a  sufficient  reason,  in  view  of  JM
    (Liberia), for the Tribunal to decline to deal with an issue raised  in
    the grounds of appeal.

8.   During the course of the hearing I did  check  whether  Article  8  was
    indeed raised, and it was clear that it was,  both  in  the  First-tier
    grounds of appeal, and in the First-tier skeleton argument.

9.   Apart from this general point there is a more specific  one  applicable
    in this case.  At the hearing before me Ms Rahman, for the  respondent,
    accepted that removal directions (IS151B) were made for  the  appellant
    on 21  March  2013.   She  had  nothing  to  show  that  these  removal
    directions had been withdrawn.   Although  the  judge  was  correct  to
    identify that he was dealing only with the appeal against the  refusals
    of residence cards, nevertheless it appears that  the  position  before
    him was that there was in fact a removal  direction  in  force,  albeit
    only for the first appellant.

10.  It may be arguable that the general application  of  the  JM  (Liberia)
    principle  to  European  cases   is   incorrect,   particularly   where
    applications are being made for permanent residence, and  there  is  no
    suggestion as a result of a refusal that an applicant is being required
    to leave the UK, even voluntarily.  This family, however, do not appear
    to fall into that category.  The observations that the judge made about
    the  appellants'  immigration  history,  at   paragraph   15   of   the
    determination, and the overall circumstances, suggested that this was a
    situation in which the appellant and her children were to  be  regarded
    as having no basis of stay in the UK.

11.  In his observation at the end of paragraph 5 of the  determination  the
    judge noted that he was in no position to challenge the residual effect
    of the removal directions of March 2013, and that  he  must  limit  his
    decision to the residence card refusals.  This was undoubtedly correct,
    in that he was only considering appeals against the  latter  decisions,
    but it does appear to me, with respect, that he nevertheless fell  into
    error on the basis that he put forward as his reason  for  not  dealing
    with Article 8 the fact that no removal directions had been made in the
    decisions under appeal (paragraph 16).  The difficulty with this, quite
    apart from the general JM (Liberia)  principle,  is  that  the  removal
    direction for the appellant remained in force, and the fact that it had
    been made in connection with a different decision, did not  alter  that
    point.

12.  I have considered the  broader  submissions  made  on  the  appellants'
    behalf about Zambrano, and  the  TFEU.   It  appears  to  me  that  the
    Zambrano decision was limited to EU citizens who were in the country of
    their own nationality.  The final ruling of the Grand  Chamber  of  the
    Court of Justice of the European Union in that case was as follows:

         "Article 20 TFEU is to be interpreted as meaning that it  precludes
         a Member State from refusing a third country national upon whom his
         minor children, who are European Union citizens, are  dependent,  a
         right of residence in the Member State of residence and nationality
         of those children, and from refusing to grant a work permit to that
         third country national, insofar as  such  decisions  deprive  those
         children of the genuine enjoyment of the substance  of  the  rights
         attaching to the status of European Union citizen."

13.  This makes it clear that the decision was concerned with  residence  in
    the member state of residence and nationality of the children.  In this
    case the child that the appellant is referring  to  is  not  a  British
    citizen, but a citizen of the Republic of Ireland.  If the family  were
    in Ireland, the Zambrano argument would work.  As they are not, it does
    not.

14.  The other relevant decision,  also  reflected  in  Regulation  15A  (as
    amended) was the Chen case.  This referred to self-sufficient children.
     In this case there was no challenge by the appellant  to  the  judge's
    conclusion that she had not established such self-sufficiency.

15.  The wider principle suggested by Mr Olalunbosun would have  the  effect
    of removing the right of member states to require  self-sufficiency  in
    Chen-type cases.  Although Zambrano has been accepted, it has  such  an
    effect only for British children in the UK (or for EU citizens  in  the
    countries of their own nationality) and I cannot accept the  submission
    that there is a proper basis, by direct reference to Article 20 of  the
    TFEU, for extending the Zambrano principle as suggested.

16.  In relation to the 2006 Regulations no error has been disclosed in  the
    judge's conclusions.  In relation to the Zambrano  point,  even  if  it
    might be argued that this was not fully dealt  with,  nevertheless  any
    potential error could not be  material  given  my  remarks  above.   In
    relation to the judge not dealing at all with  Article  8,  however,  I
    find that there was a material error of law, and that aspect  falls  to
    be set aside.

17.  Within the terms of the  Practice  Statement,  giving  guidance  as  to
    whether decisions should be remade in the Upper Tribunal  or  remitted,
    this appeared to me to be a situation in which the  appellant  had  not
    had any hearing at the First-tier of the relevant point.  As  a  result
    it appeared to me an appropriate case for remittal.  The  parties  were
    both in agreement.

18.  Despite the outcome I suggested to Mr Olalunbosun, and  the  appellant,
    that serious consideration should be given to the overall position.  If
    it is accepted that the appellant and the children have  only  been  in
    the UK, most recently, since 2012, and bearing  in  mind  the  comments
    about the approach  to  children  and  education  in  the  case  of  EV
    (Philippines) v Secretary of State [2014] EWCA  Civ  874,  I  suggested
    that the appellant and her representatives should take a long hard look
    at the arguability of the Article 8 case, once it is accepted that  the
    European aspect falls away.  I considered an  immediate  remaking,  but
    there was insufficient time in the list.  Since the matter  would  have
    required an adjournment remittal remained the correct  course,  bearing
    in mind that the full facts (particularly about the children) were  not
    clear.  Nevertheless, the appellant's representatives should  be  alert
    to the issue of whether time and costs should be expended in the  event
    that, on a proper consideration of the factual circumstances, there  is
    no properly arguable case.

19.  Despite  the  involvement  of  the  appellant's  children  it  was  not
    suggested by either side that there was any need for anonymity in these
    appeals.  There  was  no  application  for  any  fee  awards.   In  the
    circumstances, despite having allowed the  appeals  on  the  Article  8
    point only it does not appear to me to be appropriate to make  any  fee
    awards.

Notice of Decision

The judge's decision dismissing the appeals is set aside  only  in  relation
to the lack of consideration of Article 8.  The findings in relation to  the
2006 Regulations remain undisturbed.

The appeals are remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  fresh  hearing,
limited to the Article 8 grounds only.



Signed        Date 2 December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Gibb

