

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/36451/2014
      IA/38235/2014
      iA/39620/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |      Sent to parties on     |
|On 17 November 2015                           |      On 22 December 2015    |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L MURRAY

                                   Between

                                   A C S G
                                    B S G
                                  G B D S G
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr S Bellara, Counsel instructed by Western
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Appellants are Brazilian nationals. The first  and  third  Appellants
   are husband and wife and the second Appellant is their daughter. She  was
   born in the UK on 26 November 2007. On 3 May  2014  the  first  Appellant
   applied for indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of  ten  years
   continuous lawful residence in the United Kingdom. That  application  was
   refused by the Respondent on 8 September 2014. The  Respondent  concluded
   that she had not demonstrated ten years continuous lawful residence.  The
   Respondent considered whether the first Appellant qualified under any  of
   the other provisions of the Immigration Rules. The  Respondent  concluded
   that the first Appellant did not benefit from the requirements of  EX.  1
   as her husband did not meet the eligibility requirements and her daughter
   was a Brazilian national and had not lived in the  UK  for  more  than  7
   years at the date  of  application.  The  Respondent  also  came  to  the
   conclusion that the first Appellant could not meet  the  requirements  of
   paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules as she did not meet the  length
   of residence requirements and there were not very  significant  obstacles
   to her integration to Brazil.


2. The third Appellant applied on 29 July 2014 for  leave  to  remain  as  a
   Tier 4 student dependent. The Respondent refused the  application  on  24
   October 2014 as the first Appellant did not have leave as a Points  Based
   System Migrant and therefore the  third  Appellant  could  not  meet  the
   requirements of paragraph 319C(b) of the Immigration Rules. Further,  his
   application was refused under paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration  Rules
   as  the  Respondent  considered  that  he  had  used  deception  in   his
   application for further leave to remain.


3. The second Appellant applied on 29 July 2014 for leave  to  remain  as  a
   Tier 4 student dependent and her application was refused under  paragraph
   319 H as the first Appellant did not have leave as a Points Based  System
   Migrant.  Consideration  was  given  to  section  55  of   the   Borders,
   Citizenship and Immigration act 2009 (BCIA) and it was concluded that the
   interests of immigration control outweighed the possible  effect  on  her
   that re-establishing family life outside the UK might have.


4. The Appellants appealed the Respondent's decisions and  First-tier  Judge
   G A Black dismissed their appeals in a decision promulgated on 3 February
   2015. She found that the Appellants did not meet the requirements of  the
   Immigration Rules, found that the third Appellant used false documents in
   his application and further found  that  there  would  be  no  breach  of
   Article 8 ECHR if the Appellants were returned to Brazil.


5. The Appellants sought  permission  to  appeal  that  decision  which  was
   granted by First Tribunal Judge P J M Hollingworth on 16  June  2015.  He
   granted permission on the basis that arguable errors of law had arisen in
   relation to the application of section 117C; the period of time spent  in
   the UK in the context of the  proportionality  exercise;  the  Article  8
   exercise outside  the  Immigration  Rules  and  the  application  of  the
   standard of proof in relation to the document verification report.


   The Grounds

6. Ground 1 asserts that the First-tier Tribunal erred in its assessment  of
   Article 8 and the best interests of the child. It is  asserted  that  the
   First-tier Tribunal failed to consider that the 7 year threshold had been
   crossed by the date of the appeal hearing and that s117B (6) of the  2002
   Act, the Rules and also case law acknowledged the significance in private
   life terms for a child of that time period in the UK. It is  also  argued
   that the First-tier Judge failed to  give  proper  consideration  to  the
   significance of the second Appellant's activities outside of  her  family
   and that her preference for  speaking  English  was  indicative  of  ties
   formed in this country. It is asserted  that  there  was  a  considerable
   amount  of  evidence  before  the  Tribunal  indicating  how  the  second
   Appellant had developed a significant private life and  identity  outside
   of her family. It is stated that there is no reference to the case law of
   E-A Nigeria Article 8 - best interests  of  child)  Nigeria  [2011]  UKUT
   00315) relied on by the second Appellant. It is further alleged that  the
   First-tier Tribunal failed to consider that the second  Appellant  should
   not be blamed for the conduct of her parents; wrongly referred  to  s117C
   of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  ("the  2002  Act");
   failed to direct herself and make  a  finding  on  whether  it  would  be
   reasonable for the second Appellant to leave the UK;  failed  to  make  a
   clear finding on what is ultimately is  in  the  best  interests  of  the
   second Appellant and failed to make it clear whether she was  considering
   Article 8 outside the Rules.


7. Ground 2 asserts that the First-tier Tribunal  materially  erred  in  her
   findings at paragraph 38 to 39 of the decision in relation to the use  of
   deception by the third Appellant. The Respondent had produced a  document
   verification report ("DVR"). The grounds of appeal argue that the  First-
   tier Tribunal failed to take into account the detailed submissions in the
   Appellants'  skeleton  argument  concerning  the  shortcomings   in   the
   evidence. It is asserted that the DVR did not identify that the  official
   contacted had the status to have access  to  the  information  about  the
   third  Appellant;  did  not  detail  what  information  was  checked   to
   demonstrate that the opinion offered by the official was reliable and  it
   was unclear what documents were involved in  correspondence  between  the
   Respondent and the official. The allegedly correct details of  the  third
   Appellant's account were not produced to show that any document contained
   false information. The  third  Appellant  gave  evidence  that  his  bank
   manager had not been contacted by the Respondent.



The Rule 24 Response

8. The Respondent's response asserts that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
   directed  herself  appropriately.   The   Appellants   demonstrated   no
   compelling  circumstances  to  be  considered  outside  the  Rules.  The
   reasoning to support the finding that there was  a  false  document  was
   clear and sustainable. Although there may have been  a  misdirection  in
   relation to the standard of proof required in paragraph 38 it only  went
   on the Appellant's favour. The Judge was entitled to place little weight
   on the email allegedly from the Appellant's bank. Following Zoumbas v  v
   Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 74), even  if  it
   were in the best interests of the third Appellant to remain in  the  UK,
   none of the parties were British, their stay had always been  precarious
   and fraud had been relied on to attempt to obtain leave.




The Hearing

9. In submissions Mr Bellara said that it was a  striking  feature  of  the
   appeal that there was no reference to section 55  of  the  BCIA  in  the
   original refusal and that was not considered in the reasons for  refusal
   letter ("RFRL"). The Respondent was fully aware that there was  a  child
   and the best interests had to  be  considered.  Counsel  asked  for  the
   matter to remitted taking into account the  family  circumstances.  That
   proposal was not taken up by the Judge. The entire assessment was flawed
   as if one looked to the determination there was no reference to  JO  and
   Others (section 55 duty) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 00517 (IAC)  and  s55.  The
   Judge did not consider that the appeal should be considered outside  the
   Rules and there was no formal  assessment  outside  the  Rules.  Clearly
   there had to have been a careful extensive examination  of  the  child's
   best interests. It may be argued that there had been a consideration  of
   the best interest of the child but it did not meet the  level  of  care.
   That was the most serious defect in the  determination.  The  Judge  had
   referred to s117 C of the 2002 Act and that was not the correct  section
   because it related to foreign criminals.


10. There was  also  the  issue  of  deception.  The  Judge  had  not  given
   sufficient  reasons.  What  appeared  to  have  happened  was  that  the
   Appellant produced rebuttal evidence. Although  not  the  most  material
   ground it needed to be assessed carefully and the Respondent's  evidence
   did not meet the required standard of proof. It was sufficient to render
   it unsafe. In addition it was incorrect that there were no  reasons  not
   to consider the Appellants' case outside the Rules.  There  should  have
   been  more  thorough  assessment.  The  Article  8   consideration   was
   incomplete. The matter should have been remitted. The Respondent  should
   have reconsidered matters in the light of JO which  was  promulgated  by
   the date of decision.


11. Mr Jarvis submitted that the search for error of law was  predicated  on
   the grounds on which permission was granted. There was no  challenge  to
   the First-tier Tribunal's approach in respect to the argument  that  the
   Respondent's decision was unlawful. That  was  a  distinct  point.  With
   regard to JO, in MK (section 55 - Tribunal options) Sierra Leone  [2015]
   UKUT 223 the President  reigned  back  on  some  of  the  findings.  The
   concession made by Mr Jarvis in MK was that where the Respondent did not
   know about the relevant child then it should go back to the Secretary of
   State. JO and MK said that the Secretary of State had to show that there
   had to have been a careful forensic examination of the best interests of
   the child but where it had taken place it did not need to  be  remitted.
   The argument did not show a flaw in the decision.  It  was  not  a  long
   determination but the Judge did make reference to the best  interest  of
   the  child  which  were  considered.  Education   was   considered   and
   extracurricular activities were found to be capable of being  replicated
   in the home country. The substance of the private life was dealt with.


12. The second ground related to the DVR. If one read paragraph  33  and  39
   it was plain that there was further evidence provided after the hearing.
   The Judge did not have a duty to accept that evidence and she dealt with
   it lawfully. She found that overall that evidence was not weighty enough
   and not persuasive enough to outweigh the DVR. She gave  lawful  reasons
   on the balance of probabilities and it  did  back  up  the  Respondent's
   decision.  Paragraphs  38  and  39  of  the  decision  were  lawful.  At
   paragraph 39 she gave reasons in detail why she did not give  weight  to
   the document from the bank. The findings were open to her. The  argument
   against the findings on the DVR was not strong.


13. Paragraph 40 of the decision was in a slightly grey area. Paragraph  276
   (iii) of the Immigration Rules required 7 years residence in the case of
   a child but both  the  Rule  and  the  2002  Act  had  a  reasonableness
   assessment. There was a danger of challenging the decision on the  basis
   of the word "reasonable" not being used. Any deficiency in  relation  to
   the words used was a cosmetic matter. The  Judge  said  at  the  end  of
   paragraph 40 that she had actually conducted  an  exercise  outside  the
   Rules. She had made reference to the best interests  of  the  child  and
   private life factors. Paragraph 40 was Article  8  compliant.  She  also
   took into account that the Appellant failed to meet the Rules. She  used
   the words "qualifying child" and the reference to  section  117C  was  a
   typographical error. She had dealt with both sides of the  balance.  The
   best interests of the child was a discrete  matter  and  then  when  the
   proportionality matters came into play then the immigration factors  did
   come into the balance. That was relevant as it was part of the balancing
   exercise. She was not holding the immigration history against the  child
   as part of the best interest assessment but taking it  into  account  in
   the proportionality assessment. When one put aside the point that  there
   is a typographical errors and the arguments in and outside the Rule  she
   had taken into account relevant  factors.  The  Appellants'  status  was
   precarious. The decision "did the job".


14. Mr Bellara said in reply that the proportionality exercise  was  missing
   in this decision. At paragraph 40 there was a  focus  under  the  Rules.
   Although the Judge touched on family life there were  compelling  enough
   circumstances outside the Rules that would have engaged a further set of
   circumstances. For example there could have been  greater  detail  about
   the school. One could not be sure whether the  Judge  applied  a  higher
   stringent test in relation to deception. There seemed  to  have  been  a
   focus on the assessment under the Rules. Mr Jarvis had said that it  had
   been considered but it had not gone far enough. The second stage had not
   conducted. If the Judge had the deception issue in mind when considering
   s117 it seemed that the Judge when considering the email evidence  could
   have asked the primary decision maker  to  verify  it.  She  had  simply
   stated that Respondent had not had time to consider it.  There  was  not
   enough evidence as to why the higher burden was met. Having referred  to
   s117, there may have been an impact on proportionality.  The  period  of
   time spent in UK was not assessed properly. If she had s117C in mind the
   whole assessment was in error.


15. Mr Jarvis submitted that if I were to find a material error of  law  the
   case could be retained in the Upper Tribunal. Mr Bellara submitted  that
   it should be remitted to First-Tier.


Discussion and Findings


16. I find that the First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  error  of  law  in
   relation  to  the  Article  8  assessment  with  regard  to  the  second
   Appellant. The First-tier Tribunal dealt with Article 8 in paragraph  40
   of the decision. The Judge entitles that consideration  "Article  8  and
   the Best Interests of the Child". She  concluded,  correctly,  that  the
   second Appellant could not meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE  as
   she had not demonstrated 7 years lawful residence prior to the making of
   the application. She then stated that it was accepted that there was  no
   breach of family life because the family would remain  together  and  be
   removed to Brazil  together.  This  was  also  correct  because  it  was
   conceded by the Appellants at paragraph  31  of  the  skeleton  argument
   drafted by Mr Harris, Counsel at the  hearing.  She  then  moved  on  to
   consider the second Appellant's best interests.  She  dealt  with  those
   best interests  and  her  approach  was  lawful  as  she  treated  those
   interests as a primary consideration which needed to be addressed  first
   (ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4).   She addressed the evidence as to  where
   the second Appellant's best interests lay and the fact that reliance was
   placed on her attendance at school and her  extracurricular  activities.
   She found that those activities could be continued in Brazil and were of
   the usual range pursued by a child of her age. These findings were  open
   to her on the evidence. It is clear that she had regard to the  evidence
   in  the  Appellant's  bundle  from  the  primary  school.  The  evidence
   submitted on behalf of the second  Appellant  in  respect  of  her  best
   interests before the First-tier Tribunal consisted of witness statements
   from both her parents and a letter from her primary school. The  witness
   statements described the  second  Appellant's  achievements  and  extra-
   curricular activities and her integration into the UK. The  letter  from
   her primary school stated that she was doing well academically and  that
   to move her would be a tremendous shock.


17. The First-tier Tribunal accepted that  she  had  established  a  private
   life in the UK and had regard to her age, the nature of  her  activities
   and her adaptability given her age.  The First-tier Tribunal  identified
   that the second Appellant's "main interest" lay in being brought  up  by
   her immediate family. These findings accorded with established case  law
   that  correct  starting  point  in  considering  the  welfare  and  best
   interests of a young child is that it is in  the  best  interests  of  a
   child to live with and be brought up by his or her parents,  subject  to
   any very strong contra-indication (E-A (Article 8 -  best  interests  of
   child) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00315). Whilst the  First-tier  Tribunal  did
   not cite E-A the decision accords with the ratio of that case.


18. Further, the First-tier Tribunal did not, as the grounds  assert,  blame
   the second Appellant for the conduct of her parents. It  is  clear  from
   the  consistent  jurisprudence  of  the  higher  courts  that  the  best
   interests of a  child  are  an  integral  part  of  the  proportionality
   assessment under article 8 ECHR and a  child  must  not  be  blamed  for
   matters for which he or she is not responsible, such as the conduct of a
   parent (ZH (Tanzania [2011] UKSC4, Zoumbas v Secretary of State for  the
   Home Department [2013] UKSC 74)).   Further, the best interests  of  the
   child are to be determined by  reference  to  the  child  alone  without
   reference to the immigration history or  status  of  either  parent  (EV
   (Philippines) and others v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
   [2014] EWCA Civ 874).  The First-tier Tribunal found that  the  elements
   of the second Appellant's private life could be replicated in Brazil and
   that her best interests were to be brought up with her immediate family.
   She made these findings without reference to the immigration history  or
   status of either parent.  She was entitled to take account of  the  fact
   that the second Appellant had no lawful leave in the UK as part  of  the
   proportionality assessment when considering what weight to give  to  the
   second Appellant's private life. She found that the second Appellant had
   failed to meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules as a  dependant
   of a Tier 4 student. That was a factor which  she  could  lawfully  take
   into account in an assessment of proportionality.


19.  Whilst the First-tier Tribunal referred to section  117C  of  the  2002
   Act, it is clear that this was a typographical error. It is evident when
   looking at the decision as a whole and her  specific  reference  to  the
   second Appellant as a qualifying child in paragraph  40  that  she  knew
   that none of the Appellants were foreign criminals  and  did  not  apply
   section 117C.


20. It is asserted in the grounds that the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to
   consider that the 7 year threshold had been crossed by the date  of  the
   hearing and that section 117 B (6) of the 2002 Act applied.  I find that
   this assertion is not correct. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  states  in
   paragraph 40 that the second Appellant had resided in the UK  for  seven
   years and was a "qualifying child". This was clear reference to  section
   117 B (6). It is correct that she did not use the word  "reasonable"  in
   her assessment. However, I consider that when  one  has  regard  to  her
   reasoning in paragraph 40 it  is  evident  that  she  is  assessing  the
   reasonableness of the child leaving the UK. In so doing  she  took  into
   account the fact that she was here as the dependant of a  student  whose
   residence was in a  temporary  capacity  and  who  failed  to  meet  the
   requirements of long residence. This approach  also  accords  with  E  A
   where the Upper Tribunal stressed that those  who  have  their  families
   with them during a period of study in the UK must do so in the light  of
   the expectation of return.


21. Whilst the First-tier Tribunal made reference at the  end  of  paragraph
   40 to there being no compelling circumstances to lead  her  to  consider
   "unvarnished" Article 8 outside the Rules, she did conduct an assessment
   of the second Appellant's best interests and the proportionality of  her
   removal in paragraph 40. She took into account all relevant  factors  on
   both sides of  the  balance  and  it  was  open  to  her  to  find  that
   notwithstanding the fact she had been in the UK for 7 years from  birth,
   her removal was proportionate in the light of her age, her  adaptability
   and the immigration status of her parents.  In Azimi-Moayed  and  Others
   (decisions affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC) the
   Tribunal summarized the best  interests  of  the  child  and  noted,  at
   paragraph 13 (iv) that seven years from age four is likely  to  be  more
   significant to a child than the first seven years of  life.  Very  young
   children are focussed on their parents rather than their peers  and  are
   adaptable. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  accorded  with  this
   observation.


22. Mr  Bellara  also  argued  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should  have
   remitted the second Appellant's case to the Secretary  of  State  for  a
   lawful assessment under section 55 BCIA. Firstly, that was not a  ground
   on which permission was sought from the First-tier  Tribunal.  Secondly,
   it was not recorded as a submission before the First-tier  Tribunal  nor
   was it argued in the Appellants'  skeleton  argument.   Thirdly,  it  is
   clear from MK (section 55 - Tribunal options) Sierra Leone  [2015]  UKUT
   223 (IAC) that where the Tribunal finds that there has been a breach  of
   either of the section  55  duties,  one  of  the  options  available  is
   remittal to  the  Secretary  of  State  for  reconsideration  and  fresh
   decision. The Tribunal may decide not to remit where satisfied  that  it
   is sufficiently equipped to make an  adequate  assessment  of  the  best
   interests of any affected child.


23. The Secretary of State considered section 55 of the BCIA in  the  second
   Appellant's refusal  letter.  The  consideration  was  brief  but  there
   appears to have been little evidence submitted with the application.  In
   any event, the First-tier Tribunal was not invited to  find  that  there
   was a breach of section 55 or that the matter should be remitted. It was
   not a ground in respect of which permission was sought and it  was  open
   to the First-tier Tribunal to consider the best interests of the  second
   Appellant on the evidence before her.


24. It is clear that the First-tier Tribunal did not conduct  an  assessment
   of the first and third Appellant's circumstances outside the Immigration
   Rules. The grounds argue that the First-tier Tribunal's findings outside
   the Rules are materially flawed in respect of the second  Appellant  and
   consequently the other Appellants. In Singh and  Khalid  v  SSHD  [2015]
   EWCA Civ 72 the Court of Appeal opined at paragraph [64]  "there  is  no
   need to conduct a full separate examination of Art 8 outside  the  Rules
   where, in the circumstances of a particular case, all  the  issues  have
   been addressed in the consideration under the Rules." It is  not  argued
   that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should  have   conducted   a   separate
   examination of the first and third Appellants' case  outside  the  Rules
   save for in relation to the second Appellant.


25. The Appellants  also  argued  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in
   finding  that  the  third  Appellant  used  deception.  The   First-tier
   Tribunal's findings in relation to deception are at paragraphs 38 and 39
   of the decision. She found that the DVR:


       38.  "established the evidence of deception to the higher degree and
       it is cogent evidence in support.... The DVR clearly concludes  that
       the figures shown in the document produced by A3 had  been  inflated
       as compared with the true account movement, although  those  figures
       were not  given.  There  is  no  doubt  that  officials  made  these
       enquiries with the bank and there is sufficient information  in  the
       DVR to confirm this. The complaints made on behalf of A3 are  simply
       unsustainable. The DVR can be relied on as evidence of deception.


       39.  I did not find the evidence of A3 to be credible or reliable. I
       place little weight on the email purporting to come from  the  bank.
       The respondent had no opportunity to consider the same and there  is
       nothing on the document  to  indicate  that  it  is  from  the  bank
       Bradesco. I find his account of having made contact with his bank is
       wholly lacking in credibility and unsupported. He  has  provided  no
       credible explanation for the increased figures produced  by  him  in
       the bank statement. I am satisfied that A3 relied  on  deception  in
       support of his application under the PBS. I dismiss the appeal under
       paragraph 322.



26. The Respondent refused the third Appellant's application because it  was
   said he had used deception in his application by submitting a false bank
   statement which had been confirmed to be false by the issuing authority.
   The application was therefore refused under paragraph 322  (1A)  of  the
   Immigration Rules.


27. The document verification report is in  the  Respondent's  bundle.   The
   document centre overseas request form gives the third Appellant's  name,
   bank name, account number, account  number  and  appends  two  financial
   scanned documents the content of which is not included. According to the
   detailed verification results the verifier  who  works  at  the  British
   Consulate in Rio De Janeiro concluded that the bank document was  false.
   According to the Respondent's contact history the contact detail for the
   bank was searched online. An official from the bank answered  the  phone
   and asked to receive the documents by email. Later,  the  same  official
   confirmed that the letter was not  an  accurate.  The  name  and  number
   account did match what  they  had  on  their  systems  but  the  account
   movement involved higher amounts than the real account  had.   According
   to the report, the information provided was the Appellant's  bank  name,
   account number and the balance of R$13,334,14. The information  verified
   was the Appellant's name, account number but the balance did  not  match
   the information provided.


28. It is of note that the bank statement provided by  the  third  Appellant
   with his application showed a final balance of $13,334,14 and  his  name
   and bank account number  on  the  bank  statement  correspond  with  the
   information said to have been provided by the Respondent to his bank.  I
   find that the First-tier Tribunal was entitled to find on the  basis  of
   this evidence that the officials made these enquires with the  bank  and
   there was sufficient evidence in the DVR to confirm this. She considered
   the evidence that the third Appellant had  produced  in  rebuttal.  That
   evidence is described at paragraph 33 of  the  decision.  The  Appellant
   said that he had telephoned his bank in Brazil a month before and spoken
   to the manager whose name he did not know. He received an email from the
   bank in Portuguese which was not before the First-tier Tribunal  at  the
   hearing. He submitted it with a translation  after  the  hearing.     He
   said that if any authority had checked his bank he would have been  sent
   notification.


29. It is clear  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  took  that  evidence  into
   account at paragraph 39 of the decision and found it  wanting  and  gave
   adequate and sustainable reasons for that finding. The Appellant had not
   produced any supporting evidence to show that he had spoken to his  bank
   a month before and hence she was entitled to find that his  account  was
   unsupported.  The post-hearing evidence consisted of an  email  with  an
   uncertified translation and she was entitled to find that  the  evidence
   was insufficient to demonstrate that it was from the  third  Appellant's
   bank and to attach little weight to it. On the basis of  this  evidence,
   her  finding  that  the  third  Appellant  had  provided   no   credible
   explanation for the increased figures in the bank statement was open  to
   her.


30. In R(on the application of Giri) [2015] EWCA Civ it was  held  that  the
   statement in JC (Part 9 HC 395 - burden of proof - China)  [2007]  UKAIT
   27 that, in relation to a question of deception, the standard  of  proof
   would be at the higher end of the spectrum of  balance  of  probability,
   was incorrect.  The standard to be applied is the  civil  standard.  The
   more serious the allegation or the more serious the consequences if  the
   allegation is proved, the stronger must be the evidence before  a  court
   will find the allegation proved on the  balance  of  probabilities.  The
   First-tier Tribunal's self-direction with  regard  to  the  standard  of
   proof was correct in respect of the requirement for the need for  cogent
   evidence but arguably she placed too high a burden on the Respondent  in
   stating that the deception needed to be proved  to  "a  higher  degree".
   However, as the Respondent asserts in the R24  response,  if  she  found
   that the Respondent had demonstrated the deception to a higher  standard
   than required that only went in the third Appellant's favour. For  those
   reasons therefore, I find that the First-tier Tribunal did  not  err  in
   her finding in relation to deception.


Conclusions:

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision and the Appellants' appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                             Date




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray


