
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/36523/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:  Manchester                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 27th January 2016                 |On 28th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                          Oluwaseun Oyemade Aikomo
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Youssefian, DJ Webb & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria born on the 9th  August  1986.
       He appeals with permission[1] the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
       (Judge Robson)[2] to dismiss his appeal against a decision to  refuse
       to grant him indefinite leave to remain.

    2. The matter in issue before the First-tier Tribunal  was  whether  the
       Appellant had accrued ten years continuous lawful  residence  in  the
       United Kingdom so as to qualify for leave to remain  under  paragraph
       276B of the Immigration Rules. The sole matter in issue was whether a
       break in the Appellant's leave during 2005 should  be  treated  as  a
       break in his  continuous  lawful  residence,  having  regard  to  the
       Respondent's published policy and the Rules themselves.

    3. Judge Robson decided that matter in the Respondent's favour  and  the
       appeal was dismissed under the Rules and on  Article  8  grounds.  In
       granting the Appellant permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
       Judge Reeds found it to be arguable that in doing so Judge Robson had
       erred in failing to  conduct  a  complete  proportionality  balancing
       exercise, having regard  to  the  particular  circumstances  why  the
       Appellant had not managed to get his application in on time  back  in
       2005.

    4. The matter came before the Upper Tribunal on the 30th September 2015.
       In her written decision dated 1st October 2015 Upper  Tribunal  Judge
       Plimmer found that Judge Robson had materially erred  in  failing  to
       make findings of fact and to adequately address Article  8.  She  set
       the decision aside with the intention of  re-making  it  at  a  later
       date. In doing so she noted that at the date  of  the  appeal  before
       her, the Appellant had  now  apparently  accrued  the  ten  years  of
       continuous residence required  under  the  rule,  that  period  being
       calculated from the 3rd July 2005.  Judge Plimmer gave the Respondent
       an opportunity to consider this point and gave  directions  that  the
       case was to be reviewed prior to the next hearing.

    5. The Respondent actioned Judge Plimmer's directions and sent a request
       to the caseowner in Leeds that the case was to be  reviewed.  On  the
       26th December  2015  the  office  of  the  Respondent  in  Leeds  was
       submerged in floodwater and the Appellant's file was lost. So it  was
       that when the matter came before me today, Ms Johnstone had to  offer
       the  Respondent's  apologies  for  not  having  complied  with  Judge
       Plimmer's directions. No review had  taken  place,  but  clearly  the
       Respondent cannot be blamed for that.

    6. Ms Johnstone had however acted with her customary diligence  and  had
       pursued the relevant papers in the few days she  had  been  given  to
       prepare the case. She was able to  confirm,  with  reference  to  the
       Respondent's electronic record, that the Appellant  had  indeed  held
       continuous valid leave since the 3rd July 2005 to date. She  knew  of
       no reason why the Appellant could not qualify  under  paragraph  276B
       for indefinite leave  to  remain.  She  invited  me  to  re-make  the
       decision in the appeal on the evidence that was before me.

    7. I have done so. I am satisfied that the Appellant continues today  to
       hold valid leave to remain and that he has done so for  a  continuous
       period since July 2005. The only ground for refusal was  the  alleged
       break in leave in May - June of 2005 but that is  not  now  relevant.
       This being an in-country appeal I must decide, at  the  date  of  the
       appeal before me, whether the Appellant meets the requirements of the
       relevant rule. It being conceded that he does, the appeal is allowed.

       Decisions

    8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

    9. I remake the remaining issue in the appeal as follows:

           "the appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules".

   10. I was not asked to make an anonymity direction and on the facts I see
       no reason to do so.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           27th January 2016
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission was initially refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge JM Holmes
on the 2nd March 2015 but granted upon renewed application by Upper
Tribunal Judge Reeds in an undated decision
[2] Determination promulgated 8th January 2015

