
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/36050/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th February 2016                         |On 18th April 2016            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                             mr Chikku Varghese
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No attendance
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen  of  India  born  on  13th  May  1991.   The
    Appellant entered the United Kingdom on 25th  May  2011  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student with valid entry clearance until 30th September 2013.
     This entry clearance was  extended  until  31st  December  2015.   The
    Appellant contends that  he  requested  permission  from  his  college,
    London St. Andrew's College, to travel to India in April  2014  due  to
    his father allegedly being taken seriously ill.  However the  Appellant
    did not depart from the UK  until  12th  June  2014  as  the  Appellant
    contends he was helping his friend Sreeja Rajendra,  to  obtain  a  new
    passport.

 2. On 3rd September 2014, when the Appellant returned to the UK, the  port
    officer acting in his capacity as the representative of the Respondent,
    cancelled the Appellant's leave to remain alleging that  the  Appellant
    had employed false representation in his previous application for leave
    to remain and that the Respondent was satisfied that the Appellant used
    TOEIC obtained fraudulently.  Further it  was  also  alleged  that  the
    Appellant had  not  undertaken  his  studies  at  London  St.  Andrew's
    College.

 3. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Kainth sitting at Richmond  on  31st  July  2015.   In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 20th August  2015  the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed.

 4. On 2nd September 2015 Grounds  of  Appeal  were  lodged  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On 31st December  2015  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Pooler granted permission to appeal.  He noted that the application for
    permission was made in time and that it was submitted  that  the  judge
    had erred in law by dismissing the appeal without scrutiny and  failing
    to appreciate the standard of evidence required; failing to make  clear
    findings; and relying on documentary evidence submitted on the date  of
    the hearing.  Judge Pooler considered that it  was  arguable  that  the
    judge had erred in law noting that the judge had stated at paragraph 70
    that he did not think it appropriate to dissect in any great detail the
    statements upon which  the  Respondent  relied  as  evidence  that  the
    Appellant had employed deception; and at paragraph 23  that  the  judge
    appeared to do no more than adopt  the  Respondent's  analysis  of  and
    reasons for the decision.  Further at paragraph 18 Judge  Pooler  noted
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had referred  in  general  terms  to
    concerns of the widespread use of fraud, relying on evidence adduced by
    the Respondent in the hearing at which  the  Appellant,  who  was  then
    unrepresented, had no warning.  He considered arguably that  the  judge
    had failed to make  findings  on  matters  in  issue,  failed  to  give
    adequate  reasons,  and  committed  a  procedural  irregularity   which
    resulted in unfairness and/or misdirected himself in law.

 5. On 7th January 2016 the Secretary of State responded to the Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  The Respondent opposes  the  Appellant's  appeal
    and submits inter alia  that  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    directed himself appropriately.  In the substantive  paragraph  of  the
    Rule 24 response, the Secretary of State contends that the  Appellant's
    ETS language  certificate  was  declared  by  the  Educational  Testing
    Service to be invalid.  The Secretary of State contends that the  judge
    considered this incontrovertible evidence with other relevant  evidence
    and in the light of relevant case law arrived at the  conclusion  which
    was, on the evidence presented, open to him.

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The Appellant does not attend.  There is  however
    produced to me a letter by his  instructed  solicitors,  Legend,  dated
    11th February  2016  stating  that  due  to  financial  stringency  the
    Appellant is not in a position to attend  the  hearing  personally  and
    that they have been instructed by their client to ask that  the  matter
    be dealt with on the papers.  Quite properly the clerk to the  Tribunal
    responded, advising that the matter would remain in the  list  so  that
    the Home Office representatives could make oral submissions.  There are
    no further written representations made on  behalf  of  the  Appellant.
    Whilst I appreciate that he may not  personally  be  in  the  financial
    position to instruct solicitors, the fact remains that  he  has  chosen
    personally not to attend.  In such circumstances I consider the Grounds
    of Appeal as being his submissions in this matter.

Submissions/Discussion

 7. Mr Clarke takes me to the Grounds of Appeal and points  out  that  they
    raise issues that were never before the First-tier  Tribunal  and  that
    this is an attempt to re-litigate the  matter.   He  takes  me  to  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge which at paragraphs 16 and 17
    set out the evidence of the Respondent that is relied upon, this  being
    the  statements  of  Rebecca  Collings  and  Peter  Millington.   These
    statements have been used in many appeals.  Mr Clarke points out to  me
    that that evidence is not objected to.  What he submits is  now  raised
    are issues that would not in any way  discharge  the  findings  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 8. So far as there is a challenge made to the evidence  at  interview,  he
    submits that that has been very thoroughly dealt with and,  to  use  Mr
    Clarke's words, "- the Appellant was all over the  place".   He  points
    out that the judge could only rely on the evidence that was before  him
    and I am referred to the decision of R (On the application of  Gazi)  v
    the Secretary of State for the Home Department (ETS - judicial  review)
    IJR [2015] UKUT 00327 (IAC).  He submits that considering the facts  of
    this matter there was enough evidence for the  Respondent  to  issue  a
    Section 10 notice to the high degree of probability in connection  with
    their own policy.   He  takes  me  to  the  evidence  in  the  hearing,
    particularly paragraphs 11 to 13 as recorded  by  the  judge,  and  the
    criticisms expressed therein.  In such circumstances  he  submits  that
    the Appellant's case has not been made out and he asked me to  find  no
    material error of law.

The Law

 9.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

10. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Case Law

11. R (On the application of Gazi) v the Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department (ETS - judicial review)  IJR  [2015]  UKUT  00327  (IAC)  is
    authority for stating that a challenge to the strength and  quality  of
    the evidence underpinning the Secretary of State's decision to remove a
    student from the United Kingdom under Section 10 of the Immigration and
    Asylum Act 1999, on the ground of fraud in procuring  a  TOEIC  English
    language qualification, is best suited to the fact-finding forum of the
    First-tier  Tribunal  and  is  unsuitable  for  determination   by   an
    application for judicial review.

12. As the president of the Tribunal  quoted  therein,  the  evidence  must
    always prove to a high degree of probability that  deception  has  been
    used to gain the leave, whether or not an  admission  of  deception  is
    made.  The onus - as always in such situations  -  is  on  the  officer
    making the assertion to prove his case.

13. The Tribunal must  evaluate  and  determine  the  applicant's  improper
    purpose challenge by reference to the material presumptively considered
    by or available to the decision-maker when the  impugned  decision  was
    made.  The Tribunal has to be satisfied that the  evidence  upon  which
    the impugned decision was made has the hallmarks of care, thoroughness,
    underlying expertise and sufficient reliability.

Findings

14. It is against that background that I have to consider  whether  or  not
    there has been a material error of law in the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.  I emphasise that I am not rehearing  the  appeal.
    I have given full and detailed consideration to the Grounds  of  Appeal
    and I am not persuaded that those grounds show that there has been  any
    material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.



15. This is a judge  who  has  given  very  careful  consideration  to  the
    evidence as produced and has made strong criticisms at paragraphs 11 to
    13 as to the inconsistencies in the Appellant's testimony.   The  judge
    has then gone on to consider the law and the generic evidence  produced
    by the Secretary of State at paragraphs 16 to 17.

16. There is no further  evidence  produced  whatsoever  to  even  try  and
    remotely persuade me that the judge has not made findings that  he  was
    not entitled to.   Indeed  for  reasons  best  known  to  himself,  the
    Appellant has chosen not to personally attend.  I acknowledge  that  he
    claims that this is for financial reasons but that cannot  explain  his
    own personal failure to attend.  It may well explain his failure to  be
    able to instruct solicitors.

17. I am satisfied having given anxious scrutiny to  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge that it is well-reasoned and that  the  judge
    has made clear findings which he was entitled to.  The submissions  and
    arguments in the Grounds of Appeal put forward amount  to  little  more
    than an attempt to disagree with the finding of the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge and to re-argue the case.  In  such  circumstances  there  is  no
    material error of law disclosed  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge and the Appellant's appeal is dismissed and the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law and the Appellant's appeal is  dismissed  and  the  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.





Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
