
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/36647/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29th July, 2016 Given                      |On 10th August, 2016          |
|Extempore Signed and                          |                              |
|sent for Promulgation                         |                              |
|on 5th August, 2016                           |                              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                          MR GEORGE MARTIN MCCARTHY
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Mair of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica who was born on 10th  July,  1961
    and on 15th November, 2002 he  married  a  Shirley  McCarthy,  formerly
    Shirley Madden, a British and Irish dual national.

2.   He entered the United Kingdom on 12th May, 2002, as a visitor  and  was
    subsequently served with a  removal  notice  on  7th  July,  2013.   He
    claimed asylum, but this was  refused  on  16th  June,  2014  and  that
    decision was subsequently withdrawn on 23rd June, 2011.  On 26th March,
    2004, he sought indefinite leave to  remain  as  a  spouse  of  an  EEA
    national which was refused without a right of appeal on 9th July, 2004.
     At the time he had exhausted appeal rights.  On  4th  July,  2004,  he
    sought  a  residence  card  and  although  the  original  refusal   was
    reconsidered, it was subsequently maintained on 20th April, 2007.

3.   On 1st May, 2014 the appellant sought a derivative  residence  card  as
    confirmation of a right of  residence  as  the  principal  carer  of  a
    British citizen on the basis of the ECJ judgment in the  case  of  Ruiz
    Zambrano C3409 and he appealed under Regulation 26 of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (even  though  it  must  have
    been clear to those advising him that he could  not  qualify)  and,  or
    Section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, against
    the respondent's decision taken on 4th August, 2014, to refuse to issue
    a  derivative  residence  card.   This  appeal  has  a  lengthy,   very
    complicated and sad history.

4.   The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and  his  appeal  was
    heard by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Simpson  in  Manchester  on  4th
    February, 2015.  In her determination, she concluded that the appellant
    was not entitled to a derivative residence card, because he was not his
    wife's primary carer, since either of  her  daughters  could  take  the
    role, they were both exempt persons for the purposes of the Regulations
    and his wife would still be able to reside within the EU or EEC even if
    the appellant were required to leave the UK, particularly  as  she  has
    three adult daughters living within a ten mile radius of her home.  The
    judge was aware of the fact that  the  appellant  had  applied  to  the
    Secretary of State for leave to remain on the basis of  his  Article  8
    rights and she made various findings and  concluded  in  the  light  of
    those findings that she would allow the appeal to the  extent  that  it
    still remained for the Secretary of State to make an Article 8 decision
    based on her findings.

5.   Today the appellant  sought  to  challenge  Judge  Simpson's  decision,
    arguing that a residence card should have  been  issued  and  that  the
    judge should have made the decision under Article  8  and  allowed  the
    appellant's appeal outright.  The respondent  cross  appealed,  arguing
    that Judge Simpson correctly refused the  EEA  Regulations  appeal  and
    arguing that the judge should not have  made  an  Article  8  decision,
    because the appeal was an EEA Regulations appeal.

6.   After hearing much argument and  both  representatives  taking  further
    instructions, it now transpires that the Secretary of State has,  since
    the hearing  of  the  appeal,  considered  the  appellant's  Article  8
    application, but did so ignoring the findings made by Judge Simpson, as
    a result of which the appellant has given Notice of Appeal to the First-
    tier Tribunal. So there is also an appellant's appeal  pending  in  the
    First-tier.

7.   For the Secretary of State, Mr Harrison maintains that the decision  to
    refuse the derivative residence card was a  correct  decision  in  law,
    because the appellant is not his wife's primary  carer.   He  has  also
    pointed out that at the time the judge made her decision  she  did  not
    err in making findings in respect of the appellant's  Article  8  claim
    and not allowing it outright.  Miss Mair, for the appellant, agrees and
    they have both agreed, in my view sensibly, that this appeal should  be
    dismissed.

8.   Counsel and the Presenting Officer have both agreed that Judge  Simpson
    did not make any error of law and consequently I  uphold  the  decision
    made by her.

9.   In doing so I hope that the decision of Judge Simpson  will  be  placed
    before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  during  the  course  of   the
    appellant's Article 8 appeal and I  hope  also  that  a  copy  of  this
    determination will be placed before the judge.

10.  I find that Judge Simpson  did  not  make  any  error  of  law  in  her
    determination which will stand.  The appeal under Regulation  15(a)  of
    the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 is dismissed.  The human  rights
    appeal is still to be decided in the light  of  the  findings  made  by
    Judge Simpson.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD
I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
