
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/36568/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Phoenix House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 October 2015                   |On 3 November 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                              MR MD ABDUL KADER
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr, K Shikder of Counsel
For the respondent:    Ms Willcocks- Briscoe Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department. The respondent is Mr Kader. However for the convenience,  I
    shall continue to refer to Mr Kader as the appellant and the  Secretary
    of State as the respondent which are the designations they  had  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal against the  determination
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Roopnarine-Davies allowing the appellant's
    appeal against the decision of the respondent dated 13  September  2014
    cancelling the appellant's leave to remain in the United Kingdom  as  a
    Tier 4 (General) Student, under the  points-based  system  pursuant  to
    paragraph 321A (1) of the Immigration Rules.

 3. Permission to appeal  was  initially  refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Pooler and on a renewed application, Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic granted
    the respondent permission to appeal on 27 July 2015, stating that it is
    arguable that the Judge materially erred in  law  in  failing  to  have
    proper  regard  to  the  evidence  submitted  by  the  respondent  that
    appellant's English test results had been  invalidated  by  the  tester
    which meant that he  had  no  valid  certificate  as  required.  It  is
    arguable  that  the  Judge  should  have  considered  the  respondent's
    decision to cancel leave in the context of the appellant being  without
    a valid language certificate.

    First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings

 4.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  for  the
    following  reasons  which  I  summarise.  Paragraph  321A  (1)  of  the
    Immigration Rules provides for the cancellation of a person's leave  to
    enter or remain which is in force  on  his  arrival  in  whilst  he  is
    outside the United Kingdom, where "there has  been  such  a  change  of
    circumstances of that person's case since the  leave  was  granted  and
    that it should be cancelled". It is a mandatory ground of cancellation.
    Whilst the respondent retains the discretion in exercise of  the  power
    no such option is open to the Tribunal. In JC (Part 9 HC 395-burden  of
    proof) China [2007] UKAIT 00027, it is stated that deception means  the
    making of false representations or submitting false documents  (whether
    or not material to the application) of  failing  to  disclose  material
    facts. This  is  a  serious  allegation  and  must  be  proved  by  the
    respondent on a balance of probability. False means actual dishonesty.

 5. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 6 October 2009  with  leave
    as a Tier 4 General Student, such leave  being  valid  until  13  April
    2013. Leave was subsequently extended to  study  for  an  MA  until  30
    January 2014. Further leave was granted on 22 April 2014 to remain as a
    Tier 2 General Migrant Worker until 11 May 2017.  Leave  was  cancelled
    when the appellant was returning from a holiday  in  Bangladesh  on  20
    August 2014 at Port.

 6. In the explanatory statement of 27 March 2015 (it is doubted  that  the
    appellant has received this given the date  of  the  statement)  it  is
    clear that the  respondent  based  her  decision  on  the  findings  of
    widespread fraud in relation to  ETS  Certificates  arising  out  of  a
    general enquiry into the process  by  the  Home  Office.  Deception  on
    behalf of the appellant has not been particularised.  A  transcript  of
    the respondent's interview with the appellant on 21 August 2014  showed
    that the appellant responded to the questions put to him at the airport
    in an open and straightforward manner and in articulate English.

 7. The explanatory  statement  makes  no  reference  to  any  findings  of
    inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence at his interview (paragraph
    18 onwards). Rather the respondent relied on the evidence of ETS in the
    enquiry which is asserted was produced by a "highly diligent  process".
    I agree that the respondent has failed to  prove  the  precedent  facts
    necessary for the exercise of the power in paragraph 321 A (1) in  line
    with the case of RP (proof of forgery) Nigeria [2006] UKAIT 00086.

 8. The Judge allowed  the  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the  respondent's
    decision was otherwise not in accordance with  the  law  and  that  the
    appellant had leave to remain in the United Kingdom and awaits a lawful
    decision by the respondent.

    Grounds of appeal

 9. The respondent in her grounds of appeal states as follows.   The  Judge
    has failed to give adequate reasons for findings on a material  matter.
    The judge has not provided adequate reasons for her finding  "deception
    on behalf of the appellant has not been particularised".

10. The respondent provided at appeal a bundle of documents in  support  of
    the  allegation.  This  includes  witness  statements  from  Mr   Peter
    Millington and Miss Rebecca Collings and an  email  document  from  ETS
    Task Force dated 10 September  2014.  The  witness  statement  from  Mr
    Millington  and  Miss  Collings  clearly  provides   that   tests   are
    categorised as "invalid" where ETS are certain that there  is  evidence
    of proxy test taking or impersonation.

11. The ETS described that any test characterised as cancelled (which later
    became known as invalid) has the same voice for multiple test takes. On
    questioning they advised that there were certain there was evidence  of
    proxy test taking or impersonation in  those  cases.  Further,  in  the
    statements of Miss Rebecca  Collings  stated  that  upon  comprehensive
    investigations ETS provides the Home Office with  lists  of  candidates
    whose test results show "substantial evidence of invalidity". The  Home
    Office was provided with the background of the processes used by ETS to
    reach that conclusion. Mr Peter Millington statement said that "where a
    match has been identified that  approach  is  to  invalidate  the  test
    results. As set out in the witness statement of Miss Rebecca  Collings,
    ETS has informed the Home Office that there was evidence of  invalidity
    in those cases".

12. Taking into account this evidence it is  clear  that  in  order  to  be
    characterised as "invalid" on the  spreadsheet  provided  to  the  Home
    Office, the case has to have gone through a computer  program  analysis
    and then to independent voice analysts. If all three are  in  agreement
    that a proxy has been used  then  the  test  would  be  categorised  as
    "invalid". A printout of the relevant section of  the  ETS  spreadsheet
    was attached at Annex E of the explanatory statement.  The  spreadsheet
    identifies the appellant by name and records that  the  test  that  was
    taken on 15 January 2013 was invalid. In light of this  the  judge  has
    erred in his findings.

13. Had the first-tier Tribunal properly take into  account  the  evidence,
    the Judge would have found that this  is  exactly  what  the  documents
    assert and evidence to prove it. It is clear from the evidence that the
    ETS invalidates test results, as in the instant case, this  is  because
    there is evidence of proxy test taking or impersonation. The Judge  has
    failed entirely to provide adequate reasons  for  his  finding  to  the
    contrary.

14. In reaching the material finding the Judge relies  on  the  appellant's
    current English language  ability.  However,  the  appellant's  present
    English language ability has little bearing on  whether  the  appellant
    used a proxy in his English language test taken  on  15  January  2013,
    some three years ago.

    The hearing

15. At the hearing I heard submissions as to whether there  is  a  material
    error of law in the determination.

    Decision on error of law

16. I have given  anxious  scrutiny  to  the  determination  of  first-tier
    Tribunal Judge who allowed the appellant's appeal to remain as a Tier 4
    Student (under the points-based  system).  The  Judge  found  that  the
    respondent,  on  whom  the  burden  lies,  had  not  proved  that   the
    appellant's application was correctly refused under paragraph  321A  of
    the Immigration Rules in respect of the English language  test  and  as
    such, the respondent had not demonstrated that the  appellant  employed
    fraud to the burden of proof required.

17. In the Judicial Review application  JR/12120/2014  President  McCloskey
    stated that the litigation context in which  this  challenge  (the  ETS
    English language test) unfolds is conveniently identified in an earlier
    decision of this Tribunal promulgated in September 2014, R (Mahmood)  -
    v - Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] UKUT 00439 (IAC),
    at [1]:

         This is another of the currently plentiful crop of  "ETS"  judicial
         review cases. These have gained much currency during recent months,
         stimulated by action taken on behalf of the Secretary of State  for
         the Home Department ("the  Secretary  of  State"),  the  Respondent
         herein, in the wake of the BBC "Panorama" programme broadcast on 10
         February 2014.   "ETS"  denotes  Educational  Testing  Services,  a
         global agency contracted to provide certain educational testing and
         assessment services to the Secretary of State.  In order to  secure
         leave to remain in the United Kingdom, by virtue  of  the  relevant
         provisions of  the  Immigration  Rules  it  was  incumbent  on  the
         Applicant to provide evidence that he had obtained a specified type
         of English language qualification.  The action taken on  behalf  of
         the Secretary of State, which the  Applicant  challenges  by  these
         proceedings, was based on an assessment that the  English  language
         certificate on which he relied had been procured by deception.

18. The Judge in her determination correctly identified that the burden  of
    proof is on the respondent and it  is  on  a  balance  of  probability.
    However the Judge failed to take  into  account  certain  evidence  and
    place sufficient emphasis on material evidence and came  to  a  legally
    erroneous conclusion.

19. The evidence provided by  the  respondent  was  a  statement  from  Mrs
    Rebecca  Collings  who  stated  that  "ETS  described  that  any   test
    characterised as cancelled (which later became known  as  invalid)  had
    the same voice for multiple test takes. On questioning  the  respondent
    was advised by the ETS that they were certain that there  was  evidence
    of proxy test taking or impersonation in those cases. The Judge in  her
    determination did not give good reasons  for  why  she  considered  the
    witness statements of Mr Peter Millington and  Collings  could  not  be
    relied on in respect of this particular appellant. Mr Peter  Millington
    stated in his witness statement, "it is  clear  that  in  order  to  be
    characterised as 'invalid' on the  spreadsheet  provided  to  the  Home
    Office, the case has to have gone through a computer program  analysing
    speech and then two independent voice analysts. If  all  three  are  in
    agreement  that  a  proxy  has  been  used  then  the  test  would   be
    characterised as 'invalid'".

20. The evidence of both witnesses is clear that  when  a  test  result  is
    characterised  as  "invalid",  it  has  gone  through  rigorous  checks
    including a computer program analysing speech and two independent voice
    analysts. Therefore the Judge by not engaging with the evidence of  the
    two witnesses  fell  into  material  error  in  her  finding  that  the
    respondent has not proved that the appellant has used deception. It was
    incumbent on the Judge to give reasons for rejecting this evidence  and
    this was not done and that brought the Judge into material error.

21. The Judge also materially erred by finding  that  the  appellant  spoke
    articulate English when questions were put to him at  the  airport  and
    that proves that he did not use a proxy in his English language test in
    2013. This is a perverse  finding  because  essentially  the  Judge  is
    saying that the appellant spoke such good English in 2015 that it would
    not have been necessary for him to take an  English  language  test  by
    proxy in 2013. There are nearly 3 years between  the  English  language
    test and the questions put to the appellant at the airport.

22. There was a failure by the Judge to take into account all the  evidence
    in the appeal and adequate reasons  for  why  the  respondent  had  not
    discharged her burden of proof that the appellant used deception in his
    English language test.

23. The features of the general grounds  for  refusal  in  Part  9  of  the
    Immigration  Rules  were  considered  by  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal in JC (Part 9 HC395 - burden  of  proof)  China  [2007]  UKAIT
    00027 ('JC').  Part  9  of  the  Immigration  Rules  contains  "general
    grounds"  for  the  refusal  of  entry  clearance  or  leave  to  enter
    (paragraphs 320, 321), for the cancellation of leave to enter or remain
    (paragraph 321A) and for refusal of variation  of  leave  to  enter  or
    remain or for curtailment of leave (paragraph  322).  These  provisions
    represent, as it were, the list  of  general  grounds  which  the  Home
    Secretary currently thinks must or should  operate  to  complement  the
    substantive Immigration  Rules.  They  cover  circumstances  where  the
    respondent considers that a person should not be permitted to enter  or
    remain even though he meets the ordinary  substantive  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules. They are general grounds for saying "no".   Each
    of  the  general  grounds  has  an   exclusionary,   rather   than   an
    inclusionary, intent.  The applicant is not showing why  he  qualifies;
    rather the decision-maker is seeking to show why the applicant  is,  or
    should normally be, disqualified.  (See JC, paras. 8, 10 and 14.)

24. Each of the general grounds depends for its application on the decision-
    maker being able to  establish  a  precedent  fact  or  facts,  and  in
    relation to all of the general grounds the burden of proof  is  on  the
    decision-maker to establish the facts relied upon (JC, para. 10).   The
    reason why the burden rests on the decision-maker is that each of these
    grounds alleges in one way or another failing or a  wrongdoing  on  the
    part of an applicant (JC, paras. 11-12).  The standard of proof  is  at
    the higher end of the spectrum  of  balance  of  probability,  but  the
    standard is flexible in its  application,  and  the  more  serious  the
    allegation or the more serious the consequences if  the  allegation  is
    proven, the stronger must be the evidence before a court will find  the
    allegation proved on the  balance  of  probabilities  (JC,  para.  13).
    However, once the decision-maker establishes the underlying facts,  the
    burden shifts to the appellant, even when the general ground  concerned
    is discretionary, stating that refusal  should  "normally"  be  refused
    (JC, para. 15).

25. In respect of paragraph 321A(ii),  the  precedent  fact  on  which  the
    application of this provision depends is that the appellant produced  a
    false English test result with  his  application,  and  the  burden  of
    establishing this fact lies on the respondent (JC, paras. 16-17).

26. The ETS entity is one of a small number of Home Office suppliers of so-
    called "Secure English Language Testing" ("SELT") and was appointed  in
    2011. The test is taken by an applicant and he is notified by  the  ETS
    of their grades and ETS issue a certificate which is then forwarded  to
    the respondent for further leave to remain.

27. The respondent provided evidence in the form  of  statements  from  two
    witnesses that there was evidence of fraud at the ETS test centres. The
    full procedure of the test are set out in the President's determination
    so I will not repeat it here. Suffice it to say that it is evident that
    ETS informed the Home Office  that  they  had  been  able  to  identify
    impersonation and proxy testing using voice recognition  software.  ETS
    sent the Home Office the results of their analysis of the  first  batch
    of test centres on 24 and 28 March 2014. Ms  Rebecca  Collings  in  her
    statement stated that any test categorised by ETS as  cancelled,  which
    later became known as "invalid", had the same voice for  multiple  test
    takers. On questioning, ETS "advised that they were certain  there  was
    evidence of  proxy  test  taking  of  impersonation  in  those  cases".
    [Emphasis mine]

28. There was no dispute that the appellant's  test  results  were  amongst
    10,000's test scores analysed and her test was deemed to  be  "invalid"
    i.e. that the ETS was certain there was evidence of proxy  test  taking
    or impersonation in her case.

29.  I  take  into  account  President  McCloskey's  observation  "At  this
    juncture,  it  is  appropriate  to  highlight  the  single   piece   of
    documentary evidence relating to the decision in the  Applicant's  case
    which has been produced by the Secretary of State.  It  consists  of  a
    photocopied excerpt from a spreadsheet taking the form of a  horizontal
    line containing six pieces of information: the "ETS  Registration  ID",
    the Applicant's first and last names, the test  date,  the  Applicant's
    date of birth and the name  of  the  test  centre.   Neither  the  word
    "invalid" or "cancellation" or any derivative of  either  appears".  Mr
    Millington  stated  that  the  technology  used  entailed  over  70,000
    pairings of nonmatching  comparisons  and  that  the  matching  samples
    produced values that were higher  than  values  from  the  non-matching
    samples the majority of the time, with  a  less  than  2%  error  rate.
    [Emphasis mine.]

30. I take into account that the statement of Mr Millington  is  that  "the
    ETS accepted that voice biometric technology is currently imperfect ...
    too many false positives would fatally undermine the integrity  of  the
    voice biometric system". However, Mr Millington stated "In  recognition
    of the risk of 'false positives'", ETS  "....  subjected  each  flagged
    match to a further human  verification  process".   This  required  the
    recruitment of additional staff who, it is  said,  received  "mandatory
    training in voice recognition analysis" and were "initially mentored by
    experienced OTI analysts". The statement continues "Having engaged  the
    necessary number of  analysts,  the  process  operated  was  that  each
    'flagged comparison' would be considered by  two  analysts  separately.
    Each analyst would then form an opinion.  The purpose of  the  exercise
    was to establish  whether,  in  both  analysts'  opinion,  the  samples
    constituted a "match", having been thus designated  by  the  "biometric
    engine." Given the evidence by the respondent it is clear that the Home
    Office accepts the results provided by the ETS and conduct  no  further
    investigations.

31. The respondent has the burden of proving the existence of  the  factors
    upon which reliance is placed  to  found  the  exercise  of  the  power
    conferred by paragraph 321A of the  Immigration  Rules.  The  stringent
    civil standard applicable in cases of fraud has been  achieved  by  the
    respondent's evidence: see RP (Proof of Forgery) Nigeria [2006] UK  AIT
    00086. It is argued that the evidence provided  by  the  respondent  is
    generic and in the absence of  individual  evidence  pertinent  to  the
    appellant, the Appellant's test  performance  cannot  be  shown  to  be
    fraudulent. I consider less than 2% error  rate  to  be  proof  by  the
    respondent by evidence on a balance of probabilities.

32. I have a duty to enquire, and determine, whether  there  is  sufficient
    evidence to justify the respondent's belief that appellant had employed
    deception. I have  to  consider  the  evidence  against  this  specific
    appellant. I have conducted this enquiry on the evidence and  the  onus
    lies on the respondent to prove to the satisfaction of  the  court,  on
    the balance of probabilities, the facts relied on by the respondent.

33. Even applying a standard at the higher end of the spectrum  of  balance
    of probability, on  the  evidence,  I  find  that  the  respondent  has
    established the precedent fact of the production  of  a  false  English
    test result. The burden therefore now shifts to the appellant  to  show
    that the respondent's decision to exercise her  power  under  paragraph
    321A is improper.

34. The appellant's case is that she has  produced  a  valid  English  test
    result and that the respondent has not discharged her burden of  proof.
    There is no other  credible  evidence  provided  by  the  appellant  to
    challenge the respondent's case.

35. I do not accept the appellant's  evidence  that  he  has  such  a  good
    English language skills that he  did  not  need  to  take  his  English
    language test by proxy, the implication being that he would have passed
    the test without the assistance of a proxy. I  how  however  take  into
    account that he only received 5.5 for listening, 4.5 for writing and  5
    for speaking. These scores do not, in themselves, demonstrate that  the
    appellant's language skills  were  so  good  that  he  would  not  have
    required the assistance of a proxy and was confident he could  pass  on
    his own. The appellant took the test in 15 January  2013,  and  if  his
    English language skills were as good as claimed, he would have achieved
    higher scores to reflect this.

36. Having considered all of the evidence in this case as a whole,  I  find
    that  the  appellant  fraudulently,  in  an  attempt  to  mislead   the
    respondent, provided his English-language test results which he knew to
    be obtained by proxy and therefore fraud. I find  that  the  respondent
    has discharged her burden of proof. I  find  that  the  respondent  has
    demonstrated on the requisite standard of proof  that  the  appellant's
    appeal  falls  to  be  refused  pursuant  to  paragraph  321A  of   the
    Immigration Rules.

37. I therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  allowing
    the appellant's appeal and  substitute  my  decision  and  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal.

DECISION

I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   allowing   the
    appellant's appeal

I dismiss the appellant's appeal.


      Dated this 2nd day of November 2015
Signed by

.............................................
Mrs S Chana
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Chana

