
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/36116/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Columbus House, Newport    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 4 November 2015                  |On: 4 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             ALTHEA GRACE ANGUS
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms R Moffat, Counsel instructed by Hoole & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Coaster in which the Judge allowed on Article
    8 grounds the appeal of Ms Angus, a citizen  of  Jamaica,  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision to refuse leave to remain. I shall  refer
    to Ms Angus as the Applicant although she  was  the  Appellant  in  the
    proceedings below. This appeal is not subject to an anonymity order  by
    the First-tier Tribunal and neither party invited me to  make  such  an
    order.

 2. The Applicant arrived in the United Kingdom on 18 August 2000  and  was
    granted leave to enter as a visitor for six months. Subsequent  periods
    of leave to remain as a student were granted the last  expiring  on  30
    April 2005. The Appellant's application for further leave to remain  as
    a student made on 21 April 2005 was refused  on  2  June  2005  and  no
    appeal was lodged. The Applicant remained in the United Kingdom without
    leave and on 26 October 2010 applied for leave to  remain  outside  the
    terms of the Immigration Rules. This application was  refused  with  no
    right of appeal on 10 January 2011 and a  request  for  reconsideration
    was refused on 18 November 2011 and thereafter further  representations
    were made. On 28 August 2014 a detailed decision was made refusing  the
    Applicant's application for leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  on
    the basis of representations made between October 2010 and August 2014.
    The Applicant exercised her right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.
     This is the appeal which came before Judge Coaster on 12 February 2015
    and was allowed on Article 8  ECHR  grounds.  The  Secretary  of  State
    applied  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper   Tribunal.    The
    application was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes on  14  May
    2015 in the following terms

         "The grounds argue that the judge erred as it was  not  found  that
         there were compelling  circumstances  to  justify  considering  the
         Appellant's case outside the Immigration Rules. The grounds rely on
         Gulshan and Nagre and there were no significant  obstacles  to  the
         Appellant returning to Jamaica.

         To find that the Appellant has a family life with her daughter  the
         Appellant would have to show that there were more  than  the  usual
         ties  between  adults,  paragraphs  46  does  not  show  that.  The
         Appellant's  private  life  was  considered.  The   judge   wrongly
         considered that the Home Office had done nothing since 2005,  there
         was no evidence that an application had been made and the  response
         delayed, the Appellant overstayed and did not bring herself to  the
         attention of the Home Office until 2010. The delays were  those  of
         the Appellant not the Home Office.

         The grounds, that the judge failed to  identify  the  circumstances
         adequately, are arguable, it is arguable that  insufficient  weight
         was given to the factors set out in section 117B and the failure of
         the Appellant to meet the Immigration Rules."

Background

 3.  The  history  of  this  appeal  is  detailed  above.  The  facts,  not
    challenged, are that the Applicant came to the United Kingdom  lawfully
    and having remained lawfully for a period of about 5 years  overstayed.
    The Applicant was 39 years old on arrival in the United Kingdom and she
    is now 54. The Applicant's daughter, Stacey-Ann Hutchinson came to  the
    United Kingdom shortly after the  Applicant  and  lives  close  to  the
    Applicant with her child, the Applicant's grandchild.  The Secretary of
    State refused the application for leave to remain because the Applicant
    did not meet the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  it  was
    considered that there were no exceptional circumstances  to  warrant  a
    grant of leave to remain outside the terms of the Immigration Rules.

 4. There was  no  suggestion  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
    Applicant met the requirement of the Immigration Rules, the appeal  was
    put forward to the First-tier Tribunal  and  allowed  by  reference  to
    Article 8 ECHR. In doing so the  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the
    public interest did not require the  removal  of  the  Applicant  being
    outweighed by her protected Article 8 rights.

Submissions

 5. Mr Richards appeared on behalf of the Secretary of State and Ms  Moffat
    represented the Applicant and submitted  a  written  skeleton  argument
    along with copies of the authorities of SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387,
    Agyarko  and  others  v  SSHD  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  440  and  Jeunesse  v
    Netherlands [2015] 60 EHRR 17.

 6. On behalf of the Secretary of State Mr Richards noted that the  grounds
    upon which permission was granted do not reflect the grounds upon which
    the appeal was lodged. This appeal was allowed by virtue of  Article  8
    ECHR and the Judge found that Article 8 was engaged in respect  of  the
    Applicant's daughter and grandson and also that  she  had  a  protected
    private life in the United Kingdom. The Judge goes through  the  Razgar
    criteria but when she comes to  the  final  proportionality  stage  the
    Judge focuses on one issue alone being the supposed inactivity  of  the
    Home Office. This was wrong. Any delay by the Home Office was  confined
    to the period 2010 to 2014, between 2005 and 2010 the Applicant was  an
    overstayer  with  no  applications  or   representations   outstanding.
    Otherwise Mr Richards relied on the  grounds  as  set  out.  The  Judge
    failed  to  have  appropriate  regard  to  section  117  and  used  the
    Applicant's illegal overstaying as a factor in her favour  rather  than
    against. Little weight should have been given to her private life.

 7. For the Applicant Ms Moffat referred to her skeleton argument. There is
    no reference to primary legislation  in  the  grounds  of  appeal.  The
    grounds  say  that   there   is   no   identification   of   compelling
    circumstances. There is no error of law  in  this  respect  and  indeed
    compelling circumstances are specifically mentioned  at  paragraph  57.
    The correct test was applied. It was open to the Judge to take  account
    of the delay between 2010 and 2014. The Judge makes the correct finding
    that the reasons for the Applicant overstaying  do  not  exonerate  her
    breach of immigration control (at paragraph 53). The Judge  found  that
    the family life  developed  with  her  daughter  and  grandson  engaged
    Article 8 and gives cogent reasons for doing  so.  The  Judge  makes  a
    finding as to compelling circumstances and the  Judge  correctly  noted
    that the Appellant's  daughter  suffers  from  depression  following  a
    hysterectomy. The Judge took other factors into account as well as  the
    delay.

 8. In response Mr Richards said  that  in  terms  of  proportionality  and
    compelling circumstances the Judge's reasoning is  exclusively  devoted
    to delay. This was an error of fact amounting to an error of law.

 9. I reserved my decision and both  representatives  agreed  that  in  the
    event of an error of law being found there would be no additional facts
    to consider and that I should proceed to remake the decision based upon
    the evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal.



Error of law

10. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal assert a single error being
    that the Judge made a material misdirection in  law.  The  misdirection
    alleged is a failure to identify compelling circumstances in accordance
    with Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 and Nagre [2013]  EWHC  720  Admin.  The
    Secretary of State adds in the grounds that there  are  no  significant
    obstacles or insurmountable difficulties to prevent the Applicant  from
    returning to Jamaica.

11. As Mr Richards rightly pointed out permission to appeal was granted for
    reasons that do not reflect  the  grounds  of  appeal.  Permission  was
    granted not on the basis of material misdirection of  law  but  on  the
    basis of inadequate reasoning. Indeed the detail of the error of law is
    equally unrelated to the grounds being in respect of  the  relationship
    between the Applicant and her daughter and the length of the  delay  by
    the Home Office. Grants of permission to appeal should not be made  for
    reasons that are not asserted in  the  grounds  of  appeal,  except  in
    respect of Robinson obvious matters, and in an exceptional  case  where
    such disconnect has nevertheless occurred should, where appropriate, be
    rectified by an application to amend the grounds.  There  was  no  such
    application made before me.

12. Dealing first with the grounds of appeal the First-tier Tribunal  found
    (at paragraphs 42 and  43)  that  the  obstacles  in  the  way  of  the
    Applicant returning to Jamaica  are  not  insurmountable  and  that  it
    cannot be said that she does not  retain  cultural  or  emotional  ties
    there. It was not argued before me that there was any  fault  in  these
    findings and this was not the basis upon which the appeal was  allowed.
    It was a finding made by the Judge which was  part  of  the  matrix  in
    which the proportionality assessment was conducted. There is  no  error
    of law in this respect.

13. Equally there can be no error of law in the alleged failure to identify
    compelling circumstances in accordance with Gulshan and Nagre. This  is
    firstly because the jurisprudence in this regard has developed  and  is
    probably best now summarised in SS (Congo) and Others [2015]  EWCA  Civ
    387 and Sunassee [2015] EWHC 1604.   If the requirements of  the  rules
    cannot be met, and a judge finds that an Article 8  assessment  outside
    them is required there does not need to be exceptional reasons or  very
    compelling circumstances to justify carrying out the Article 8 exercise
    and it will usually be necessary to go through the Article 8 assessment
    to identify whether compelling circumstances exist.   Paragraph  33  of
    the judgment in SS (Congo) provides guidance.

         "In our judgement, even though a test of  exceptionality  does  not
         apply in every case falling within the scope of Appendix FM, it  is
         accurate to say that the general  position  outside  the  sorts  of
         special contexts referred to above is that compelling circumstances
         would need to be identified to support a claim  for  grant  of  LTR
         outside the new Rules in Appendix  FM.  In  our  view,  that  is  a
         formulation which is not as strict as a test of exceptionality or a
         requirement of "very compelling reasons"  (as  referred  to  in  MF
         (Nigeria) in  the  context  of  the  Rules  applicable  to  foreign
         criminals), but which  gives  appropriate  weight  to  the  focused
         consideration of public interest factors as finds expression in the
         Secretary of State's formulation of the new Rules in Appendix FM."

14. Secondly and in any event  the  Judge  makes  a  specific  finding,  at
    paragraph 57, that there are compelling circumstances. The Judge having
    found that such circumstances exist it is not the remit  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal  to  go  behind  such  an  assessment  unless  there  is  some
    perversity or irrationality or unless the  finding  was  based  upon  a
    mistake as to a material fact (see R (Iran) [2005] EWCA  Civ  982  para
    9). There is no allegation of perversity or irrationality either in the
    grounds, the grant of permission or Mr Richards' submissions.

15. The grant of permission suggests that the First-tier Tribunal may  have
    erred in finding that the family life enjoyed  by  the  appellant,  her
    daughter and her grandson did not engage Article 8. Mr Richards did not
    pursue this point in submissions. In my judgement the  Judge  correctly
    self directed at paragraph  44  referring  to  appropriate  authorities
    including Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31 and reached  a  conclusion
    at paragraph 47 that was open to her. There is no misdirection  in  law
    and there is no inadequacy of reasoning.

16. So far as mistake of fact is concerned and whereas it is not raised  in
    the grounds Mr Richards submitted on behalf of  the  Sectary  of  State
    that the Judge erred in focusing on the one issue of delay on behalf of
    the Home Office. The Judge's reasoning he said is  exclusively  devoted
    to delay and, bringing into the argument the  terms  of  the  grant  of
    permission to appeal, any delay by the Home Office concerned the  years
    2010 to 2014 and not the 9 year period referred to  by  the  Judge.  Ms
    Moffat said that other matters had been taken into account and  pointed
    out the Judge's attention to the  other  elements  of  the  Applicant's
    claim.

17. To the extent that this can be considered  to  be  a  valid  ground  of
    appeal it is in my judgement  misfounded.  A  careful  reading  of  the
    decision and reasons shows that the Judge was under no  illusion  about
    the length of the delay or the responsibility for the delay.  Paragraph
    53 is illuminating in this regard

         "The appellant has been in the United Kingdom  for  14  years.  She
         came here legally in 2001 and remained her legally until June  2005
         when her application for leave to remain was refused for breach  of
         the conditions of her student visa. The reason for  committing  the
         breach, although laudable,  does  not  exonerate  and  expunge  the
         breach."

    Paragraph 54 is equally helpful.

          "... The appellant stayed  here  for  five  years  without  leave,
         overstaying illegally. Whilst this is a serious matter which should
         not be overlooked, the remarkable failure of the respondent to deal
         with her request for reconsideration in 2010 cannot be  ignored  on
         the question of proportionality."

    Further at paragraph 55

          "The Home Office should have been aware  that  the  appellant  was
         present in the UK between 200 and 2010. He file was 'live'. It  was
         certainly aware between 2010 and 2014 when it  finally  dealt  with
         her reconsideration request."

18. The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found  the  Appellant's  circumstances
    compelling and in doing so took account  of  the  facts  that  were  in
    existence and allowed the appeal by  virtue  of  Article  8  ECHR.  The
    challenge to the Judge's decision in the grounds of appeal is, for  the
    reasons given above, not made out. Permission to appeal was granted for
    reasons not contained in the grounds. There was no application to amend
    those grounds. It was asserted in submissions,  in  the  light  of  the
    grant,  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal   based   its   proportionality
    assessment solely upon delay in  doing  so  upon  a  mistake  of  fact.
    Neither assertion is correct. Whereas the finding of compelling reasons
    may have been predicated on delay the proportionality assessment  as  a
    whole was based upon the plethora of circumstances put forward  on  the
    Applicant's behalf. In dealing with delay there was no mistake of fact,
    the Judge demonstrated that she was fully aware of the factual  matrix.
    There was in my judgment on error of law.

19. My conclusion from all of the above is that the Judge did not fall into
    error of law either as asserted  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  or  oral
    submissions or as identified in the grant of permission to appeal.

Summary

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
    material error of law. I dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.


Signed:     Date:

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
