
IAC-CH- CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/36202/2014 & Others


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 29th April 2015                   |On 18th May 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         KIRAN BALA MALIK (& OTHERS)
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr R Davies, Counsel


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. In this decision notice I will refer to the parties in  the  style  in
      which they appeared before the First-Tier Tribunal.

   2. The appellant is a female citizen of India, born 24 January 1983.  She
      applied  for  leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  Tier  1
      (Entrepreneur) Migrant under the Points Based System.  Her husband and
      their daughter applied as her dependents.  The application was refused
      and the appellant appealed against that decision.

   3. The appeal came before Judge  of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  Suffield-
      Thompson sitting at Newport on 4 December 2014.  An oral  hearing  was
      held and both parties were represented (the appellant by  Mr  Davies).
      In a decision dated 6 December 2014,  the  judge  allowed  the  appeal
      "under the Immigration Rules".

   4. The respondent sought  leave  to  appeal  based  upon  one  ground  of
      misdirection of law by  reason  of  the  judge  accepting  documentary
      evidence on the day of the hearing by reference  to  the  case  of  DR
      (Morocco) [2015] UKAIT 0038.  The respondent alleged that case related
      to entry clearance cases only and was  specifically  not  relevant  in
      cases involving the Points Based System.

   5. Another judge of the First-Tier Tribunal agreed that it  was  arguable
      the judge had erred and also referred to the  determination  as  being
      "relatively brief and not well reasoned".

   6. Hence the matter came before me sitting in the Upper Tribunal.

   7. Mr Davies produced a skeleton argument which included a view that even
      without the document allowed in by the judge,  there  were  sufficient
      findings made by Judge Suffield-Thompson to substantiate her  decision
      that the appellant succeeded under the rules.

   8. Having considered the matter, Mr Mills indicated that he accepted that
      argument and he was withdrawing the appeal on behalf of the  Secretary
      of State.  I indicated that I agreed  with  that  view.  Although  the
      judge was in error it was not material to the outcome.  Accordingly  I
      consented to the withdrawal.

Decision

   9. Appeal withdrawn. The decision of the First-tier Judge will stand.




Signed        Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Poole
