
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/36880/2014
                                                               IA/36898/2014
                                                               IA/36900/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 January 2016                    |On 19 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                   Vijayan Suseela BIMAL (FIRST APPELLANT)
                       DIVYA BIMAL (SECOND APPELLANT)
                             B (THIRD APPELLANT)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr K S Sreekumar, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of India.  The first and second  appellants
    are husband and wife and the third appellant is  their  daughter.   The
    first  appellant's  application  for  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  1
    (Entrepreneur) was refused by the respondent  in  a  decision  dated  8
    September 2014.  The corresponding applications by the second and third
    appellants were also refused.  Their  appeals  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Stott at a hearing on 7 July 2015  whereby  the  appeals
    were dismissed.

 2. The respondent's decision refers to paragraph 41-SD of  Appendix  A  of
    the Immigration Rules and states that although the first appellant  had
    provided a job title as listed in Appendix J, the only evidence that he
    had submitted to demonstrate that he was active in that  occupation  as
    part of his business BS New Tech Limited, is advertising and  marketing
    material.  It went on to state that the evidence he  had  submitted  in
    relation to a trading contract is not acceptable because  it  does  not
    cover a continuous period commencing before  11  July  2014  up  to  no
    earlier than three months  before  the  date  of  the  application,  as
    required by the Rules.  The contract is dated  11  July  2014  and  the
    services commence on that date.

 3. Furthermore, the  appellant  had  not  demonstrated  that  he  met  the
    requirements of the Rules in terms of the business  having  a  UK  bank
    account of which he is a signatory, and/or relevant alternatives.

 4. Accordingly, he was not awarded the necessary 25 points for  access  to
    funds, with corresponding decisions in relation to points for funds  in
    other categories.  He was awarded the claimed  10  points  for  English
    language and Maintenance.

 5. Judge Stott accepted that (some) documentation was submitted  with  the
    first appellant's application, that being  those  documents  listed  at
    Section 7 of the application form.  However,  he  concluded  that  that
    list does not include the invoices or  receipts  or  the  Halifax  Bank
    account which the appellant relied on at the hearing  before  him.   He
    noted that in relation to  the  Halifax  account  at  page  24  of  the
    appellant's bundle, the earliest date on the account is 18 July 2014.

 6. At [9] he accepted that the appellant had founded a business  and  that
    the business has been trading.  However,  although  the  appellant  had
    wanted to submit further documents showing the  continued  activity  of
    the business, the judge decided that he was precluded from  considering
    that evidence in the light of s.85A of the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002.

 7. Furthermore, at [10] he concluded that he was unable to find  that  the
    personal bank statement which was submitted by the appellant and dating
    from 18 July 2014  was  included  in  the  material  submitted  to  the
    respondent when the application was made.  In any event,  the  earliest
    date shown on the account post-dates the relevant date of 11 July 2014.
     As regards the  invoices,  he  found  that  those  invoices  were  not
    available for the respondent's consideration when the  application  was
    made.  Although the first of them is dated 9 July 2014,  and  therefore
    would potentially have been relevant, the invoices are  not  listed  on
    the  documentation  produced  when  the  application   was   made   and
    accordingly they could not be taken into account.

 8. In relation to receipts produced  at  the  hearing,  of  which  legible
    copies were provided in place of the  blank  ones  in  the  appellant's
    bundle, the earliest date on them is 22 July 2014.   Again,  the  judge
    concluded that there was no evidence that that material  was  submitted
    with the application.

 9. In the light of those findings the judge dismissed the appeal under the
    Immigration Rules.

10. The appellant's grounds refer to the judge's finding that the appellant
    had founded a business and that the business  has  been  trading.   The
    grounds also refer to the invoice dated  9  July  2014,  prior  to  the
    relevant date of  11  July  2014,  suggesting  that  this  "proves  the
    requirement of trading."

11. At [10] of the grounds the assertion is made that "The  Respondent  did
    not produce all the documents  submitted  by  the  Appellant  in  their
    bundle."

12. In submissions on behalf of the appellants, Mr Sreekumar relied on  the
    grounds.  He also sought to rely on arguments not the  subject  of  the
    grounds, and incidentally not the subject of any application  to  amend
    the grounds.  The first of these new arguments, as I  understood  them,
    was that the Rules which governed the  application  for  further  leave
    under Tier 1 came into effect at  12.15am  on  11  July  2014  but  the
    contract relied on came into being at 12  midnight  on  the  same  day.
    Accordingly, so the  argument  goes,  his  contract  came  into  effect
    fifteen minutes prior to the implementation of the relevant  Rule.   It
    was further submitted that the signing of the contract was preceded  by
    the appellant having provided services under it.   Accordingly,  if  it
    was accepted that the contract was in existence before  11  July  2014,
    the appellant had complied with all the requirements of the Rules.

13. Mr Wilding submitted that the Rules required that the contract be dated
    before 11 July 2014 and in this case it  was  dated  actually  on  that
    date.  The appellant was unable  to  show  therefore,  that  he  had  a
    business that was trading before 11 July 2014 as required by  paragraph
    41SD(iv).

14. So far as the invoices are concerned, it is not the case that  invoices
    were sent with the application, as the grounds suggest.  Section  7  of
    the application form makes no mention of invoices and there are none on
    the respondent's file.

15. So far as the bank statement is concerned, a print-out from  a  Halifax
    account was provided to the Secretary of State, although it is  not  in
    the form that is in the appellant's bundle.

16. Paragraph 41SD(e)(vii)(2) of Appendix A requires the  account  to  show
    transactions for the business, which the account does not do.   Nothing
    in the documents  demonstrates  that  the  account  was  used  for  the
    purposes of a business as required by the Rules.  The bank account does
    not show anything other than funds in and out.

    My assessment

17. There is nothing to support the appellant's sweeping contention in  the
    grounds that the respondent did not  produce  in  her  bundle  all  the
    documents submitted by the appellant in  support  of  the  application.
    That may be true for one document only, produced at the hearing  before
    me, being the Halifax bank statement (referred to at [15]  above).  The
    application for leave at section 7 lists the  documents  provided  with
    the application, as was pointed out by the  First-tier  Judge  at  [7].
    The appellant has not provided any positive evidence of other documents
    having been submitted to the respondent in support of  the  application
    and which were not taken into account by  the  respondent.  It  was  Mr
    Wilding who  referred  me  to  the  Halifax  bank  statement,  but  the
    appellant's own case as disclosed by the documents in the bundle before
    the First-tier Tribunal, did not rely on that document.

18. The appellant was required by paragraph 41SD(e)(iv) of  Appendix  A  to
    provide, for example, a contract showing that the business was  trading
    before 11 July 2014  and  traded  continuously  throughout  the  period
    leading up to the date of his application.   The  appellant's  contract
    does not show that to be the case and documents intended to support the
    contention that there had been previous trading were not  submitted  in
    support of the application.  That is even accepting that they could  be
    taken into account to fortify what is in the  contract.   The  contract
    itself is undoubtedly dated 11 July 2014.

19. The appellant was also required by paragraph 41SD(e)(vii)(2) to provide
    evidence  that  the  business  has  a  UK  bank  account  which   shows
    transactions for the business.  Mr Wilding provided to me a copy  of  a
    print-out from a Halifax account with transactions dated from 16  April
    2014 to 17 July 2014.  However, there is nothing to indicate  that  the
    transactions on them are related to business.

20. The argument in relation to the appellant's contract having been signed
    on 11 July 2015 at midnight, whereas the Rules did not come into effect
    until 12.15am, is not an argument that was put  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The document provided at the hearing before me on behalf  of
    the appellant said to support the date of the coming into force of  the
    Rules is a screenshot from UK Visas and Immigration  website.  However,
    that document actually relates to the coming  into  force  of  relevant
    guidance, not the Rules.

21. In any event, regardless of the precise time that the Rules  came  into
    force relative to the appellant's contract, that argument on behalf  of
    the appellant does not begin to deal with the fact  that  the  contract
    does not comply with the Rules.  That is also aside from the fact  that
    this is not an argument raised in the appellant's grounds to the  Upper
    Tribunal, and there was no application to amend the grounds.

22. Likewise, the new argument to the  effect  that  the  contract  was  in
    existence before 11 July 2014 was not an argument that was  put  before
    the First-tier Judge and is not the subject of the grounds  before  the
    Upper Tribunal.  Again, there was no application to amend the  grounds.
    In any event, there is nothing  to  support  the  contention  that  the
    contract was in existence before 11 July 2014, which is the date of it.
     Furthermore, the argument that the contract was in existence before 11
    July 2014 is inconsistent with the suggestion that  the  contract  came
    into being at midnight on 11 July 2014.

23. The fact of the matter is  that  the  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did not demonstrate that the appellant was able  to  meet  the
    relevant requirements of the Rules in terms of provision  of  specified
    documents.  There  is  nothing  to  support  the  suggestion  that  the
    respondent had  not  identified  or  included  documents  submitted  in
    support of the application,  aside  from  the  Halifax  bank  statement
    produced at the hearing before me, which is not a document  that  could
    have assisted the appellant.  The First-tier Judge had no option but to
    dismiss the appeal on the basis that the appellant was unable to comply
    with the Rules in terms  of  the  required  documentation  provided  in
    support of the application.

24. Accordingly, I am not satisfied that there is any error of law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier  Tribunal.   The  decision  to  dismiss  the
    appeal therefore stands.

    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point  of  law.   The  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal
    therefore stands.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek      18/01/16

