
IAC-AH-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/36761/2013
                                                               IA/36769/2013
                                                               IA/36791/2013
                                                               IA/36795/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13.1.2015                         |On 22.1.2015                         |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL GA BLACK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              SOI + 3 claimants
                          (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the Claimant: Mr Avery (Senior Home Office Presenting officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr A Magsood (Legal representative)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State. For ease  of  reference  I
    shall refer to  the  parties  as  the  "Secretary  of  State"  and  the
    "Claimant".

 2. The main Claimant, SOI is a citizen of Nigeria and her date of birth is
    14.11.1995,  the  second  Claimant  is  JCI  whose  date  of  birth  is
    22.10.1999, the third Claimant is HCI whose date of birth is 27.11.1996
    and the fourth Claimant is NII whose date of birth is 5.12.2002. At the
    time of the application, made under Regulations 6  and  17  Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2006 ("EEA Regs"), the Claimants were under 18  years
    except for SOI who was 18 years of age,  but  all  were  in  full  time
    education. She made an  application  together  with  her  siblings  for
    residence cards as family members of an EEA citizen, their father  RSP,
    a Dutch national. Their mother is RI whose date of birth  is  5.6.1983,
    and she is also a citizen of Nigeria who was granted a 5 year residence
    card valid until 1st December 2015.  The  Claimants  were  granted  EEA
    family permit entry clearance from  22.10.2011  for  one  year.   Their
    applications for residence cards were refused on 27th August 2013.

 3. The Secretary of State appeals against a decision promulgated  on  10th
    October 2014 by First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  T  Jones)  in  which  the
    appeals were allowed under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006  with
    reference to Regulation 6 EEA Regs., and in which  the  Tribunal  found
    that there was evidence to show that the EEA citizen  was  a  qualified
    person (employed) and exercising Treaty Rights.

 Grounds of application

 4. The Secretary of State submitted in ground 1 that  there  were  factual
    errors such that the Judge  failed  to  show  he  had  applied  anxious
    scrutiny to the decision.  Ground 2 argued that there was  no  evidence
    on which the Tribunal could have found that the  Claimants  father  was
    exercising Treaty rights as a worker at the date  of  hearing  on  26th
    September 2014 (Boodhoo & another (EEA Regs: relevant evidence)  [2013]
    UKUT 00346(IAC).  Their enquiries revealed that he left  employment  on
    30th June 2013 and it was the  Claimants  evidence  that  he  left  the
    matrimonial home on 2nd December 2013 and had not been heard of  since.
    Divorce proceedings were commenced.

Permission

   5. Permission was granted by First-tier Judge Shimmin  on  24th  November
      2014 on ground 2 only.  It was arguable that  the  Tribunal  erred  in
      finding evidence on  which  to  conclude  that  the  EEA  sponsor  was
      employed exercising Treaty Rights at the date of the hearing.

Error of law hearing

 6. The matter came before me for consideration of  error  of  law  in  the
    decision and reasons.  Submissions were made by  both  representatives.
    Mr Avery in the main relied on the grounds of application.  Mr  Magsood
    responded that the date of hearing was not the required time  at  which
    the evidence must be established.  There was evidence that the  sponsor
    was working until the end of June 2013 and that the Tribunal relied  on
    the Claimants' mother's oral evidence that the sponsor appeared  to  be
    going out to work from the home up until December 2013, when  he  left.
    He submitted that in any event the Tribunal needed to  have  regard  to
    the derivative rights of the children who are in education.

Decision and reasons

 7. Firstly, I observe that the  Tribunal  referred  to  RI  as  the  first
    Appellant when she was not in fact a party  to  these  proceedings  but
    called as a witness. Although this  formed  the  basis  for  ground  1,
    permission was not granted on this ground, but I do  find  it  of  some
    limited relevance to the Tribunal's  decision.  Furthermore  I  observe
    that the Secretary of State relied on  two  grounds  for  refusal;  the
    first that the Claimants failed to produced evidence of the identity or
    a valid passport for the EEA national.  No reference was made  to  this
    issue in the Tribunal's decision and none  was  raised  before  me.   I
    proceed on the basis that  this  was  no  longer  the  subject  of  any
    challenge.

 8. The background to the appeal is that  RI,  the  Claimants  mother,  was
    granted a residence card as an EEA family member (spouse)  valid  until
    1.12.2015. It was argued in the grounds of appeal before the First-tier
    Tribunal that she had retained a right of residence having  lived  with
    an EEA national from 26.3.2010 until 2.12.2013, and that the  Claimants
    ought to have been granted residence cards in line  with  her.  Further
    the grounds of appeal submit that the application was made on the basis
    that the Claimants are direct descendant relatives and dependents of an
    EEA national's spouse. It was not  disputed  that  the  Claimants  were
    financially dependent on their mother  who  was  employed  and  had  no
    recourse to public funds since her arrival in  the  UK  in  2010.   The
    Claimants are enrolled in full time education. The  grounds  of  appeal
    argued that Article 8 family life is engaged.

 9. I am satisfied that there was  no  reliable  evidence  upon  which  the
    Tribunal could sustain a finding that the  sponsor  was  a  "qualified"
    person either since 2nd December 2013, at which point the sponsor  left
    the matrimonial home, or at the date  of  the  hearing.   The  date  of
    hearing is the relevant time for consideration of the  evidence.  I  am
    satisfied that there was no direct evidence before the Tribunal to show
    that the sponsor was in employment and a qualified person  beyond  30th
    June 2013. The evidence establishes that he was employed at the date of
    application but not at the date of decision or thereafter. Clearly  the
    Tribunal found the Claimants mother to be a credible  witness  but  her
    evidence as to his employment  can  only  amount  to  supposition.  She
    believed that  her  husband  was  going  out  to  work.  There  was  no
    additional evidence  relied  on  or  referred  to  that  supported  the
    witness' belief that her husband was in fact working until he left  the
    family home, for example financial  evidence.   Further  there  was  no
    documentary evidence to show that he was employed or even living in the
    UK exercising Treaty Rights at the relevant time.   The  focus  of  the
    reasons for refusal and indeed the Tribunal's decision  was  the  issue
    under Regulation 6.

10. The Tribunal has materially erred for  the  reasons  given  above.   As
    Regulation 6 was not met there can be no  entitlement  to  a  residence
    card under Regulation 17 EEA Regs. However, that is not an end  of  the
    matter, as it is clear that further consideration ought  to  have  been
    given to the circumstances of the  Claimants  and  their  mother  under
    Regulation 15A EEA Regs, namely derivative rights of residence.   There
    was no consideration of this issue by either the Secretary of State nor
    the Tribunal and which was raised in the grounds  of  appeal.   It  may
    well be that in light of the  Tribunal's  mistake  in  identifying  the
    Claimants mother as the main Appellant the waters were muddied.  It  is
    not necessary for a further hearing before this Tribunal as  I  propose
    to remake the decision having  received  further  written  submissions.
    Accordingly I have decided to set aside that part of the decision  made
    that Regulation 6 is met.  I direct that the parties do file and  serve
    within  14  days  of  the  date  of  issue  of  this  decision  written
    submissions on the applicability of  Regulation  15/15A  EEA  Regs  and
    Article 8 family and private life.

Decision

  11. There is a material error  of  law  in  the  decision  and  that  part
      relating to Regulation 6 is set aside. In order to remake the decision
      I direct that both representatives do file and serve within 14 days of
      the date  of  issue  of  this  decision  written  submissions  on  the
      application of Regulation 15A and Article 8.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Claimants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.   Three  of
the Claimants are under the age of 18 years.



Signed        Date 15.1.2015

Judge GA Black
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award applicable

Signed        Date 15.1.2015

Judge GA Black
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
