
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/36026/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          | Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                   |
|On 13 October 2015                            | On 2 November 2015           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

                               mr Eric Bediako
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr John Waithe (Counsel), instructed by Shan & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr Steve Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant whose date of birth is 21 October 1969 is  a  citizen  of
    Ghana.  He appeals against a decision made by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge S Taylor) who dismissed his appeal on Article  8  grounds  in  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 30 April 2015.

2.   The appellant made an application for the issue  of  a  residence  card
    under EEA Regulations, but the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    proceeded on Article 8 grounds only, the appellant arguing that  family
    life was established as between himself and his  12  year  old  British
    citizen daughter.

FtT Decision

3.   In  a  decision  and  reasons  the  First-tier  Tribunal  found  little
    evidence to support family life as claimed.  Neither the mother of  the
    child nor the child  had  attended  for  the  hearing  to  support  the
    appellant. The First-tier Tribunal found  no  independent  evidence  to
    support the appellant's account that he was  closely  involved  in  his
    daughter's life on at least three days a week, including  swimming  and
    other activities [13].

4.    The  FtT  reasoned  that  there  should  be  more  evidence  including
    photographs and evidence of  document  verification.   It  specifically
    took into account that there was no such evidence available  to  verify
    the letters produced by the appellant's daughter and her mother.

Grounds of Application

5.   In the grounds applying for permission to appeal the  appellant  argued
    that

    (1)  There was  documentary  evidence  before  the  Tribunal  including
         three  copies  of  his   ex-partner's   passport,   together   with
         photographs of him and his daughter  produced on  the  day  of  the
         hearing which the Tribunal had not taken into account.


    (2)  There was no consideration as to the genuineness  and  subsistence
         of the relationship as between the appellant and  his  daughter  by
         the Secretary of State.


    (3)  The Tribunal erred procedurally by making findings at [13 and  14]
         given that there was  evidence  of  photographs  and  the  passport
         produced at the hearing.

Permission to Appeal

6.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Colyer
    on 16 July 2015 on the basis of the grounds submitted.

Rule 24 Response

7.   It was accepted that the FtT overlooked the  photographs  and  passport
    and indeed placed weight on the absence of the  same  in  reaching  its
    findings of fact and conclusions.  However the FtT  took  into  account
    the lack of supporting evidence as to the appellant's  activities  with
    his daughter at school, church and other activities.   Furthermore  the
    Tribunal placed weight on the fact that the  appellant's  daughter  and
    her mother had not attended the  hearing  which  was  of  significance.
    There was no material error of law.

Error of Law Hearing
8.   Mr Waithe relied on the grounds  of  appeal.   He  submitted  that  the
    documents had been before the Tribunal and which  had  not  been  taken
    into account by the Tribunal
         had distorted the Tribunal's findings as to family life.

9.   Mr Walker relied on  the  Rule  24  response.   He  accepted  that  the
    Tribunal  had  placed  weight  on  the  absence  of   photographs   and
    verification documentation but it was clear that the decision  made  by
    the Tribunal focused on  the  lack  of  other  supporting  evidence  to
    establish the relationship between the appellant and his daughter.  The
    Tribunal found there was insufficient evidence to  establish  that  the
    appellant had a relationship with his daughter.  There was no  evidence
    to show he had sole responsibility for the child and the  Tribunal  had
    considered that there were no  compelling  or  other  circumstances  to
    justify consideration of Article 8 outside of the Rule.

10.  Mr Waithe responded contending  that  sole  responsibility  was  not  a
    relevant issue.  There had been no challenge by the respondent that the
    appellant had a relationship with his daughter.  The error  arose  from
    the Tribunal's failure to take into account material that was  in  fact
    before the  Tribunal  which  would  have  influenced  the  family  life
    findings and the issue of proportionality.   In  the  absence  of  that
    information the Tribunal's assessment of proportionality had  not  been
    properly carried out.

Discussion and Decision

11.  Having heard the submissions and considered the decision and reasons  I
    am satisfied that the grounds argued are made out and disclose an error
    of law such that the decision shall be set aside.  The Tribunal's  main
    concern was  the lack of evidence about the extent of  family  life  as
    between the appellant and his British citizen  daughter.  The  Tribunal
    firstly did overlook  relevant  evidence  of  the  photographs  of  the
    appellant and his daughter, together with a photocopy of the daughter's
    mother's passport and significantly placed weight  on  the  absence  of
    such material in reaching its decision.  The photographs are capable of
    showing that the appellant  and  his  daughter  engaged  in  activities
    together.  The passport was evidence  capable  of  verifying  that  the
    witness statement was from the child's mother and which  supported  the
    appellant's claim that  he  was  involved  with  his  daughter.   I  am
    satisfied that the errors are material and which  render  it  necessary
    for the matter to be remitted for a hearing de novo before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

Decision

12.  There is a material error of law in the determination  which  shall  be
    set aside.

13.  The matter is remitted for rehearing to the hearing  centre  at  Taylor
    House (excluding First-tier Tribunal Judge S Taylor) on a  date  to  be
    fixed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Dated: 30.10.2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  fee  award
in part (half of the fee) as the appellant produced the evidence at  a  late
stage at the hearing.


Signed                                  Dated 30.10.2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

