
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
IA/36375/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 19 February 2016                       |On 20 May 2016                    |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                          mr Ebhodaghe Goddy Edogun
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Solomon, Counsel, instructed by MA Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. The appellant (hereafter the Secretary of  State  or  SSHD)  brings  this
appeal against the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT)  Judge  R  A  Cox
dated 20 August 2015.  In that decision Judge Cox allowed the appeal of  the
respondent (hereafter the claimant) against a decision of 2  September  2014
to refuse to issue a permanent residence card  pursuant  to  Regulations  10
and  15  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006
(hereafter the 2006 Regulations).  The claimant had  applied  for  permanent
residence at an earlier period in time, on 18 August 2008 and this had  been
refused by the SSHD in a letter of 8 October 2009,  which  included  a  S120
Notice. Against that decision the claimant was appeal rights exhausted  long
ago.

2. In his grounds of appeal the claimant  in  addition  to  challenging  the
SSHD's decision  under  the  Regulations,  had  raised  Article  8  ECHR  in
connection with his relationship with his four  children  in  the  UK.   The
judge noted that:


    "In accordance with what appears to be [the SSHD's] usual  practice  in
    EEA cases of this nature  she  has  made  no  decision  to  remove  the
    [claimant] and has specifically not addressed any Article 8 or  Section
    55 [of the 2009 Act] issues in the refusal letter  indicating  that  if
    the [claimant] wished to pursue these matters he should make a separate
    application".

3. At [3]-]5] the judge stated:

    3.   Therein lay the  problem  for  me,  which  I  discussed  with  the
         representatives, who were both helpful.  In a nutshell, if  I  were
         to deal with the Article 8 issue myself I would need, as a  primary
         consideration, to have regard to the children's best interests.  In
         all such  cases  it  is  desirable  that  the  Secretary  of  State
         considers them first (having greater resources at her disposal) and
         of course there is in any event a statutory duty upon her so to do.
          That is not to say that the Tribunal is precluded from  being  the
         decision  maker  but  it  needs  to  be  "satisfied  that   it   is
         sufficiently equipped to make an adequate assessment  of  the  best
         interests of any affected child" - see MK (section 55 -  Tribunal
         options) Sierra Leone [2015] UKUT 00223 (IAC).   Here,  there  were
         four children to consider - two by the Appellant's ex-wife and two
         by his present partner - and I was far from satisfied that  I  had
         before me any sufficiency  of  material  upon  which  to  make  the
         necessary assessments.


    4.   Both representatives understood and agreed with my  position.   Ms
         Knight helpfully suggested that, as long as it was clear that I had
         made no findings on the issue under  the  Regulations,  then  there
         would be no problem in my remitting the whole case to the Secretary
         of State in order that she  might  consider  the  Section  55  best
         interests of the children in the context of the Article 8 Ground of
         Appeal.  Miss  Brankovic,  having  consulted  with  the  Appellant,
         readily concurred in  that  suggestion.   It  was  one  which  also
         commended itself to me, and seemed  consistent  with  the  guidance
         given at points (iv) and (v) of the explanatory head note in MK.


    5.   I therefore allow the appeal on the basis  that  the  Respondent's
         decision proves not to  have  been  in  accordance  with  the  law,
         without making any other findings on the matter, and to the  extent
         of remitting the case to the Secretary of State for reconsideration
         and a fresh decision which takes account of  the  Section  55  best
         interests of the Appellant's four  children.   I record  that  the
         Appellant has been advised, and has agreed, to  cooperate  in  this
         matter and in particular to provide through his representatives any
         necessary further information to assist the Secretary of  State  to
         perform her duty.

4. The SSHD's grounds were concise and to the point.  She accepted that  the
Presenting Officer at the hearing had been in  agreement  with  the  judge's
decision to remit the decision to the  SSHD.   However,  such  an  agreement
could have no effect where the issue was a matter of law and in  Amirteymour
and Others (EEA appeals, human rights) [2015] (IAC) the Upper  Tribunal  had
held that where no notice under Section 120 of the Nationality,  Immigration
and Asylum Act 2002 has been served and where no EEA decision to remove  has
been made an appellant cannot bring a human rights challenge  in  an  appeal
under the EEA Regulations.  The refusal of the claimant's application  under
the EEA Regulations had not been accompanied by a decision to  remove  or  a
notice under Section 120 and therefore it was wrong in law for the judge  to
find that the decision was not in accordance with the law.

5.In amplifying these grounds Mr Wilding submitted that the  position  taken
by the Upper Tribunal in Amirteymour had now been confirmed by the Court  of
Appeal in TY (Sri Lanka) [2015] EWCA Civ 1233.  In TY Jackson  LJ  addressed
the argument raised by Counsel Ms Jegarajah that  Amirteymour  was  contrary
to the ratio of JM v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1402.  In  JM  the  appellant  had
sought to rely upon an additional Article 8 ground in an  appeal  against  a
refusal to vary leave to remain.  The Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  had
refused to deal with the Article 8 ground  because  there  had  not  been  a
decision to remove and M was not in imminent danger  of  removal.   Allowing
M's appeal, the Court of Appeal held that the AIT  had  construed  S84(1)(g)
of  the  2002  Act  too  narrowly.   Jackson  LJ  rejected  Ms   Jegarajah's
submission, seeking to rely on JM, pointing out that  "The  crucial  feature
of JM was that the  Secretary  of  State  served  a  S120  One-Stop  Notice"
([34]).  It followed that:


    "... that the Secretary of State's decision  to  withhold  a  residence
    card  under  the  EEA  Regulations  would  only  breach  the   [Refugee
    Convention, or] ECHR if in the future the appellant makes an asylum  or
    human rights claim, which  the  Secretary  of  State  and/or  Tribunals
    incorrectly reject" ([35]).

6. Jackson LJ added at [36] that:


    "In the result I reach a similar decision on the issues  before  us  to
    the decision reached by the Upper Tribunal in Amirteymour.   The  Upper
    Tribunal in Amirteymour distinguished JM (Liberia) on a different basis
    from  that  which  I have  identified.   See  Amirteymour  at   [50].
    Nevertheless in the end  the  Upper  Tribunal  has  come  to  the  same
    decision as myself."

7. Mr Solomon's rejoinder to Mr Wilding's submission was very  detailed  but
was in summary that neither Amirteymour nor TY  applied  to  the  claimant's
case because unlike the appellants in those cases there  was  a  valid  S120
notice.

8. Mr Solomon accepted that  the  decision  under  challenge  had  not  been
accompanied by a S120 notice but relied  on  the  fact  that  one  had  been
served on the claimant previously.  This had been served in the  context  of
a decision made by the SSHD  on  8 October  2009  refusing  the  claimant's
(earlier) application for a permanent residence  card  on  the  basis  of  a
retained right of residence.  The notice in  question  stated  that  if  the
claimant wished to remain in the UK "you must now make  a  formal  statement
about any reasons why you think you should be allowed to stay here, and  any
grounds why you should not be removed or required to leave ..."

9. In seeking to make out his argument Mr Solomon relied  on  the  following
propositions:-

    1.   The "historic" S120 notice was still extant, as no time limit  was
         attached  to  such  a  notice  and  so  it  imposed  a   continuing
         obligation;


    2.   That no time  limit  was  attached  to  a  S120  notice  had  been
         confirmed by leading cases;


    3.   The continuing effect of a S120 notice was confirmed by S96(2)  of
         the 2002 Act;


    4.     The ability of a claimant to raise Article 8 issues  in  an  EEA
         appeal was consistent with Regulation 4(8) of  Schedule  2  to  the
         2006 Regulations.

10. Mr Wilding's submission in response was that whilst there  was  no  time
limit to a S120 notice it was served in respect of  an  appealable  decision
and  once  that  appeal  was  finally  determined,  it  no  longer  had  any
existence.  The claimant's historic S120 notice had been served  in  respect
of a decision on a previous application made by  the  claimant  and  against
that decision the claimant was appeal rights  exhausted.   In  the  decision
under challenge in this appeal there had been no S120 notice  and  the  SSHD
had  been  under  no  obligation  to  serve  one.   The  whole  purpose  and
philosophy behind S120 notice was a "one-stop shop", the regime designed  to
"flush out" all claims  an  appellant  might  wish  to  make;  Mr  Solomon's
reading of the legislation would extend the language  of  the  Act  way  too
far.  The historic S120 notice was some seven years  old.   There  had  been
two subsequent appeals.  In relation to the historic  S120  notice,  it  had
been served in very different circumstances.  If Mr  Solomon  was  right  an
appellant would not need to make an application for anything.

Analysis and legal framework

11. It is pertinent to recall the precise provisions of Sections 82,  85,120
and 96 of the 2002 Act as applicable to this case:-

      82 Right of appeal: general
      (1) Where an immigration decision is made in respect of a person he
      may appeal to the Tribunal.
      (2) In this Part "immigration decision" means-
      (a) refusal of leave to enter the United Kingdom,
      (b) refusal of entry clearance,
      (c) refusal of a certificate of entitlement under section 10 of this
      Act,
      (d) refusal to vary a person's leave to enter or remain in the United
      Kingdom if the result of the refusal is that the person has no leave
      to enter or remain,
      (e) variation of a person's leave to enter or remain in the United
      Kingdom if when the variation takes effect the person has no leave to
      enter or remain,
      (f) revocation under section 76 of this Act of indefinite leave to
      enter or remain in the United Kingdom,
      (g) a decision that a person is to be removed from the United Kingdom
      by way of directions under [section 10(1)(a), (b), (ba) or (c) of the
      Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 (c. 33)] 2 (removal of person
      unlawfully in United Kingdom),
      (h) ....
      (3) ....
      (4) The right of appeal under subsection (1) is subject to the
      exceptions and limitations specified in this Part.


      85 Matters to be considered
      (1) An appeal under section 82(1) against a decision shall be treated
      by the Tribunal as including an appeal against any decision in respect
      of which the appellant has a right of appeal under section 82(1).
      (2) If an appellant under section 82(1) makes a statement under
      section 120, the Tribunal shall consider any matter raised in the
      statement which constitutes a ground of appeal of a kind listed in
      section 84(1) against the decision appealed against.
      (3) Subsection (2) applies to a statement made under section 120
      whether the statement was made before or after the appeal was
      commenced.
      (4) On an appeal under section 82(1), 83(2) or 83A(2) against a
      decision the Tribunal may consider evidence about any matter which it
      thinks relevant to the substance of the decision, including evidence
      which concerns a matter arising after the date of the decision.


      120 Requirement to state additional grounds for application
      (1) This section applies to a person if-
      (a) he has made an application to enter or remain in the United
      Kingdom, or
      (b) an immigration decision within the meaning of section 82 has been
      taken or may be taken in respect of him.
      (2) The Secretary of State or an immigration officer may by notice in
      writing require the person to state-
      (a) his reasons for wishing to enter or remain in the United Kingdom,
      (b) any grounds on which he should be permitted to enter or remain in
      the United Kingdom, and
      (c) any grounds on which he should not be removed from or required to
      leave the United Kingdom.
      (3) A statement under subsection (2) need not repeat reasons or
      grounds set out in-
      (a) the application mentioned in subsection (1)(a), or
      (b) an application to which the immigration decision mentioned in
      subsection (1)(b) relates."


      96[ since 2004]  Earlier rights of appeal
      "(1) An appeal under section 82(1) against an immigration decision
      ("the new decision") in respect of a person may not be brought if the
      Secretary of State or an immigration officer certifies-
      (a) that the person was notified of a right of appeal under that
      section against another immigration decision ("the old decision")
      (whether or not an appeal was brought and whether or not any appeal
      brought has been determined),
      (b) that the claim or application to which the new decision relates
      relies on a matter that could have been raised in an appeal against
      the old decision, and
      (c) that, in the opinion of the Secretary of State or the immigration
      officer, there is no satisfactory reason for that matter not having
      been raised in an appeal against the old decision.
      (2) An appeal under section 82(1) against an immigration decision
      ("the new decision") in respect of a person may not be brought if the
      Secretary of State or an immigration officer certifies-
      (a) that the person received a notice under section 120 by virtue of
      an application other than that to which the new decision relates or by
      virtue of a decision other than the new decision,
      (b) that the new decision relates to an application or claim which
      relies on a matter that should have been, but has not been, raised in
      a statement made in response to that notice, and
      (c) that, in the opinion of the Secretary of State or the immigration
      officer, there is no satisfactory reason for that matter not having
      been raised in a statement made in response to that notice.


12. Also relevant  is  regulation  4(8)  of  Schedule  2  of  the  2006  EEA
Regulations which provides that:

    Section 120 of the 2002 Act shall apply to a person if an EEA  decision
    has been taken or may be taken in respect of him and, accordingly,  the
    Secretary of State or an immigration officer may by  notice  require  a
    statement from that person under subsection (2)  of  that  section  and
    that notice shall have effect for the purpose of section 96(2)  of  the
    2002 Act.


13. In AS (Afghanistan) [2009] EWCA Civ  1076  the  Court  of  Appeal  by  a
majority  considered that the language of the Act,  in  particular  Sections
85(2),  96(2)  and  120,  demonstrated  that  they  were  intended  to  form
constituent parts of a coherent procedure, designed to avoid a  multiplicity
of applications and appeals.  He  went  on  to  consider  S120  and  S96(2),
viewing them as a procedural scheme under which the appellant  was  required
to put forward all his grounds for challenging the decision against him  for
determination in one set of proceedings. AS (Afghanistan) was upheld by  the
Supreme Court in Patel v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2013]
UKSC 72.

14.It is  entirely  clear  from  the  above  statutory  scheme  and  leading
decisions relating to it that the procedural scheme established by  S120  is
to allow and encourage an applicant to provide all the  reasons  he  or  she
has for appealing against  a  particular  decision.  Whilst  S120  does  not
specify a time limit for replying, the life of a S120 notice cannot  survive
beyond final determination of any appeal  against  that  decision.  That  is
demonstrated by  the wording of S85(2) which provides that if  an  appellant
under S82(1) makes a statement under S120, "the Tribunal shall consider  any
matter raised in the statement which constitutes a ground  of  appeal  of  a
kind listed in section 84 against the decision appealed  against"  (emphasis
added).  By S85(3) such a statement can be made "before or after the  appeal
was commenced" but not beyond final determination of the appeal.  Similarly,
the language of S120 provides for the Secretary of State or  an  immigration
officer to issue a notice in writing in respect of a person who  has  either
made an application to enter or remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  [the  pre-
decision stage] or where "(b) an immigration decision within the meaning  of
section 82 has been taken or may be taken  in  respect  of  him."  (emphasis
added) Where the decision has been taken, then  the  notice  is  limited  to
setting out reasons or grounds relating to that decision. Section  120(3)(b)
 makes clear that such a statement need not repeat reasons  or  grounds  set
out in "an application  to  which  the  immigration  decision  mentioned  in
subsection 1(b) relates" (emphasis added).

15.As regards S.96(2), I see nothing in its wording to support Mr  Solomon's
thesis  that  a  S120  notice  has  a   continuing   effect   beyond   final
determination  of  any  appeal  against  a  decision  made  on  a   previous
application. According to Mr Solomon, this  provision  established  that  it
could only be by application of S96  in  the  form  of  a  positive  act  of
certifying that the Secretary of State could  prevent  an  old  S120  notice
from having continuing effect. He pointed out that the  Secretary  of  State
had not chosen to certify the claimant's current appeal. However, whilst  as
Burnton LJ said in Lamichane v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
[2012] EWCA Civ 2 at [35], S120 does not contain any time limits and  "[t]he
primary consequence of the service of a section 120 notice is  to  be  found
in section 96",  S96 provides a discretionary  mechanism  that  enables  the
Secretary of State to  prevent  an  appeal  being  brought  against  a  "new
decision" if there has been an "old decision (whether or not an  appeal  was
brought against it and whether or not any  appeal  brought  against  it  has
been determined). Nothing in its wording seeks to modify the  definition  of
a S120 notice as given in S120 itself. Failure on the part of the  Secretary
of State to apply S96 does not alter the  basic  concepts  set  out  in  the
structure of the 2002 Act  that  (i)  require  a  decision  to  be  made  in
relation to a particular application; (ii) provide rights of appeal only  in
relation to appeals against a  particular  (historic)  decision;  and  which
(iii) provide for final determination of an appeal.

16. I concur with Mr Wilding in considering that if  Mr  Solomon's  approach
was adopted, the entire decision-making process in the field of  immigration
would become a constant regurgitation of old grounds and  reasons  given  in
response to old S120 notices no matter how  unconnected  they  were  to  the
situation as at the date of application. The "one-stop  shop"  would  indeed
become a multistop carousel. As is made apparent by the facts of this  case,
it would entail decision-makers and courts and  tribunals  having  to  trawl
back to S120 notices served years ago in very different  factual  and  legal
circumstances- in the claimant's case, over 6 years ago.

17. For the above reasons my decision is that the First-tier Tribunal  judge
materially erred in law in allowing the appeal on "not  in  accordance  with
the law" grounds. The only decision under appeal was  that  against  refusal
to issue a permanent residence card under the 2006 EEA Regulations. Yet  the
judge made no findings in relation to the EEA decision under appeal at  all:
see [4]. That was a material error of law.

18. Having concluded that the judge materially  erred  in  law,  I  turn  to
consider whether I am in a position to re-make the decision without  further
ado. I am satisfied that I am not in a  position  to  re-make  the  decision
myself because the effect of the judge's decision is  that  the  appeal  has
not yet being considered at all. That being so, it falls squarely under  the
Senior President's Practice Statement governing remittals to the  First-tier
tribunal. I hereby remit  this  case  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  with  a
direction that the only matter to be considered by it  concerns  the  appeal
against the Secretary of State's decision of 2 September  2014  refusing  to
issue the claimant with a permanent residence card. The composition  of  the
First-tier Tribunal should not include Judge R.A. Cox.




19. No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date: 17 May 2016


                            [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

