
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number IA/36778/2013
                                                               IA/36780/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons promulgated       |
|On 20 November 2014                  |On 19 June 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis


                                   Between

                          1) Benik Aghajaniohanians
                             2) Folora Yessaian
                         (Anonymity orders not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellants:    Ms S Amal of MAAS.
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. These are linked appeals against the decisions of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Devittie promulgated on 27 August 2014  dismissing  each  of  the
    Appellants'  appeals  against  decisions  of  the  Respondent  dated  5
    September 2013 to refuse to vary leave to remain and to remove each  of
    them from the UK.



Background

 2. The Appellants are nationals of Iran born on 26 May 1928  and  21  July
    1940 respectively. They are husband and wife. They entered the UK on 18
    September 2012 pursuant to  visitor  visas.  On  4  January  2013  they
    applied for leave to remain. The applications were refused, and removal
    decisions were made by  way  of  Notices  of  Immigration  Decision  in
    consequence.

 3. The Appellants appealed to the IAC.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  dismissed  the  Appellants'  appeal  for
    reasons set out in his determination.

 5. The Appellants sought permission to appeal which was granted by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth on 14 October 2014.

Consideration

 6. In granting permission to  appeal  Judge  Hollingworth  identified  two
    arguable errors of law: one  in  respect  of  "an  adjournment  [being]
    refused": the other in respect of whether the correct  Rules  had  been
    applied to the appeal.

 7. The lengthy Grounds in support of the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal include the following at paragraph 1b: "The Tribunal  materially
    erred in law by failing to adjourn the hearing in view of the fact that
    the respondent had  failed  to  serve  statements  of  reasons  on  the
    appellants along with the notices of its decisions... and had failed to
    file the statements of reasons with the tribunal...".

 8. Before me Ms Ammal acknowledged that there  was  no  evidence  that  an
    application for an adjournment had been made,  and  also,  necessarily,
    acknowledged that this put her in difficulty in pursuing this ground of
    challenge. She indicated that she would not  pursue  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal the issue of the apparent absence of a RFRL before the  First-
    tier Tribunal. She expressly accepted that the Appellants had been able
    to bring forward the case that they had wanted to present, and had  had
    an adjudication upon it by the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. As regards the Immigration Rules, the first thing to note is  that  the
    Appellants' application sought  "indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom under paragraph 318  with  reference  to  paragraph  317
    immigration rules, and Leave Outside the Rules  (LOTR)",  (see  opening
    paragraph of representatives' letter dated 2 January 2013 enclosing the
    SET(O) application form and supporting documents  (Respondent's  bundle
    before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  annex  D).  However,   because   the
    Appellants'  applications  were  made  after  9  July  2012,  and   the
    transitional  provisions  in  Part  8  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  in
    particular paragraph A280(c)(ii) and (d) did not apply, paragraphs  317
    and 318 were not the applicable rules.

10. The First-tier Tribunal Judge correctly identified that the  applicable
    rules were to be found in Appendix FM (paragraph  7).  He  then  stated
    that Section EC-DR - 'Entry clearance as an adult  dependent  relative'
    was applicable, and went on to consider aspects of that  Section.  This
    was in error because the Appellants were not seeking  entry  clearance,
    but leave to remain - and indeed indefinite leave to remain.

11. Bearing in mind that they could not qualify under the rules for limited
    to remain as a parent because their 'child'  was  over  18,  under  the
    Rules the Appellants fell to be  considered  under  Section  E-ILRDR  -
    'Eligibility for indefinite leave to  remain  as  an  adult  relative'.
    However, each of the Appellants failed at the first requirement - being
    in the UK with valid leave to remain as an adult dependent relative (E-
    ILRDR.1.2).

12. Further and in any event, the Judge's entirely sustainable findings  in
    respect of  the  financial  requirements  (paragraph  9)  were  equally
    applicable  to  Section  E-ILRDR:  see  and   compare   the   identical
    requirements of E-ECDR.3.2 and E-ILRDR.1.4.

13. Accordingly the error in identifying EC-DR as the applicable rules  was
    not material to the outcome under the Rules.

14. Nor, in my judgement was it  material  to  the  Judge's  evaluation  of
    Article 8. I accept that the Immigration Rules form  a  backdrop  to  a
    consideration of Article 8: necessarily so because an  element  of  the
    Article 8 assessment is an attempt to identify whether  there  are  any
    circumstances not adequately covered  by  the  Rules.  This  should  of
    course, properly, involve and identification of the correct  applicable
    rule. However, any such failure to correctly  identify  the  applicable
    rule - as here - is not  inevitably  fatal  if  there  is  no  material
    difference in respect of the consideration of an inapplicable rule.

15. In my judgement, on the facts of this particular case the Judge's error
    in wrongly identifying the applicable rules could have made no material
    difference to the evaluation  under  Article  8  bearing  in  mind  the
    findings that he made which were equally applicable to the  Rules  that
    should have been applied to the appeal  -  and  there  was  in  fact  a
    further basis upon which the Appellants would  have  failed  under  the
    correct rule, i.e. that they entered with entry clearance  as  visitors
    and not with entry clearance as adult dependent relatives.

16. Whilst it is correct, as identified in the Grounds in  support  of  the
    application for permission to appeal, that the post-entry Rules do  not
    make any express reference to care needs, I do not accept that  in  the
    context of Article 8 the  requirement  under  the  pre-entry  Rules  in
    respect of care needs become, as pleaded, "irrelevant". This is because
    the post-entry rules make it  a  requirement  that  an  applicant  have
    entered as an adult dependent relative, and  necessarily  therefore  to
    have entered having satisfied an entry clearance officer in respect  of
    care needs. An in-country applicant cannot generally, as it were,  'by-
    pass' the care requirements of the system  of  immigration  control  in
    respect of adult dependent relatives in circumstances where he  or  she
    entered in a different category  and  has  made  an  application  which
    expressly falls for refusal under the Rules on the basis that he or she
    did not enter because of pressing care needs that could not be  met  in
    his or her own country. Accordingly, in my judgement,  the  care  needs
    aspect is highly relevant a consideration under Article 8.

17. Otherwise as regards the  Article  8  submission,  in  the  Grounds  in
    support of the application for permission to appeal it is  argued  that
    the Judge's decision was irrational in the sense  that  "no  reasonable
    Tribunal could ever have come to it" (Part II, Grounds at paragraph 1).
    It is not apparent that such a submission found any favour  with  Judge
    Hollingworth in granting permission to appeal. Be that as  it  may,  in
    any event I reject the submission.

18. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did identify that "This  is  a  difficult
    case"  (paragraph  21).  The  compassionate  circumstances   inevitably
    involved in an application to remain made by elderly  parents,  one  of
    whom is suffering from a  number  of  ailments  as  identified  in  the
    supporting medical evidence, may make any adverse decision 'difficult';
    that is very different from making the decision one of perversity.

19. In this context, and generally, it is abundantly clear that the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge gave careful consideration to the  evidence,  which
    is clearly set out at  paragraphs  3-6  of  the  determination.  It  is
    equally clear that the Judge gave careful evaluation to  this  evidence
    in the remaining body of his decision. I do not  accept  for  a  moment
    that his conclusion was irrational or otherwise unsustainable.

20. In many respects this is a paradigm case adequately and exactly covered
    by the Rules, and in respect of which there is nothing exceptional. The
    Immigration Rules in respect of adult dependent relatives  overtly  set
    out specific, and quite demanding, requirements both in respect of  the
    nature of care needs and the lack of adequate provision in the  country
    of habitual residence, and the specified evidence required  in  support
    (Appendix FM-SE paragraphs 33-37). Where the Judge was not satisfied in
    respect of such  matters,  and  where  in  reality  there  was  nothing
    exceptional being advanced in the case beyond the  claimed  care  needs
    that were the very particular concern of the  Rules,  it  was  entirely
    justifiable and sustainable to conclude that the Appellants' removal in
    consequence of  the  Respondent's  decisions  would  not  constitute  a
    disproportionate   interference   with   their   Article   8    rights,
    notwithstanding the sympathy evoked by the circumstances - to which the
    Judge makes express reference at paragraph 21.

21. In her oral submissions Ms Ammal essentially reiterated the  merits  of
    the case to an extent that I was required to intervene and  invite  her
    to direct my attention to any particular error of law: her response was
    essentially "you can't define human rights, each case  depends  on  its
    facts" before adding that the Judge had not given "due weight"  to  the
    circumstances, and inviting my  attention  to  the  supporting  medical
    evidence in respect of the First Appellant. Necessarily I consider such
    submissions to be no more than an attempt to re-argue  the  issues  in,
    and merits of, the appeal - but in doing so they failed to identify any
    relevant error of law.

22. In all such circumstances I find no material error of law.



Notices of Decision

23. The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal contained no  material  errors
    of law, and accordingly the decisions stand.

24. The appeals of each of the Appellants are dismissed.

25. No anonymity order is sought or made.



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     17 June 2015
