
IAC-AH-pc-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/36469/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 20 November 2014                |On 26 November 2014                |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                             Olarn Chiaravanont
                         (anonymity Order NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Bazzini of Counsel instructed by E2W (UK) Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin of the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS
The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Thailand born  on  2  January  1986.   He
    first entered the United Kingdom on 1 September 2000.   Since  then  he
    has been educated at  secondary  and  tertiary  levels  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  In recent years he  has  begun  to  establish  himself  as  a
    promising young artist. On  28  January  2013,  before  expiry  of  his
    previous leave, he submitted an application for indefinite leave on the
    basis of long residency under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules
    (the IRs).

 2. On 8 August 2013 the Respondent refused his application and decided  he
    should be removed  by  way  of  directions  under  Section  47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  By a letter of the  same
    date the Respondent gave reasons for the decision.  The  Appellant  had
    been out of the country for longer than the maximum  periods  permitted
    if an applicant was to qualify for indefinite leave based on ten years'
    continuous lawful residence.

 3. The Respondent went on to consider whether the Appellant  had  a  claim
    that  removal  would  place  the  United  Kingdom  in  breach  of   its
    obligations to respect his  private  and  family  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom protected by Article 8 of the European  Convention  by  way  of
    reference to the IRs and Appendix FM.  There was no9 evidence of family
    life and he did not meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE  relating
    to private life. The Respondent considered there were  no  sufficiently
    compelling or compassionate circumstances to warrant granting  him  any
    further leave exceptionally and outside the IRs.

The First-tier Tribunal Determination

 4. On 3 September 2013 the Appellant lodged notice of appeal under Section
    82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended.  The
    grounds relied on Article 8 outside the IRs but also made  non-specific
    references to applicants similar to the Appellant who had been educated
    in the United Kingdom and whose absences were because  of  their  youth
    and for school holidays.

 5. By a determination promulgated on 27 August 2014 following a hearing on
    23 July 2014 Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Verity  dismissed  the
    appeal based on long residency grounds under paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    IRs because the Appellant  had  spent  more  time  outside  the  United
    Kingdom than permitted by the IRs.

 6. She made findings of fact about the Appellant relating to the length of
    time he had been in the United Kingdom, his  education  in  the  United
    Kingdom and on the evidence that  he  was  seen  to  be  an  artist  of
    exceptional  talent  and  showed  great  promise.   Having  made  these
    findings of fact she concluded in the  context  of  the  IRs  that  the
    Appellant fell within  the  exceptional  circumstances  category.   She
    noted a considerable amount of evidence had been put before  her  which
    had  not  previously  been  seen  by  the   Respondent   and   remitted
    consideration of the Appellant's claim under Article 8 outside the  IRs
    to the Respondent.

 7. Each party sought permission to appeal and by a single permission of 14
    October 2014 dealing with both applications  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal P J M Hollingworth granted permission in the following terms:-

         The judge should not have returned the matter to the  Secretary  of
         State.  There is no indication as to whether the appeal was allowed
         or not ... it is unclear  whether  the  criteria  in  Gulshan  were
         satisfied.  At paragraph 21 the judge has referred to  forming  the
         opinion that the Appellant did fall within what might be termed the
         'exceptional  circumstances'  category.   In  the  light  of   this
         conclusion the purported return of the matter to the  Secretary  of
         State vitiates the determination.  At paragraph 23 the judge states
         that the matter should be returned to the  Secretary  of  State  to
         consider all the facts and for detailed consideration to  be  given
         to whether the Appellant falls within the exceptional circumstances
         category ...  in  the  light  of  the  conclusion  reached  ...  at
         paragraph 21 a further arguable error has arisen in relation to the
         purported delegation of a decision by the judge already reached.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 8. The Appellant attended the hearing.  Following  a  lengthy  discussion,
    both parties agreed the determination  dismissing  the  long  residency
    appeal under the  IRs  at  paragraph  19  should  stand.   However  the
    consideration of the appeal on Article 8 grounds outside the IRs should
    be remitted to Judge Verity for further consideration on the basis that
    her starting point should be the findings of fact made at paragraph  21
    of her determination.  I did not consider I could re-make the  decision
    at the same hearing because it was not  clear  from  the  determination
    whether the findings were selective or comprehensive  and  because  the
    balancing exercise must take all circumstances into account.

Reasons for Finding of an Error of Law

 9. At the start of paragraph 21 of her determination  the  Judge  referred
    expressly to paragraph 276ADE of the IRs. She had "formed  the  opinion
    that  the  Appellant  did  fall  within  what  might  be   termed   the
    "exceptional circumstances" category.

10. MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013]EWCA Civ.1192 is acknowledged to be a current
    leading judgment in the jurisprudence relating  to  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention in English law.  It focuses on the  application  of
    Article 8 both within the Immigration Rules  and  outwith  the  IRs  in
    cases involving the deportation of foreign non-EEA national  criminals.
    Paragraph 398 of the Rules which relates to deportation uses the phrase
    'exceptional circumstances'.   This  is  not  a  deportation  case.  At
    paragraphs 39 and 40 the Master of the Rolls said:-

         (Counsel) has made it clear on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State
         that  the  new  Rules  do  not  herald   a   restoration   of   the
         exceptionality test.  We agree.  ...The Rules expressly contemplate
         a weighing of the public interest  in  deportation  against  'other
         factors'.  In our view, this must  be  a  reference  to  all  other
         factors which  are  relevant  to  proportionality  and  entails  an
         implicit requirement that they are to be taken into account.

         ...It is necessary to focus on the statement that it will  only  be
         'in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the   public   interest   in
         deportation will be outweighed by other factors'.  ...Great  weight
         should be  given  to  the  public  interest  in  deporting  foreign
         criminals....  It is only exceptionally that such foreign criminals
         will succeed in showing that their rights under Article 8(1)  trump
         the public interest in their deportation.

    At paragraph 41, the Master of the Rolls referred to the judgment in  R
    (Nagre v SSHD [2013]  EWHC  720  (Admin).   He  pointed  out  that  the
    significance of the cases cited in Nagre was in the repeated use by the
    European  Courts  of  Human   Rights   of   the   phrase   'exceptional
    circumstances'.

11. I take it he was referring to paragraph 40 of the  judgment  in  Nagre.
    With one exception each of the ECtHR cases in the  long  list  is  from
    jurisdictions other than the United  Kingdom  where  the  domestic  law
    within the margin of appreciation of contracting states may and in some
    cases does (for example Norway and Denmark) provide that the  test  for
    engaging rights protected by the European Convention is more  stringent
    than the test of reasonableness established by Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL
    11. MF (Nigeria) makes the point that in assessing the  proportionality
    of a deportation decision it will only be in exceptional  circumstances
    that the public interest will be outweighed by other factors.  But this
    is not a deportation case.

12. At paragraph 128 of R (oao MM and Others) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 985 in
    the leading judgment Aikens LJ in the course of a lengthy discussion of
    the relationship of the jurisprudence on Article 8 in  the  context  of
    the Immigration Rules and Strasbourg case-law said:-

        ....  Nagre does not add anything  to  the  debate,  save  for  the
        statement that if a particular person is outside the rule  then  he
        has to demonstrate, as a preliminary to a consideration outside the
        rule, that he has an arguable case that there may be  good  grounds
        for granting leave to remain outside the rules. I cannot  see  much
        utility in  imposing  this  further,  intermediary,  test.  If  the
        applicant cannot satisfy the rule, then there either is or there is
        not a further Article 8 claim.  .....

    and at paragraph 134:-

        ......  if the relevant group of IRs is not such a "complete  code"
        then the proportionality test will be more at large, albeit  guided
        by the Huang tests and UK and Strasbourg case law.

13. The test of exceptional circumstances is different  from  the  approach
    referred to in the Section of Chapter 8 of the Immigration  Directorate
    Instructions on family members dealing with Appendix FM.   Section  1.0
    Introduction provides:-

         This  guidance  reflects  the  two-stage  approach  to  considering
         applications under the family and private life Rules in Appendix FM
         and paragraph 276ADE-DH.  First, caseworkers must consider  whether
         the applicant meets the requirements of the Rules, and if they  do,
         leave under the rules should be granted.  If the applicant does not
         meet the requirements of the Rules, the caseworker must move on  to
         a second stage: whether, based on an overall consideration  of  the
         facts of the case, there are exceptional circumstances  which  mean
         refusal of the application  would  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh
         consequences for the individual or their family such  that  refusal
         would not be proportionate under Article  8.   If  there  are  such
         exceptional  circumstances,  leave  outside  the  Rules  should  be
         granted.  If not, the application should be refused.


         This two-stage approach has been endorsed by the High Court in  the
         Judicial Review in Nagre.  In the judgment Sales J finds  that  our
         regime of Rules coupled with the  Secretary  of  State's  published
         policy on  exceptional  circumstances  '...fully  accommodates  the
         requirements of Article 8' [paragraph 36]  and  '...there  is  full
         coverage of an individual's rights under Article 8 in all cases  by
         a combination of the new Rules and (so far  as  may  be  necessary)
         under the Secretary of State's residual discretion to  grant  leave
         to remain outside the Rules' [paragraph 35].  ...

    The test described in MF (Nigeria) is different  from  the  Immigration
    Directorate Instructions which is not part of the Rules: see paragraphs
    64 and 106 of the judgment in R (Alvi) v SSHD [2012] UKSC 33.

14. Further, at paragraph 54 of Patel and others v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72 Lord
    Carnwath approved the approach to Article 8 described in Huang and that
    the Rules are no more than the starting point for the consideration  of
    Article 8.

15. Indeed, the suggested logic that a test of exceptional circumstances or
    compassionate  factors  referred  to  in  the  Immigration  Directorate
    Instructions has  to  be  engaged  before  a  less  stringent  test  of
    "reasonableness" under Article 8 outside the  IRs  can  be  engaged  is
    difficult to follow.

16. It follows that being found to be in  the  "exceptional  circumstances"
    category is for the Respondent the trigger for her case worker to go on
    to consider the claim with regard to Article 8 outside  the  IRs.   But
    there is no logic at law for the imposition of this initial hurdle.

17. The Judge commented on the amount of evidence which was before her  and
    which had not been considered by the Respondent.  This was  not  reason
    enough to remit the matter to the Secretary of State.   The  Judge  was
    then in a position to conduct a proper assessment  of  the  Appellant's
    case  under  Article  8  outside  the  IRs.   Her  treatment   of   the
    "exceptional  circumstances"  category  and  failure  to  make  a  full
    assessment of the Article 8 claim outside the IRs amounted to an  error
    of law.

18. There was no challenge  to  those  facts  upon  which  the  Judge  made
    findings.  As  mentioned,  it  is  not  clear  from  the  face  of  the
    determination  whether  such  findings  are   comprehensive.   In   the
    circumstances I consider it appropriate to find that there is an  error
    of law in the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  and  that  the
    matter should be remitted to the same judge to complete the  assessment
    and determination of the Appellant's claim under Article 8.

Anonymity

19. There was no request for an anonymity direction or order.  Having  read
    the papers in the Tribunal file and heard the parties on the  error  of
    law issue, I do not see that any such is required.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal's determination  contained  an  error  of  law.  The
appeal is remitted for a resumed hearing in the First-tier  Tribunal  before
Judge Verity on the basis outlined above.

No anonymity order is made.


Signed/Official Crest  Date 26. xi. 2014

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


