
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/36337/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 October 2016                   |On 15 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                    MIHINDUKULASOORIYA JUDE GAYAN PEIRIS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Kannangara, of Counsel (Direct Access)
For the Respondent:    Ms Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction

 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision  of  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal M Dennis (hereafter "the Judge") promulgated on  10
    May 2016.



Background

 2. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka born on 21 November  1984.  He
    entered the UK as a student on 17 November 2008 valid  to  28  February
    2011 and was granted further leave to remain in the same capacity until
    18 December 2012. He was subsequently granted further leave  to  remain
    as a Tier 1 Entrepreneur until 24 June 2016. On 9 September  2014,  the
    Appellant was stopped at Heathrow airport, returning from a short visit
    to Sri Lanka, and refused leave to enter as it  was  believed  that  he
    obtained and used a false English Language certificate  to  support  an
    application made on 24 June 2013 with a  view  to  obtaining  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 1 Entrepreneur. The Appellant  was,  however,  granted
    temporary admission to appeal the decision.

The Decision of the Judge

 3. The appeal came before the Judge for oral hearing on 25 September 2015.
    The parties were represented and the  Judge  heard  evidence  from  the
    Appellant and received submissions on behalf of both  parties.  At  the
    end of  the  hearing  the  Judge  reserved  his  decision  for  written
    determination which was given in a decision promulgated on 10 May  2016
    dismissing the appeal.

 4. The Judge considered the oral and documentary evidence  which  included
    inter alia a copy of the Appellant's landing card,  witness  statements
    of Rebecca Collings,  Peter  Millington  and  Matthew  Harold,  various
    printouts purporting to confirm the Appellant's test  result  had  been
    invalidated by ETS, Immigration Officer's  Explanatory  Statement,  the
    Appellant's witness statement together  with  a  TOEIC  Official  Score
    Report.

 5. It was the Respondent's case before  the  Judge  that  the  information
    provided by ETS shows that the Appellant's speaking test had been taken
    by a proxy  test  taker.   The  Appellant  denied  using  a  proxy.  He
    confirmed that he had not committed deception at the time of his Tier 1
    extension application  and  he  undertook  the  English  language  test
    himself.

 6. In a comprehensive decision the Judge concluded that the  Secretary  of
    State had discharged the onus upon her to establish that the  Appellant
    had perpetrated a deception. The Judge considered the  responses  given
    by the Appellant at the airport; his witness  statement  together  with
    his claims at interview  and  his  oral  evidence,  and  noted  various
    inconsistencies and disparities. The  Judge  considered  it  improbable
    that the Appellant could not remember the  test  centre  or  the  year,
    month or season that he took the test and thus  rejected  his  evidence
    that he had informed the Immigration Officer at port that he  took  the
    test in July 2012 [9]-[11]. The Judge considered that  these  omissions
    were fatal to the Appellant's appeal [12]. The Judge went on to  assess
    other aspects of the Appellant's evidence and found his claim  to  have
    engaged the services of a consultant  to  register  for  the  test  was
    highly implausible [15].

 7. In his omnibus conclusion the Judge wrote  inter  alia  as  follows  at
    [16]:

         "Thus, viewing all of  these  parts  of  the  Appellant's  evidence
         together, I am  satisfied  to  the  high  end  of  the  balance  of
         probabilities, that he did not  sit  the  examination  on  17  July
         2012...and  thus  that  the  results   of   the   Respondent   were
         fraudulently obtained and unreliable."

    And then wrote inter alia in conclusion at [17] as follows:

         "While I might not have concluded that the  Respondent  could  have
         carried the burden of proof, to whatever extent it may have it,  on
         the basis of these witness statements and the data printouts  alone
         in the face of  strong,  credible  and  reliable  evidence  to  the
         contrary from the Appellant, in the  particular  circumstances,  as
         noted above, I am satisfied that the Appellant's own evidence  must
         been seen as confirming the  conclusions  of  the  Respondent.  For
         these reasons, the appeal falls to be dismissed."

8.    The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted  by  Judge
    Saffer on 21 September 2016.

Decision on Error of Law

9.     The  case  before  the  Judge  involved  an  assertion  made  by  the
      Respondent that the Appellant had deployed deception in the taking  of
      an English language test (TOEIC) administered by ETS, one of  the  few
      suppliers used by the Respondent as an out-sourced  provider  of  such
      tests  worldwide.  As  a  consequence  the  Respondent  cancelled  the
      Appellant's leave and refused leave to enter following his return from
      Sri Lanka after a short holiday on  9  September  2014.  The  evidence
      produced by the Respondent was essentially that outlined in [4] above.
      The Judge made a series of clear and unequivocal adverse  findings  as
      to the Appellant's credibility over paragraphs  [9]  to  [17]  of  his
      decision which I have summarised above.

10.   The grounds raise a "concern" as to whether  the  excessive  delay  in
      preparing the decision  "would  have  affected  the  decision-making".
      Nothing more is said. I note the delay is a  period  of  seven  months
      from the hearing of the appeal in September 2015  to  promulgation  of
      the decision in May 2016. The  Judge  apologised  for  the  delay  and
      explained that this was on account of  his  ill-health.  While  it  is
      unfortunate that the decision did not come to be  written  until  some
      seven months after the hearing, I drew Mr  Kannangara's  attention  to
      the authorities of Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  v  RK
      (Algeria) [2007] EWCA Civ 868 and Arusha and Demushi  (deprivation  of
      citizenship - delay) [2012] UKUT 00080 (IAC), from which it  is  clear
      that there must be a nexus between the delay and  the  safety  of  the
      decision. I observed that I could not readily identify a  causal  link
      between the delay and the Judge's  adverse  credibility  findings.  In
      this regard Mr Kannangara submitted that his  only  concern  was  "how
      fresh the evidence was  in  the  Judge's  mind  when  he  reached  his
      decision".

11.   In my judgement is entirely apparent from a holistic  reading  of  the
      decision that the Judge did take full account  of  all  the  evidence.
      Indeed the Judge said at [3] that:"I have read and considered  all  of
      the evidence before me, including my verbatim notes of  the  testimony
      of the Appellant at the hearing together with the submissions made  on
      behalf of both parties in reaching my decision."  The  Appellant  does
      not contend that his evidence was not accurately recorded or that  any
      part of it was not considered by the Judge. I have carefully  examined
      the Judge's decision and I am satisfied that Mr Kannangara has  failed
      to show, indeed he does not purport to show,  any  nexus  between  the
      delay and the safety of the decision. I acknowledge the Judge fell far
      short of timeliness, but injustice to the Appellant has not  resulted.
      Just as in RK (above), where the Court of Appeal declined in the event
      to  overturn  the  impugned  determination  despite   the   delay   in
      promulgation, in the present appeal I find  that  the  delay  has  not
      affected the Judge's credibility assessment or his general approach to
      the case.  There is no material error of law.

12.   While I do not uphold the Appellant's  complaint  in  respect  of  the
      above, I am satisfied that the grounds in other respects  disclose  an
      error on a point of law such that the decision must be set  aside.  My
      reasons are as follows.

13.   There are difficulties in the manner in which  the  Judge  dealt  with
      the "veritable boomerang of proof" applicable in deception cases:  see
      SM and Qadir v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  (ETS  -
      Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 00229 (IAC) at [10]. While the
      Judge did not have the benefit of the guidance given by  the  Tribunal
      therein (it was decided after the hearing of  the  Appellant's  appeal
      albeit it had been reported before the Judge signed off his decision),
      the Tribunal endorsed the approach taken in the case of  Shen  (papers
      appeals: proving dishonesty) [2014] UKUT 00236 at [22] and  [25]  that
      the  Secretary  of  State  bears  the  initial  evidential  burden  of
      furnishing proof of deception and if satisfied the burden shifts  onto
      the  individual  to  provide  an  innocent  explanation,  and  if  the
      individual does so the burden shifts back to the Secretary of State to
      discharge the legal burden. It is common ground that the  standard  of
      proof is the balance of probabilities (SM Qadir at [58]). In  view  of
      the legal framework within which the allegation of deception is to  be
      assessed it is necessary to analyse the Judge's overall approach.

14.   At [8] the Judge said:

         "In the ordinary course of events, the burden  of  proof  will  lie
         with an appellant to demonstrate on the balance  of  probabilities,
         he is entitled to the leave to remain he seeks. Here, however,  the
         Respondent has asserted that  the  Appellant  submitted  fraudulent
         documentation to  obtain  that  leave.  There  continues  to  be  a
         distinct lack of clarity in respect of  such  circumstances  as  to
         whether the Respondent needs only introduce a prima  facie  showing
         of a factual basis for such an assertion or  whether,  once  having
         asserted it, the burden fully shifts to the Respondent to prove the
         allegation rather than to  the  Appellant  to  disprove  it.  I  am
         satisfied that on careful consideration of all evidence  before  me
         that in this particular  case  this  is  a  distinction  without  a
         difference. I am satisfied to  the  high  end  of  the  balance  of
         probabilities the  Respondent  has  made  out  its  case  that  the
         Appellant used a fraudulently obtained test score  to  support  his
         application for leave to remain as an entrepreneur. I am,  however,
         equally satisfied that the Appellant has failed to carry any burden
         of proof which might be deemed to be upon  him  to  demonstrate  he
         actually undertook all parts of the TOEIC examination at issue."

      And at [16] said:

         "Thus, viewing all of  these  parts  of  the  Appellant's  evidence
         together, I am  satisfied  to  the  high  end  of  the  balance  of
         probabilities, that he did not sit the examination..."

      And in conclusion at [17] said:

         "I have  considered  the  arguments  to  be  made  against  relying
         exclusively upon the Respondent's witness statements  and  the  ETS
         assessments.  Here,  however,  those  form  a  secondary  level  of
         evidence. It would be entirely appropriate to  consider  that  they
         were sufficient to raise the  issue  of  the  Appellant's  possible
         deception, but the Appellant's own evidence has not only failed  to
         overcome such a preliminary doubt but  has,  in  my  opinion,  only
         confirmed it.........While I might  not  have  concluded  that  the
         Respondent could have carried the  burden  of  proof,  to  whatever
         extent it may have it, on the basis of these witness statements and
         the data printouts alone  in  the  face  of  strong,  credible  and
         reliable evidence to  the  contrary  from  the  Appellant,  in  the
         particular circumstance, as noted above, I am  satisfied  that  the
         Appellant's own evidence must be seen as confirming the conclusions
         of the Respondent."

15.   These passages reveal difficulties with the  Judge's  application  of
      the shifting burden of proof and indeed the standard of proof in  such
      cases. The Judge does not set out in clear unequivocal terms that  the
      initial burden is an evidential one that rests  on  the  Secretary  of
      State, and that she only bears the legal burden once the Appellant has
      raised an innocent explanation. It is difficult  to  discern  why  the
      Judge believed the applicable principles were unclear  given  hitherto
      the Tribunal's jurisprudence on the point: SM Qadir [57]. I agree with
      the submission of Mr  Kannangara  that  the  suggestion  that  "strong
      credible and reliable evidence" is required to counter the  allegation
      places the bar too high when, all the Appellant is required to  do  so
      is to advance an innocent explanation.  Furthermore,  I  am  satisfied
      that the Judge plainly erred in assessing the evidence  to  the  "high
      end of the balance of probabilities". There is no such  sliding  scale
      on the spectrum of proof. The submission of Ms Brocklesby-Weller  that
      the Judge's application of a higher standard of proof only  prejudiced
      the appraisal of the Respondent's evidence [8] cannot stand given  the
      same terminology is used in  the  Judge's  conclusions  following  his
      analysis of the Appellant's evidence [16].

16.   In summary I find a material error of law has been committed  in  this
      case. I find the Judge has misdirected himself as to where the  burden
      and standard of proof lay and that he applied  an  impermissibly  high
      standard of proof. There is no higher standard of  proof  required  to
      prove deception other than the civil standard, namely the  balance  of
      probabilities. In a case where an allegation  is  levied  against  the
      Appellant with serious consequences, the legal framework in which  the
      appeal is to be determined is of such fundamental importance that  the
      decision cannot be allowed to stand.



Decision

17.   The decision involved the making of an error on a point of law and  is
      set aside pursuant to section 12(2)(a) of the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
      Enforcement Act 2007. Owing to the nature of the fact-finding required
      I remit the case for a hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal  by  a
      Judge other than Judge M Dennis.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed      Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral

