
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/36536/2013
     IA/41187/2013
     IA/41197/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 August 2014                             |On 16 September 2014         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD



                                   Between

                                   Mr I AW
                                  MRS S S K
                                 MISS N A W

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr E Wilford, Counsel, instructed by Roelens
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant  in  this  case  is  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department and the appellants are now claimants/respondents.

2.   The claimants are nationals of  Sri  Lanka  being  mother,  father  and
    child.

3.   The first  claimant  applied  for  variation  of  leave  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student on 4 November  2011.   That  was  refused  but  in  a
    determination promulgated on 15 May 2012, Judge Chohan  concluded  that
    the refusal was not  in  accordance  with  the  law  and  remitted  the
    decision to the respondent to reconsider the case.  That  was  done  by
    the respondent on 21 August 2013.

4.   The appellant sought to appeal against that decision which appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Clarke for hearing on 16 May 2014.

5.   Seemingly it was accepted at the hearing that the student appeal  could
    not succeed but that the appropriate appeal for consideration was  that
    of long residence under the old Immigration Rules, on  the  basis  that
    the application had been made in 2011.  The determination  of  Edgehill
    and Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ
    402 was applied.

6.   No issue was taken at that hearing other  than  that  was  the  correct
    approach to take.  I note in that regard the decisions of the Secretary
    of State dated 24 October 2012 and 21 August 2013.  Reference  is  made
    in those letters to a combined application for leave to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom as  a  Tier  4  (General)  Student  Migrant  and  for  a
    biometric residence permit.

7.   The Judge, at paragraph 14 of the determination, made reference to  the
    periods  of  leave  that  were  granted  and  noticed   a   number   of
    invalidations that arose.  The Judge did not know what they meant.   It
    was noted in paragraph 15 of the determination that there was a lack of
    evidence as to when the applications for leave to remain were submitted
    and if they were in time or not, and if out of time, whether they  were
    submitted within 28 days of the expiry of leave.

8.   Notwithstanding those concerns, however, the  Judge  went  on  to  find
    that the first claimant had resided in the United Kingdom for over  ten
    years and allowed the appeal on the basis of long  residence,  allowing
    the appeal of the second and third claimants under Article  8  in  line
    with the first claimant.

9.   The Secretary of State for the Home Department sought to raise  grounds
    of appeal against that decision, essentially on the basis that no clear
    findings were in fact made on  the  element  of  ten  years  continuous
    residence.  It was on that basis that  leave  to  appeal  was  granted.
    Thus the matter comes before me in pursuance of that grant.

10.  Mr Avery invited my attention to the decision  of  21  August  2013  in
    particular, which  sets  out  the  immigration  history  of  the  first
    claimant.   It  was  apparent,  he  submits,  from  the  face  of  that
    chronology that there were periods where the  first  claimant  did  not
    have leave to remain for one reason or another and that  those  periods
    exceeded 28 days.  Those difficulties are recognised by  the  Judge  at
    paragraph 14 of the determination but the Judge made no  findings  upon
    them.  In order to establish continual residence it was  necessary  for
    the  Judge  to  have  made  positive  findings  as  to  the   seemingly
    unexplained gaps.  The Judge had noted the  difficulties  but  had  not
    resolved them, which amounted to an error of law.

11.  Mr Wilford invited me to find that there were  documents  contained  in
    the bundles submitted on behalf of the claimants  which  would  explain
    those particular periods.  It was not always a  question  of  the  date
    when leave was granted but whether it had been applied for within time.
     If so valid leave is continued in those circumstances.

12.  Paragraph 14 of the determination highlighted in  particular  two  such
    periods. The first claimant was granted leave until 31 March 2008.  The
    application for further leave to remain was  invalidated  on  14  April
    2008 but he was granted further leave to remain on 20 May 2008.  On the
    face of it a period of one and a half months.

13.  Similarly also his grant of leave until 31 May 2008.   The  application
    for further leave to remain was invalidated on 10  June  2008  and  the
    first claimant was granted further leave to remain  on  15  July  2008.
    Once again a period of about one and a  half  months  unaccounted  for.
    The Judge clearly did not understand  what  was  meant  by  the  phrase
    "invalidated" and it is contended by the first  claimant  that  nothing
    was invalidated in his applications in any event.

14.  In that connection my attention was drawn to the decision of 21  August
    2013 which sets out the chronology.  The chronology makes no  reference
    to any invalidation of the leave.  Equally,  however,  that  chronology
    would seem to be at some variance with the chronology as set out by the
    Judge in paragraph 14 of the determination.  According to that decision
    letter the first claimant was granted leave until  31  March  2008  and
    then granted further leave to remain on 6 May 2008 (not on  20  May  as
    indicated by the Judge).  Similarly in relation to the period of  leave
    which expired on 31 May 2008 it is said that a further period of  leave
    was granted on 15 June 2008 rather than 15 July  2008  as  set  out  in
    paragraph 14.

15.  The latter period may be of significance as it would be  less  than  28
    days according to the decision of 21 August 2013 but not  according  to
    the chronology as set out by the Judge.

16.  My attention was drawn to the statement of the first claimant  dated  9
    May 2014 which it is said helped to explain the issues.  For my part  I
    do not find that the explanation is particularly helpful.  In paragraph
    3 of that statement the first claimant speaks about  the  visa  renewal
    being around May 2008.   The  UKBA  made  a  mistake  by  stamping  the
    incorrect dates such that he had to  reapply  in  June  2008.   It  was
    expressed as being a new application.  At page 74  of  the  appellant's
    bundle there is a letter from the UK Border Agency dated 25 April  2008
    thanking the first claimant for the application.  To what  extent  that
    assists in the matter is far from clear as 25 April 2008 was after  the
    expiry of leave of 31 March 2008 although not seemingly by 28 days.

17.  Essentially it was the submissions made to me, on behalf of  the  first
    claimant, that there were  explanations  for  the  period  between  the
    grants of leave such as to  show  a  continuous  residence  within  the
    guidelines issued on 10 November 2013, making  due  allowance  for  the
    periods of 28 days which were permitted.

18.  The first stage in this appeal is clearly to determine whether  or  not
    the Judge erred in law in the approach that was taken to these matters.
     It may of course be open to the claimant to  establish  the  links  of
    residence as between each period of leave on the evidence.  It may well
    have been advanced to the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The concern which
    is expressed by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  and
    which I uphold, is that that issue was not properly determined.  It  is
    not sufficient to  highlight the potential difficulties in the  linkage
    without going on to consider the materiality of those concerns  to  the
    issue of long residence.

19.  Similarly Article 8 is tainted by error finding as  to  the  status  of
    the first claimant.

20.  In the circumstances therefore I do find there to be a  material  error
    of law such that the decision should be set aside to be remade  on  all
    matters.

21.  Given the volume of evidence that is likely  to  be  required  and  the
    arguments upon it,  it  is  entirely  appropriate  in  accordance  with
    paragraph 7 of the Senior  President's  Practice  Direction,  that  the
    matter be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for determination by  way
    of rehearing.

22.  I indicated to Mr Wilford that  the  most  helpful  way  of  proceeding
    would be to draw  up  a  schedule  linking  the  evidence  showing  the
    chronology of the claimant's  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom,  the
    periods of leave and the steps taken to bridge the other  periods  said
    to be gaps in the chronology.  He indicated that he would  be  able  to
    undertake that within 28 days.

23.  It would then seem appropriate for that schedule, together with any  of
    the supporting evidence not already served, to be sent to the Secretary
    of State for the Home Department to consider in that way hopefully  the
    issues are simplified.

24.  If reliance is placed upon private and  family  life,  so  far  as  the
    three remaining claimants are concerned, it would be of  assistance  to
    have proper statements and documentation relating to them  particularly
    to the welfare of the child, the third claimant.

25.  Subject to the above, I give no further directions being  content  that
    they be issued when appropriate by the First-tier Tribunal.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
