
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
IA/36534/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision Promulgated          |
|On 9 May 2016                            |On 20 May 2016                |
|                                         |                              |


                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                              Ms CYNTHIA ADJEI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr N Garrod (counsel), instructed by Justice & Law
solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  in
order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as  they  were  in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Majid,  promulgated  on  30  October
2015, which allowed the Appellant's appeal.


Background


3. The Appellant was born on 18 May 1983 and is a national of Ghana.

4. On 8 September 2014  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application for a residence card as confirmation of a  right  to  reside  in
the UK.

The Judge's Decision

5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Majid ("the  Judge")  allowed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision.

6. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 12 April 2016 Judge  Robertson  gave
permission to appeal stating inter alia

      "2. The grounds of  application  have  arguable  merit.  There  is  no
      reference within the decision to the issues raised within the  reasons
      for refusal letter or how the Judge has  resolved  the  issues  raised
      therein (ground 2); there is no reference to whether or not he accepts
      that the proxy marriages is accepted as marriage for the  purposes  of
      the EEA Regs, or any assessment  of  the  evidence  presented  by  the
      appellant and why he does not accept that the respondent's  assessment
      of such evidence is set out in the reasons for refusal letter. As  the
      Judge has not resolved the issue  as  to  whether  or  not  the  proxy
      marriage is in fact accepted as a marriage for the purpose of the  EEA
      Regs, it is also arguable that the Judge has failed  to  identify  the
      provisions under which the appeal is allowed under such Regs  (grounds
      1 and 3)."


The Hearing

7.  Mr Duffy, for the respondent, told  me  that  the  Judge's  decision  is
inadequately reasoned. He told me that the central  question  in  this  case
was whether or not proxy marriage is recognised in  both  Ghanaian  law  and
Belgian Law, and  (he told me) the Judge did not engage with  that  question
at all. He told me that the decision  makes  no  reference  at  all  to  the
validity of the marriage in either Belgian  or  Ghanaian  law.  He  told  me
that, because no reasoned findings in fact had  been  made,  the  conclusion
reached by the Judge is entirely unsupported. He urged me allow  the  appeal
and to set the decision aside.

8. For the appellant, Mr Garrod told me that the Judge reached  the  correct
decision on the  evidence  placed  before  him,  so  that  if  the  decision
contains an error, it is not a material error of law.  He  took  me  to  the
bundle of evidence which was before the First-tier and reminded me that  the
bundle contains a report from an expert in Belgian law, who  says  that  the
marriage is recognised in Belgian law. He told  me  that  original  Ghanaian
documents are produced, and that in line with the cases of McCabe  v  McCabe
and Kareem, there was sufficient evidence to satisfy  the  Judge  that   the
appellant and EEA national are parties to a valid  marriage  which  has  now
endured for 4 years. He urged  me  to  dismiss  the  appeal  and  allow  the
decision to stand.

Analysis

9. At [7] the Judge states that in response to questions "....the  Appellant
gave evidence consistent with her assertions in the application.".  No-where
else  in  the  determination  does  the  Judge  deal  with  the  appellant's
evidence. No-where in the determination does the Judge  discuss  the  expert
report relied on by the appellant. No-where in the  determination  does  the
Judge consider the validity of the appellant's marriage in  either  Ghanaian
law or Belgian law.

10. Between [9] and [23] the Judge sets out, in the most general  of  terms,
his understanding of the approach to  be  taken  to  the  Immigration  (EEA)
Regulations 2006. The Judge then  races  to  his  conclusion  at  [24]  that
"...the Appellant comes within the relevant immigration law, as amended."

11. The decision does not contain  any  meaningful  findings  in  fact.  The
decision avoids consideration of the validity of marriage, which is  exactly
what the appeal is about. The Judge has not explained why he  preferred  the
appellant's evidence to the respondent's evidence, nor which  parts  of  the
appellant's evidence he placed weight on.  The appellant's 398  page  bundle
is not considered by the Judge. The  Judge  does  not  consider  the  expert
evidence  contained  in  the  appellant's  bundle.  In  short  there  is  no
meaningful analysis of the evidence which was placed before the Judge.

12. In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641  (IAC),  it  was
held that (i) It was axiomatic that a determination  disclosed  clearly  the
reasons for a tribunal's decision. (ii) If a tribunal  found  oral  evidence
to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document  to  be  worth  no
weight whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the determination  and  for
such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a  witness
was not believed or that a document was afforded no weight was  unlikely  to
satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

13. I can only come to  the  conclusion  that  the  summary  nature  of  the
decision indicates that the Judge has given inadequate reasons and that  his
fact-finding exercise is flawed. These are material errors of  law.  I  must
therefore set the decision aside.

14. There is, however,  sufficient  evidence  before  me  to  enable  me  to
substitute a  decision.  I  have  before  me  the  respondent's  PF1  bundle
together with the appellant's bundle which contains the items listed on  the
index to the bundle. There  is  no  reason  why  I  should  not  proceed  to
determine this case of new.

My Findings of Fact

15.  The appellant is a Ghanaian national born 18 May 1983. She entered  the
UK on 7 November 2011 with entry clearance as a  visitor,  which  was  valid
for 6 months. The appellant has remained in the UK since then.

16. Richard Mayor is a Belgian national of  Ghanaian  origin  who  exercises
treaty rights of movement as a worker in the UK. The appellant met Mr  Mayor
("The EEA National") in December 2011. Romanced developed between them,  and
they decided to marry. They  considered  marrying  in  the  UK,  but,  after
speaking to their families  in  Ghana,  decided  to  marry  in  a  customary
Ghanaian marriage. Neither the appellant nor the EEA national  could  afford
to return to Ghana, so they each consented to marriage by proxy,  with  each
one represented by family members at their wedding ceremony.

17. The appellant and EEA national's marriage ceremony took place  in  Ghana
(near Accra) on 10 February 2012. The appellant and the  EEA  national  have
lived  together  as  husband  and  wife  since  then.  Their  marriage   was
registered in Ghana on 25 October 2013.

18. The Appellant's marriage is recognised  in  Ghanaian  law.  All  of  the
legal requirements for registration  of  the  marriage  have  been  complied
with, and the  Ghanaian  High  Commission  is  happy  to  confirm  that  the
appellant and EEA national have contracted a valid marriage in Ghanaian Law

19. Dr Ian Curry- Sumner BA. MA.PhD. LlB & LLM is an expert in Belgian  law.
He works in the Netherlands and has taught private international law  there.
He provides a report at pages 16 to 20 of the  appellant's  bundle.  He  has
considered the marriage documents provided  by  the  appellant  against  the
Belgian Code of Private International Law.  He  says  that  the  appellant's
Ghanaian proxy marriage is a valid marriage in Belgian law.

20. The appellant's Ghanaian Proxy marriage is valid  in  both  Belgium  and
Ghana.

Conclusions

21. In Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT  24(IAC)  it  was  held
that (i)  A person who is the spouse of an EEA national who is  a  qualified
person in the  United  Kingdom  can  derive  rights  of  free  movement  and
residence if proof of  the  marital  relationship  is  provided;  (ii)   The
production of a marriage certificate issued by a competent  authority  (that
is, issued according to the registration  laws  of  the  country  where  the
marriage took place) will usually be  sufficient.  If  not  in  English  (or
Welsh in relation to proceedings in Wales), a certified translation  of  the
marriage certificate will be required; (iii)  A document which calls  itself
a marriage certificate will not raise  a  presumption  of  the  marriage  it
purports to record unless it has been issued  by  an  authority  with  legal
power to create or confirm the facts it attests:  (iv)     In  appeals where
there is no such marriage  certificate  or  where  there  is  doubt  that  a
marriage certificate has been issued by  a  competent  authority,  then  the
marital relationship may be proved by other evidence. This will require  the
Tribunal to determine whether a marriage was  contracted;  (v)  In  such  an
appeal, the starting  point  will  be  to  decide  whether  a  marriage  was
contracted between the appellant and the qualified person according  to  the
national law of the EEA country of the qualified person's nationality;  (vi)
In all  such  situations,  when  resolving  issues  that  arise  because  of
conflicts of law, proper respect must be given  to  the  qualified  person's
rights as provided by the European Treaties, including the  right  to  marry
and the rights of free movement and residence; (vii) It  should  be  assumed
that, without independent and reliable evidence  about  the  recognition  of
the marriage under the laws of the EEA country and/or the country where  the
marriage took place, the Tribunal is  likely  to  be  unable  to  find  that
sufficient evidence has been provided to  discharge  the  burden  of  proof.
Mere production of legal materials from the EEA  country  or  country  where
the marriage took place will be  insufficient  evidence  because  they  will
rarely show how such law is understood or applied in those  countries.  Mere
assertions as to the effect of such laws will, for  similar  reasons,  carry
no weight; (viii) These remarks apply solely to the question  of  whether  a
person is a spouse for the purposes of EU law. It does not relate  to  other
relationships that might be regarded as similar to marriage, such  as  civil
partnerships or durable relationships.

22. In TA and Others (Kareem explained) Ghana [2014]  UKUT  00316  (IAC)  it
was held that following the decision in Kareem (proxy marriages  -  EU  law)
[2014]  UKUT  24,  the  determination  of  whether  there   is   a   marital
relationship for the purposes of  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006
must always be examined in accordance with the  laws  of  the  Member  State
from which the Union citizen obtains nationality.

23. The respondent refused the appellant's application  solely  because  the
respondent was unable to accept that the appellant was a party  to  a  valid
marriage. On the facts as I find them to be,  the  appellant's  marriage  is
recognised in both Ghana and Belgium (the country of nationality of the  EEA
national). The appellant therefore meets the requirements  of  regulation  7
of the 2006 regulations.

Decision

24. The decision promulgated on 30 October 2015 is  tainted  by  a  material
error of law. I set it aside.

25. I substitute the following decision

26. The appeal is allowed  under  regulation  7  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)
Regulations 2006.

Signed                                                              Date 13
May 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
