
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/36311/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29th July 2016                            |On 22nd August 2016           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                               manisha uprety
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Al Arayn, Counsel instructed by Farani-Javid-
Taylor Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nepal whose date of birth is recorded  as
    1st July 1986.  She entered the United Kingdom in 2009 with leave as  a
    student. That leave was extended on  two  occasions  until  2nd  August
    2014.  On 6th December 2013 she made application for leave to remain as
    a Tier 1 Entrepreneur but on 4th September 2014 a decision was made  to
    refuse the application conjoined with a decision to remove her from the
    United Kingdom by way of directions  pursuant  to  Section  47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The Appellant appealed and her appeal which was  "on  the  papers"  was
    disposed of by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Kaler  on  4th  January
    2016.  The appeal was dismissed.  In considering the matter  the  judge
    had before her  evidence  produced  by  the  Secretary  of  State  that
    deception had been used in an earlier application  such  that  reliance
    was to be placed  on  Rule  322(1A)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  which
    provides for mandatory refusal.

 3. Not content with the decision, by Notice dated 29th  January  2016  the
    Appellant made application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  In short the grounds were  that  there  were  no  sufficient
    evidence to justify  the  finding  under  322(1A)  and  the  judge  had
    therefore erred in failing to engage with the substantive aspect of the
    appeal, namely whether or not the Appellant was a genuine applicant  in
    respect o f the entrepreneurial application.

 4. On 22nd June 2016 Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  M  Davies  granted
    permission  pointing  to  the  case  of  R-v-Zaheer  Hussain   Mohammed
    (JR/6299/2014) it being arguable that the evidence relied upon  by  the
    Secretary of State was unsatisfactory.  In fact the better guidance  is
    to be found in SM and Ihsam Qadir-v-Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2016] UKUT 00229 but the point remains the same.

 5. Both representatives had had the opportunity to discuss this matter  in
    advance of the matter coming before me and were in agreement  that  the
    evidence relied upon by the Secretary of State was deficient, not least
    because the judge did not have before  him  the  witness  statement  of
    Rebecca Collings who is referred to  at  paragraph  3  of  the  witness
    statement of Peter Millington whose statement reads as follows:

         "The witness statement should  be  read  in  conjunction  with  the
         witness  statement  of  Rebecca  Collings,  who  deals   with   the
         relationship between the defendant and ETS as well  as  the  action
         taken by the defendant in response to information provided by  ETS.
         I do not intend to touch on those points in any detail."

 6. The essential point being taken by the Secretary of State was  that  an
    English language test relied  upon  by  the  Appellant  was  unreliable
    because it was being suggested that somebody else had taken the test in
    her stead.  It is common ground that the burden of proof was  upon  the
    Secretary of State.  Mr Walker accepts that the evidence was deficient.
     In those circumstances it was not  open  to  the  judge  to  make  the
    finding made under 322(1A).  There is clearly an error of law.

 7. Because the judge felt compelled to dismiss the appeal because  of  the
    mandatory aspect of 322(1A) she did not go on to engage properly, if at
    all, with the application substantively which given the  error  already
    identified is a further error of law.

 8. Having found an error of law it is necessary to decide whether  or  not
    to remake the decision or remit.  Insofar as  the  matter  relating  to
    whether or not the Appellant was a general entrepreneur was  concerned,
    that clearly needs properly to  be  canvassed.   Mr  O'Ryan  has  other
    evidence that he would wish to adduce.  Mr Walker does not  object  and
    there appears to be common ground that the matter should return to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 9. I direct that it should be but with  one  qualification.   The  322(1A)
    matter has been resolved as far as I am concerned and for the avoidance
    of doubt I remake the decision to that extent.

10. The Secretary of State has simply failed to prove, in this  matter,  to
    the requisite standard, that there was  deception.   The  Secretary  of
    State has had the opportunity to deal with the matter and it would  not
    be right in my judgment to send this  matter  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal with all matters live.  To that extent the appeal  is  allowed
    and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to determine whether or not the
    Appellant is a genuine entrepreneur  with  the  requisite  funds  being
    genuinely available to her with all the matters raised  in  respect  of
    the 245 Rule being live but not, I repeat,  anything  to  do  with  the
    deception alleged by the Secretary of State, which  I  resolve  in  the
    Appellant's favour.

11. No interpreter is required (given that the Appellant says there was  no
    deception  in  respect  of  the  language  certificate.   That  is  not
    surprising).

12. The matter will be listed for two hours, for oral  hearing,  at  Taylor
    House, before any judge other than Judge Kaler.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of  law
and is set aside. As to whether there was deception I  resolve  that  matter
in the Appellant's favour. Otherwise this matter is remitted to  the  First-
tier Tribunal to be remade in accordance with the  directions  contained  at
paragraphs 11 and 12 hereof. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 19 August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker
