
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/36145/2014
      IA/36155/2014
      IA/36157/2014
      IA/36156/2014
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          | Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                   |
|On 2 December 2015                            | On 23 December 2015          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                 THE RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SM
                                     LH
                                     CS
                                      C
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant/Secretary of State:   Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondents:         Ms N Nnamani, Counsel instructed by Samuel
                               Lewis Solicitors








Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

We were not addressed in relation to the issue of  anonymity  and  no  order
was made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  but  in  the  light  of  the  child
appellants, we considered that such an order was appropriate.

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  (as
they were before the First -  tier  Tribunal)  are  granted  anonymity.   No
report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly  identify  them  or
any member of their family.  This direction applies both to  the  appellants
and to the respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.    We shall refer to the respondents  as  the  appellants  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  They  are  citizens  of  Jamaica.  The
    appellant, SM, was born on 10 September 1980.  She came to the UK on 18
    October 2001 as a visitor with a six  month  visa  and  has  overstayed
    since the expiry of this.  Her partner, LH, was born on 21 August  1977
    and he came to the UK in October 2002 as a visitor  with  a  six  month
    visa and has overstayed  since  the  expiry  of  this.  They  have  two
    children who were born in the UK.  The eldest child, CS, was born on  2
    February 2006 and the youngest child, C, was born on 26 April 2009.

2.    The appellants made  applications  for  leave  to  remain  which  were
    refused by the Secretary of State in a  letter  of  1  September  2014.
    They appealed and their appeal was allowed by Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Atreya following a hearing on 21 April 2015.   Permission  was
    granted to the Secretary of State to appeal against  this  decision  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Colyer on 13 August  2015.   Thus  the
    matter came before us.

The Decision of the First-Tier Tribunal

3.    The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal heard  evidence  from  the  adult
    appellants and took into account CS's witness statement. The judge made
    findings of fact at [44] - [77].  The judge found that  the  appellants
    were credible.  She found that both the adult appellants have lived  in
    the UK without leave for the majority of time that they have been  here
    and that they have worked here without permission.  She found that they
    have relied on family support and that they have not  claimed  benefits
    whilst in the UK.  She found that they have used NHS hospitals for  the
    birth of their children and that the children  attended  state  primary
    schools.  The judge found that both the adult appellants were  of  good
    character and had no serious criminal convictions.

4.    The Judge accepted that SM had experienced a difficult childhood,  but
    that both she and LH recognised the importance  of  family  values  and
    they both  were  involved  in  parenting  their  children.   The  judge
    accepted that SM had not worked in Jamaica and that she was not  highly
    educated and had literacy problems, but that LH had had more  education
    and that he had worked in Jamaica as a caterer.  The judge went  on  to
    find that there would not be significant obstacles for them  to  return
    to Jamaica and dismissed the appeal under paragraph 276ADE (vi) of  the
    Immigration Rules.

5.    The judge considered the position of CS.  She  observed  that  at  the
    date of the hearing she was  aged  nine.   The  judge  found  that  she
    attended school where  she  was  excelling.   She  was  integrated  and
    anglicised and that she defined herself as English.   The  judge  found
    that she was at a critical stage of her emotional development and  that
    it would not be reasonable for her to return to Jamaica where  she  has
    never been and where she has no social ties.  The judge  accepted  SM's
    evidence that she is not close to  her  own  mother's  family  (because
    there was a complicated history of abandonment) and found that  CS  was
    close to her father's side of the family (who reside here in  the  UK).
    At [58] the judge found that CS would be returning to Jamaica where she
    does not have a home.

6.    The judge found that it was highly probable  that  the  family  would,
    initially at least, only be able to find housing in a poor  urban  area
    as they had lost their connections to the places where  they  grew  up.
    There was no home to return to, no land or  other  assets.   The  judge
    accepted  that  SM  would  have  considerable  difficulties   obtaining
    employment and that LH would have  difficulty  in  obtaining  permanent
    full-time employment.  The judge found that  these  difficulties  would
    impact upon the reasonableness of CS having  to  relocate  to  Jamaica.
    The  judge  accepted  that  the  adult  appellants  had  no  meaningful
    connections there and that LH's brother and cousins live  here  in  the
    UK.  The family would be returning to Jamaica without  resources.   The
    judge attached weight to the views of CS which were  reflected  in  her
    witness statement.  The judge allowed the  appeal  of  CS  pursuant  to
    paragraph 276ADE (iv) of the Immigration Rules.

7.    The judge allowed the appeal under Article 8, having directed  herself
    in relation to SS (Congo) v SSHD EWCA [2015] 387 and she concluded that
    there were compelling circumstances which merited consideration outside
    of the Immigration Rules (see [65]).   The  judge  at  [67]  stated  as
    follows:

         "I have balanced the state's interests in removal  and  taken  into
         account the breaches of immigration law of  the  first  and  second
         appellants  as  against  the  interests  of  the  family  unit   in
         remaining.  I  find  that  the  balance  falls  in  favour  of  the
         appellants because of the 9 year old child whose best interests are
         met by remaining in the UK."


8.    The judge went on to consider Section 117 of the 2002  Act  under  the
    heading "Statutory Public Interest Considerations" directing herself in
    relation to Chege (section 117D - Article 8  -  approach)  [2015]  UKUT
    00165.  At [70] the judge took into account that the  appellants  speak
    English and had not been a "drain" on public funds.   She  went  on  to
    consider that the adult appellants have been unlawfully here (save  for
    the initial six months' leave they were granted as visitor).  The judge
    considered AM (S.117B) [2015] UKUT 260 and  concluded  that  the  adult
    appellants' immigration status here was precarious.   She  went  on  to
    give little weight to their family and private life, but concluded that
    she was unable to have no regard to it.


9.  The judge allowed the appellants  appeal  under  Article  8  stating  as
    follows:


         "71.     However I have also taken into account that  the  children
             have no leave and are not tainted by the  parents'  precarious
             immigration status.  I find  that  the  removal  of  both  the
             children would constitute a disproportionate interference with
             their family and private life rights for the following reasons


             (i) The third appellant is  a  child  and  is  integrated  and
                  anglicised in the UK.  She identifies herself  as  British
                  not Jamaican.  She is westernised


             (ii)      The third and fourth appellants are  at  a  critical
                  age of emotional development particularly [CS] (9 years  2
                  months) and 5 years


             (iii)     The human rights of their parents needs to be  taken
                  into account Beoku-Betts v Secretary of State for the Home
                  Department [2008] UKHL 39


             (iv)      The first and second appellants  speak  English  and
                  have not been a drain on public funds but have  relied  on
                  their own resources and family resources in the UK


             (v) No issue about the protection of the public or  prevention
                  of crime


             (vi)      I find that there  is  a  real  possibility  for  an
                  unsafe and uncertain future in Jamaica which will  not  be
                  in the best interests of the children".




The Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

10.   The first ground  of  appeal  challenges  the  judge's  assessment  of
    reasonableness on the basis that  it  did  not  factor  in  the  public
    interest and a proportionality assessment. The  judge  failed  to  take
    into account the serious countervailing effect of the adult appellants'
    immigration history, their  unlawful  working  and  their  reliance  on
    public funds (the NHS).  It is  asserted  that  the  finding  that  the
    family would initially have reside in poor areas of Jamaica is  without
    any reference to the parents' own evidence that friends and  family  in
    the UK have financially supported them here and  this  was  a  material
    factor in the reasonableness assessment that the judge failed  to  take
    into account.

11.   The second ground argues that the finding of  the  judge  at  [66]  is
    illogical and unlawful. Mr Walker did not expand on this. We understand
    the position of the  Secretary  of  State  to  be  that  as  the  judge
    purported to allow the  appeal  under  the  rules,  having  found  that
    removal of CS to be unreasonable, there was no need for her to consider
    Article 8 in the wider context because it  would  fall  to  be  allowed
    pursuant to Section 117B (6). That she went on to  consider  the  wider
    Article 8 assessment was illogical. It is  further  asserted  that  the
    judge made no lawful reference to the parents' reliance  on  NHS  funds
    and that the finding at [71(v)] is erroneous because the fact that  the
    appellants have not committed crimes is never capable of adding to  the
    private rights of an individual.

12.   The appellant  submitted  a  Rule  24  response  which  we  took  into
    account. There was an amended version which raised  the  issue  of  the
    Secretary of State's grounds of appeal being unsigned and according  to
    the grounds this invalidated the application and the  subsequent  grant
    of permission. Ms Nnamani did not pursue the argument  with  any  force
    and did not provide any support for it. In any event, we  permitted  Mr
    Walker, at the hearing to  sign  the  application.  In  our  view  this
    rectified any procedural error.

13.   Mr Walker made oral submissions. He  relied  on  the  grounds  seeking
    permission. We  asked  him  to  indentify  for  us  the  flaws  in  the
    proportionality assessment and he confirmed as follows:

    (1)    The judge considered the position of the  child  without  taking
         into account her parents' immigration history.


    (2)    The judge failed to consider the public interest with regard  to
         the parents having overstayed, worked illegally and their  reliance
         on public funds.


14.   We heard oral submissions from Ms Nnamani, who submitted the  relevant
    Immigration Directorate Instruction (IDI) (Family  Migration:  Appendix
    FM Section 1.0b entitled "Family Life (as  a  Partner  or  Parent)  and
    Private Life: 10-Year Routes"). The guidance is dated August  2015  and
    makes specific  reference  to  the  assessment  of  reasonableness  and
    relevant considerations.

15.   The thrust of  Ms  Nnamani's  submissions  was  that  a  child-centred
    reasonableness assessment is all that is required under the  Rules  (in
    accordance with the IDIs).  In any  event,  the  judge  considered  the
    public interest at [68] - [70] in the wider Article 8 assessment.


Conclusions

16.   We dismissed the Secretary of State's appeal and communicated this  to
    the parties at the hearing and gave brief reasons. We will  now  expand
    on these. Our focus was on the findings of the judge in relation to  CS
    because whether or not  her  removal  to  Jamaica  was  reasonable  was
    determinative of the appeal. The judge considered reasonableness having
    focused on CS and  did  not  factor  into  this  assessment  the  pubic
    interest. The Upper Tribunal  in  KMO  (section  117  -  unduly  harsh)
    Nigeria [2015] UKUT 00543 and MAB (para 399; "unduly harsh") USA [2015]
    UKUT 00435 considered unduly harsh in the context  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and  whether  this  required  the  Tribunal  to  consider  public
    interest factors. The conclusions of the Upper Tribunal  on  the  point
    are inconsistent.  It is clear that the Secretary of  State's  position
    is that of the Upper Tribunal in KMO and the  appellants'  position  is
    that of the Upper Tribunal in MAB.  We are not bound  by  either  case,
    but we prefer  the  decision  in  KMO;  however  acknowledge  that  the
    immigration rules in relation to deportation are a complete code whilst
    this is not necessarily the position under paragraph 276ADE.


17.   Ms Nnamani referred us the IDI in existence from August 2015.  We  are
    prepared to accept her word that there  is  no  significant  difference
    between these and the IDI in existence at the date of the  decision  of
    the Secretary of State and that the  guidance  suggests  that  a  child
    centred approach  to  reasonableness  is  appropriate.   However,  this
    guidance is not conclusive. Guidance is not binding.  When  considering
    Article 8 generally and paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration  Rules,  in
    our view, a judge must take into account relevant primary  legislation,
    namely Section 117B of the 2002 Act. In any  event,  nothing  turns  on
    this issue because ultimately the judge  considered  the  appeal  under
    Article 8 and made a proportionality assessment having regard to public
    interest factors. We refer specifically to [68], [69] and [70]  of  the
    decision.

18.   We conclude that the proportionality assessment is not flawed.  It  is
    clear to us that the judge attached  significance  to  the  immigration
    status of the adult appellants in accordance with Section 117B (4) (see
    [70]).  The judge decided that the family had not  been  a  "drain"  on
    public funds.  It is clear that the judge was mindful of the fact  that
    the appellants had relied on NHS funds and that the  children  attended
    primary school here (see [47]), but in concluding  that  they  had  not
    been a drain on public funds the judge considered that the family  were
    not in receipt of state benefit payments (this is not challenged by the
    Secretary of State) and the judge was entitled  to  conclude  that,  to
    this extent, the family was  financially  independent.  The  judge  was
    mindful of the evidence of  LH  that  if  his  immigration  status  was
    resolved he would be able to find full-time work here. We conclude that
    the judge properly  considered  proportionality  through  the  lens  of
    Section 117B (3).

19.   In our view, the judge was  entitled  to  conclude,  on  the  evidence
    before her that it was probable that the  family  would,  initially  at
    least, only be able to find housing in poor urban areas.   The  finding
    is made at [58] and the reasons are explained in that  same  paragraph.
    Whilst it is the case that the appellants' evidence was that  they  had
    received some financial support from  friends  and  family  in  the  UK
    (supplemented by LH's income), this does not support an  argument  that
    by implication those same friends and family would be willing and  able
    to offer the family comprehensive support on return  to  Jamaica.    We
    have considered [71(vi)] of the decision and it is our view that if the
    judge attached weight to this factor, it was in no way determinative of
    the appeal.  On reading the decision as a whole it is  clear  that  the
    factors which the judge considered for and against the appellants  were
    not confined to the matters that she summarised at [71].

20.   We do not find that there is any "illogicality"  in  the  decision  of
    the  judge.   The  judge's  view  was  clearly  that  a  reasonableness
    assessment  should  be  made   independently   from   public   interest
    considerations (an approach which the Upper Tribunal endorsed  in  MAB)
    and on this basis her finding at [66] is logical.

21.   If the judge made an error in the reasonable assessment, this  is  not
    material to the outcome of this appeal.  We accept that  reasonableness
    in 276ADE is the same as that at Section 117B (6), but it was incumbent
    on the judge to consider the appeal under the Rules before  considering
    Article 8. Whilst another judge may have dismissed  the  appeal,  Judge
    Atreya was entitled, on the evidence  before  her,  to  allow  it.  The
    decision in relation to the eldest child and is lawful and sustainable.



22.   The Secretary of State's  appeal  is  dismissed.  The  judge  made  an
    assessment of reasonableness and she considered proportionality  taking
    into account the public interest in removal and on the evidence  before
    her she reached a conclusion that was open to her and therefore  lawful
    and sustainable.  The judge properly directed herself and  the  grounds
    do not disclose that she made a material misdirection.

Notice of Decision

The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

An anonymity direction is made.





Signed

Joanna McWilliam                        Date 11 December 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam



