
IAC-AH-pc-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/36469/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 April 2015                              |On 1 May 2015                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Mr Jerin Jose
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Claimant: No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   I shall refer to the parties as follows; the appellant in  this  matter
    is the "Secretary of State" and Mr Jose shall be  referred  to  as  the
    "Claimant".

2.   The Claimant whose date of birth is 19 December 1985 is  a  citizen  of
    India.  He appealed a decision made by the  Secretary  of  State  on  1
    September 2014 refusing  his  application  to  vary  leave  and  making
    removal directions under Section 47  Immigration and Asylum Act 2006.

3.   The appeal was determined on the papers and promulgated on  13  January
    2015 by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Phull) ("FTT"), who allowed  the
    appeal to the extent that the decision made by the Secretary  of  State
    was not in accordance with the law on the grounds that the Secretary of
    State failed to consider Article 8 ECHR.  The  FTT  directed  that  the
    matter be remitted to the Secretary of Sate for reconsideration.

4.   The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal on the  grounds
    that the Tribunal erred in reaching its decision having regard  to  the
    fact that the Secretary of State had considered Article  8  outside  of
    the  Rules  in  the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  under  the  heading
    "Exceptional Circumstances".

5.   The grounds further argued that the Tribunal ought to have gone  on  to
    reach a decision by either allowing  or  dismissing  the  appeal  under
    Article 8 outside of the Rules.

6.   In granting permission Judge Brunnen found that it  was  arguable  that
    the Tribunal misapprehended the content  of  the  Reasons  for  Refusal
    Letter, which had considered the claim under the  heading  "Exceptional
    Circumstances".  The Secretary of State considered the  Claimant's  ill
    health; the fact that he  was  suffering  from  tuberculosis,  and  the
    further issue that he was awaiting the issue  of  a  CAS  in  order  to
    pursue his studies.

Error of Law Hearing

7.   The Claimant did not attend for the  hearing.   I  was  satisfied  that
    notice of hearing dated 19 March 2015 had been sent to him at his  last
    known address.  No communication was received by or on  behalf  of  the
    Claimant to explain why he was not able to attend  the  hearing.  There
    was no application for an adjournment.  I decided to  proceed  to  hear
    the appeal in the absence of the Claimant pursuant to Rule 2  and  Rule
    38 Tribunal Procedure Rules (Upper Tribunal) 2008.

8.   Mr Avery relied on the  grounds  of  appeal.   He  submitted  that  the
    Tribunal had made a clear error in concluding there had been a  failure
    to consider Article 8.  Article 8 was considered  in  the  Reasons  for
    Refusal Letter.  The Tribunal ought to have gone on to reach a decision
    under Article 8.  Mr Avery submitted that the proper course  of  action
    would be for the Upper Tribunal to remake the decision and  to  dismiss
    the appeal under Article 8 grounds.

Discussion and Decision

9.   I find that there was a material error of law in the decision  made  by
    the First-tier Tribunal.  The Secretary  of  State  clearly  considered
    whether  or   not   there   existed   exceptional   circumstances   for
    consideration of Article 8 ECHR outside of the Rules.  This was set out
    in the Reasons for Refusal Letter dated 1st September 2014   under  the
    heading "Exceptional Circumstances".  The two main issues relied on  by
    the appellant were his ill-health and his  studies.   He  relied  on  a
    letter dated 4 March 2014 from Bart's Health NHS confirming a diagnosis
    of pericardial, plural and  mediastinal  lymphadenopathy  secondary  to
    fully  sensitive  mycobacterium  tuberculosis.   He  was  treated  from
    October 2013 to 15 April 2014 and was discharged for follow-up  at  the
    TB Clinic in August 2014.  The appellant also adduced evidence  of  his
    studies at the University of Wales and his award of an MBA on  7  March
    2012.

10.  I find that the appellant entered the UK as a student in 2010.  He  was
    granted leave to remain as a student and further  leave  as  a  Tier  1
    (Post-Study Work) Migrant until 29 June 2014.  His present  application
    was for further leave to remain on the basis of private life.  This was
    considered and refused by the Secretary of State under the  Rules  with
    reference to paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The  FTT
    dismissed the appeal on immigration grounds.  In view of the  Secretary
    of State's consideration that there were no  exceptional circumstances,
    the proper course was  for the Tribunal to  deal  with  the  Article  8
    issue. I am satisfied that there was no failure  on  the  part  of  the
    Secretary of State and that the decision made was  in  accordance  with
    the law and the Immigration Rules.  The Tribunal  materially  erred  in
    allowing the appeal on that basis  and  remitting  the  matter  to  the
    Secretary of State.  I now propose to remake that decision as follows.

11.  I have considered the Claimant's grounds  of  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds outside of the Rules.  I  am satisfied that Article  8  is  not
    engaged  under  private  life  in  the  UK.   The  Secretary  of  State
    considered the two issues relied on namely his health and the fact that
    he wishes to continue to pursue his studies.  Neither of  these  issues
    on the evidence is capable of establishing private life in the UK.  The
    Claimant entered as a student and has since been granted leave in  that
    temporary capacity only.  He would be able to  re-establish  a  private
    life on return to India where he could  pursue  studies.   The  medical
    evidence indicates that his TB is now under  control  and  he  receives
    only follow-up appointments.   There  is  no  evidence  of  exceptional
    circumstances for a grant of  leave outside of the Rules.

Notice of Decision

I find a material error of law  in  the  determination.   I  set  aside  the
determination.   In  remaking  that  decision  I   substitute   a   decision
dismissing the appeal under immigration grounds and human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 29.4.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed        Date 29.4.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
