
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/36429/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 18 August 2015                    |On 28 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             ZAHEER-U-DIN OMMER
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A. Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms C. Bexson, Counsel instructed by Chauhan
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of
         the First-tier Tribunal allowing  the  appeal  of  Mr  Zaheer-u-Din
         Ommer, a citizen of Pakistan against the respondent's  decision  to
         refuse his application for leave to  remain  as  the  spouse  of  a
         settled person and to remove him from the UK as a person subject to
         administrative removal under section  10  of  the  Immigration  and
         Asylum Act 1999.  For the purposes of this decision I refer to  the
         parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

      2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269) I do not  make  an  anonymity  order.   No
         order was made by the First-tier Tribunal and there were no  issues
         before me that might require such an order.

    Background

      3. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 26 October 1984.  He
         entered the United  Kingdom  on  21  December  2009  as  a  Tier  4
         (General)  Student  under  the  Points   Based   System.    Further
         extensions of leave to  remain  were  granted,  the  last  until  2
         January 2015. The appellant then made a further in-time application
         on 16 July 2014 as the spouse of a settled person,  having  married
         Uzma Naz Ahmed on 25 April 2014.

      4.  The  respondent's  letter  dated  3  September  2014  refused  the
         application on the grounds that the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
         suitability requirements under the immigration Rules, Appendix FM S-
         LTR.2.1, in particular S-LTR.2.2(a) as it was considered  that  the
         appellant was a person who has sought leave to remain in the UK  by
         deception.  The  respondent  asserted  that  the  language  testing
         results from tests taken on 17 July 2012 and the scores  given  had
         been cancelled due to an anomaly which had suggested that the  test
         was taken by a proxy test  taker  rather  than  by  the  appellant.
         Secondly the respondent  considered  the  other  issues  under  the
         Immigration Rules but considered the appellant did not meet all  of
         the requirements.

      5. The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Davies on 20 March
         2015.  The judge, in  a  decision  promulgated  on  9  April  2014,
         concluded that the respondent had failed to show that the appellant
         had used deception in his attempt to stay in the UK and that he did
         not therefore fail  the  suitability  test  under  Appendix  FM  as
         alleged.  In addition although the  respondent  accepted  that  the
         respondent met the eligibility requirements in  respect  of  E-LTRP
         1.2-1.12  and  201  the  respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  the
         appellant qualified under EX.1.  Judge Davies  considered  EX.1  in
         the alternative and was satisfied that  there  was  a  genuine  and
         subsisting parental relationship with a British citizen minor child
         or in the alternative that  there  was  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship  with  a  British  citizen  partner  and  there   were
         insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing outside the UK.

      6. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  sought  firstly  on
         the basis that the  judge  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
         findings on a material matter and in particularly  in  relation  to
         the finding that the Secretary of  State  had  not  discharged  her
         burden  of  proof  in  demonstrating  that  this   appellant   used
         deception.  The second ground alleged  that  the  judge  materially
         misdirected himself  in  his  consideration  of  reasonableness  in
         assessing EX.1 under the immigration rules.

      7. Although permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted  on
         the sole basis that the judge had arguably erred in law  by  having
         no regard to the public interest considerations set out in s117B of
         the  Nationality,  Immigration  &  Asylum  Act  2002,  Ms  Fijiwala
         conceded before me that this was clearly incorrect as the judge had
         only considered Article 8 under the  Immigration  Rules,  where  no
         separate section 117B consideration is required; Bossade (ss 117A-D
         - interrelationship with Rules) [2015] UKUT 415 applied.   However,
         as the grounds generally were considered arguable, I  proceeded  to
         consider both of the contentions made on behalf of the Secretary of
         State.

    Ground 1

      8. Ms Fijiwala relied on the written ground  of  appeal  and  made  no
         further submissions.   Ms  Bexson  submitted  that  the  judge  had
         engaged with  the  relevant  witness  statements  provided  by  the
         respondent in respect of the alleged deception.   She  argued  that
         the judge made clear findings in relation to the witness statements
         and the largely generic nature of  the  evidence  provided  by  the
         respondent.  She relied on the obiter comments of the President  of
         the Upper Tribunal in  the  judicial  review  case  of  R  (on  the
         application of Gazi) [2015] UKUT 327, as  to  the  cogency  of  the
         evidence relied on by the respondent in cases where  deception  was
         alleged  in  the  procurement  of  English  language  test  results
         (although  said  case  ultimately  turned  on  the  separate  issue
         (unrelated to this appeal) of an improper purpose challenge).

      9. It is clear in my findings that the judge carefully  evaluated,  at
         paragraph 6 to 12 the respondent's  evidence  in  relation  to  the
         alleged deception.   There was  nothing  inherently  wrong  in  his
         analysis of the evidence produced by the respondent and  I  do  not
         accept the respondent's contention that the judge  disregarded  any
         element of the witness statements before him.  Although the grounds
         argued  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal   should   have   had   due
         consideration  to  the  specific  evidence  which  identified  this
         appellant as an individual who exercised deception, it is clear  to
         me that he did including at paragraph 7  and  paragraph  9  of  the
         decision and  reasons  where  the  judge  considered  the  specific
         evidence in Annex A of one of the respondent's  witness  statements
         which named the appellant.  However the judge,  in  rejecting  that
         evidence, noted there was  no  other  detail  in  relation  to  the
         appellant's English language test  at  Education  Testing  Services
         (ETS) other than the date and place of the test, that might  relate
         to that test or any irregularity.   He  noted  that  there  was  no
         detail as to what caused concern with the appellant's test results.
          The judge also noted that the  annex  provided  did  not  indicate
         whether the appellant's test was considered invalid as a result  of
         matching testing or disqualification on the basis of where he  took
         the test (and the judge at paragraph 8 considered  in  some  detail
         the evidence provided by the respondent in  relation  to  fraud  in
         language testing and the use of  voice  recognition  technology  to
         identity proxy test taking).

     10. In finding that the judge gave adequate reasons for his findings  I
         have also considered  that  the  judge  made  further  findings  at
         paragraphs 11 and 12 of his decision and reasons in relation to the
         appellant's  evidence,  including  his  previous  English  language
         tests, his reasonable English at his appeal and  his  finding  that
         the appellant had no incentive to resort to a proxy test taker.

     11. I am satisfied that the judge reached a conclusion open to  him  on
         the evidence before him and gave detailed, adequate reasons for his
         findings.  I do not find any merit in this ground.

    Ground 2

     12. It was Ms Fijiwala's  submission  that  the  judge  had  not  fully
         engaged with the relevant requirements of EX.1  under  Appendix  FM
         including that the judge had not considered  that  the  appellant's
         status was precarious in the UK.  Ms Fijiwala relied on the  recent
         Court of Appeal decision in R (on the application of) Agyarko & Ors
         [2015 EWCA Civ 440, in particular paragraphs 21 which reminds  that
         the phrase 'insurmountable obstacles' clearly imposes a high hurdle
         to be overcome by an  applicant  for  leave  to  remain  under  the
         immigration rules and is 'significantly more demanding than a  mere
         test of whether it would  be  reasonable  to  expect  a  couple  to
         continue their family life outside the United Kingdom.  Ms Fijiwala
         also referred me to paragraphs 28 to 31 of the  same  decision  and
         the Court's discussion on Article  8  outside  of  the  immigration
         rules and that the relevant consideration is whether  the  case  is
         exceptional for some reason.  She relied in particular on the  last
         sentence of paragraph 31 of  Lord  Justice  Sales  judgement  which
         found that: 'in a case involving precarious family life,  it  would
         be necessary to establish that there were exceptional circumstances
         to warrant such a conclusion'.

     13. Ms Fijiwala also relied on the respondent's Immigration Directorate
         Instructions (IDIs) Family Migration, Appendix FM Section 1.0b.  On
         page 26 of  the  IDIs  Ms  Fijiwala  pointed  to  the  guidance  on
         'insurmountable obstacles' being a  stringent  assessment  and  she
         pointed to the example given where a British  Citizen  partner  who
         has lived all their life in the UK and speaks only English may  not
         want to relocate half way across the world and it may be  difficult
         for them to do so.  However a significant  degree  of  hardship  or
         inconvenience does not amount to insurmountable obstacles.

     14. Ms Fijiwala submitted that the judge's consideration  in  paragraph
         20 of his decision and reasons, that it would not be reasonable for
         the child to relocate was not adequate and that the judge  had  not
         considered the full range of factors.

     15. I do not share Ms Fijiwala's conclusion  that  the  judge  did  not
         consider the precariousness of the appellant's leave to remain when
         considering EX.1.  In paragraph  17  of  his  decision  he  clearly
         recorded the appellant's wife's evidence  that  'she  knew  of  her
         husband's immigration status from 2010 when they met'.   The  judge
         considered a range of factors including that  the  appellant  is  a
         carer for her adult brother (although this was incorrectly recorded
         in the judgment as 'mother' it was not argued by either party  that
         this was anything other than a slip of the pen.  Although  much  of
         Ms Fijiwala's argument and reliance on Agyarko related to Article 8
         outside of the rules, which is not applicable here, nevertheless in
         clearly considering all the factors including Ms Fijiwala's  caring
         responsibilities and the impact thereof, together with his  finding
         that it would be an insurmountable  obstacle  for  the  appellant's
         wife to leave her son in the UK with his biological father who  has
         had no contact with his son, I am satisfied that the judge properly
         directed himself as to the more stringent  (than  a  mere  test  of
         reasonableness) nature of the test of insurmountable obstacles.

     16.  There  was  no  error  therefore  in  the   judge's   finding   on
         insurmountable obstacles as he made findings that  were  reasonably
         open to him.  On this basis alone the secretary of  state's  second
         ground cannot succeed.

     17. In addition however, the judge made findings  in  relation  to  the
         appellant's wife's child.

     18. Section EX.1. provides as follows:

             'This paragraph applies if

               a) (i) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting parental
                  relationship with a child who-

                      (aa) is under the age of 18 years, or was under the
                      age of 18 years when the applicant was first granted
                      leave on the basis that this paragraph applied;

                      (bb) is in the UK;

                      (cc) is a British Citizen or has lived in the UK
                      continuously for at least 7 years immediately
                      preceding the date of application; and

                  (ii) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
                  leave the UK;...'

     19. The judge noted in paragraph 17 of his decision and  reasons,  that
         the evidence that the appellant carries out a parental relationship
         for his wife's son, a British citizen, born  on  24  December  2009
         with  no  contact  with  his  biological  father,  had   not   been
         challenged.   The judge  also  referred  in  paragraph  15  of  his
         decision and reasons to being directed to take  into  consideration
         the best interests of the child, as he refers to section 55 of  the
         Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009.   Although  the
         judge's conclusion at paragraph 20 that  the  child  is  a  British
         citizen and that it is not reasonable to expect him to relocate and
         that the 'secretary of  state's  own  guidance  endorses  that'  is
         brief, it is clear from the totality of his decision that  he  took
         into consideration all the factors.  This included, at paragraph 17
         of his decision and reasons, the appellant's wife's  evidence  that
         her son has a close relationship to her family in the  UK  and  has
         friends and that it would be very disruptive for  him  to  move  to
         Pakistan.  The judge subsequently found, at paragraph 18 that there
         has 'been little challenge  to  the  evidence  of  the  appellant's
         wife'.  I am satisfied that when considered  in  its  entirety  the
         judge made alternative findings properly open to  him.  The  second
         ground of appeal therefore also has no merit in my findings.

    Decision:

     20. The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
         involve the making of an error on a point of law and shall stand.


Signed:     Dated: 26 August 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

