
[pic]
IAC-TH-CP-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/36813/2014
                                                               IA/36819/2014
                                                               IA/36822/2014
                                                               IA/36826/2014
                                                               IA/36830/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 January 2016                   |On 28 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                   Deborah Idowu Odubanjo (1st RESPONDENT)
                    Adeyemi Olu Odubanjo (2nd RESPONDENT)
                             EO (3rd RESPONDENT)
                             GO (4th RESPONDENT)
                             MO (5th RESPONDENT)
                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. K. Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondents:   Mr. M. Sihwa, Solicitor.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this case is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department.  However, for the sake of clarity, I shall use  the  titles
    by which the parties were known before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  with
    the Secretary of State referred to  as  "the  respondent"  and  Deborah
    Idowu Odubanjo as "the first appellant", Adeyemi Olu Odubanjo  as  "the
    second appellant", EO as "the  third  appellant",  GO  as  "the  fourth
    appellant" and MO as "the fifth appellant".

 2.  The  appellants  are  citizens  of  Nigeria.   The  first  and  second
    appellants are husband  and  wife  and  the  third,  fourth  and  fifth
    appellants are their children.  They appealed  against  a  respondent's
    refusal decision of 1 September 2014 in relation to an application made
    for indefinite leave to remain on the basis of family and private  life
    in the  United  Kingdom.   The  basis  of  the  refusal  was  that  the
    appellants had not shown the decision was in breach of the respondent's
    obligations under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights
    (ECHR) as set out within the Immigration  Rules  HC  395  (as  amended)
    ("the  Rules")  with  particular  reference  to  paragraphs  276ADE  or
    Appendix FM and Article 8.  A decision to remove the  appellants  under
    Section 10 of the Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999  was  made  on  4
    September 2014.

 3. The appellants appealed and following a hearing at Hatton Cross,  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Telford dismissed their appeals  under  "the
    Rules" but allowed them on human rights grounds.

 4. The respondent sought permission to appeal which was initially  refused
    by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal P J M Hollingworth on 3 June  2015.
    A renewed application was made and  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Canavan on 12 August 2015.  Her reasons for so doing were:-

         "1.  The appellants appealed against the respondent's  decision  to
             refuse to grant them leave to remain on human rights  grounds.
             The respondent applies for permission to appeal against First-
             tier Tribunal Judge Telford's decision to  allow  the  appeal,
             which was promulgated on 30 March 2015.

         2.   It is at least arguable that there is a contradiction  between
             the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  finding  that  it  would  be
             reasonable to expect the children to return to Nigeria as part
             of a family unit [10] and his finding that it was likely  that
             the  children  would  now  meet  the   requirements   of   the
             immigration rules [17] given that  the  'reasonableness'  test
             contained in paragraph  EX.1  of  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph
             276ADE are a similar test.  It is arguable that the First-tier
             Tribunal Judge's findings in relation to the immigration rules
             and Article 8 outside the rules  conflict  with  one  another.
             Whether a potential error would  have  been  material  to  the
             overall outcome of the appeal is a matter that will need to be
             considered further in light of the findings that were made  in
             the appellants' favour in relation to Article 8.   Whilst  the
             other points relating to  the  public  interest  question  are
             perhaps less strong permission is granted on all grounds.

         3.   Permission to appeal is granted."

 5. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 6. Mr Norton emphasised the  inability  of  the  appellants  to  meet  the
    requirements of "the  Rules".   He  acknowledged  that  the  two  minor
    appellants have  separate  applications  pending  and  are  awaiting  a
    decision by the respondent.  Further that another child  of  the  first
    and  second  appellants,  Elijah,  has  discretionary  leave  which  is
    consequently precarious.  The  Immigration  Rules  themselves  are  not
    diluted by any contribution made by  the  appellants  to  the  economic
    wellbeing of the country.  The public interest  prevails.   The  agreed
    facts are firmly within the ambit of "the Rules" and do not disclose  a
    basis for departure therefrom.   The  relationship  between  the  minor
    appellants and their brother Elijah, and the need to promote  a  single
    family unit can be realised in Nigeria itself.  Even if the  two  minor
    appellants succeeded in their own individual applications it would  not
    make it "inherently unreasonable to remove the family as a  unit,  were
    the public interest and other factors to be considered".  The judge  in
    this instant appeal has had "little regard for the public interest".

 7. Mr Sihwa responded by submitting there were factors within the  instant
    appeal which required consideration outside of  "the  Rules"  including
    the lengthy residence the appellants had in  the  United  Kingdom,  the
    absence of ties in Nigeria and the fact that  the  minor  children  had
    spent the majority of their lives in the  United  Kingdom  albeit  that
    they were not British citizens.  Further the judge has  properly  taken
    into account circumstances in relation to the adult child  Elijah  (not
    an appellant) who lives with the family.  The judge  acknowledges  that
    his presence in the "family unit  cannot  be  discounted  or  ignored".
    When  the  respondent  undertook  consideration  of   the   appellants'
    application she did not consider Elijah's position.  Beyond  that  this
    is a case where the two minor children (appellants 4 and  5)  have  now
    been in the United Kingdom in excess of seven  years.   In  due  course
    they will secure some form of "leave".  The respondent,  having  failed
    to attend the first hearing, is now seeking to do no more than  reargue
    her case where the appeal has been properly considered  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and there is within its decision  no  material  error  of
    law.

 8.  The  judge  found  here  that  the  appellants  could  not  meet   the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.  Like the factual matrix this is
    not in dispute.  The issue here is  whether  the  judge's  approach  in
    allowing the appellants' appeals under Article 8 is a  correct  one  or
    contains a material error of law.

 9. I find the judge has properly applied the required two stage  approach.
    In deciding an application or an appeal based upon  private  or  family
    life a "two stage test" must be gone through.   The  Immigration  Rules
    must firstly be applied.  If the appeal fails under "the Rules"  it  is
    incumbent upon the judge to carry  out  a  balancing  exercise  outside
    those Rules guided by Section 117A to D of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 (where applicable) and Article 8.

10. In SS Congo [2015] EWCA  Civ  387  it  was  said  that  there  must  be
    something "compelling" about a claim for it to  succeed  on  Article  8
    grounds outside "the Rules" whereas if the Article 8 claim is made by a
    foreign criminal (not the  case  here)  then  there  will  have  to  be
    something "exceptional" about it.

11. Here it was incumbent upon the judge to consider whether  there  was  a
    "gap" between the Immigration Rules and Article 8 and whether there are
    circumstances in the appeal which take it outside the  class  of  cases
    which the Immigration Rules properly provide for.  If the gap is  wide,
    the  practical  guidance  to  be  derived  from  the  content  of   the
    Immigration Rules as to the relevant public policy  considerations  for
    the purposes of the balance to be struck under Article 8 is also likely
    to be reduced - in other words the proportionality  balancing  exercise
    "will be at large" - see SS Congo [2015] EWCA  Civ  387.   Whether  the
    circumstances are described as "compelling" or "exceptional" is  not  a
    matter of substance.  They must be  relevant,  weighty  and  not  fully
    provided for within the Immigration Rules.

12. Here I find the judge has properly reasoned why, in following  the  two
    stage approach, there are identifiable reasons why it was necessary  to
    proceed to look at Article 8 in its own right.  Circumstances have been
    identified that are relevant, weighty and not fully provided for within
    the Immigration Rules.  For example see the findings at paragraph 14 of
    his decision in relation to the child Elijah (not an appellant) and his
    relationship to the rest of his family, the length of time  (in  excess
    of seven years) the fourth and fifth appellants have been in the United
    Kingdom (paragraph 17 of the decision) and his findings in relation  to
    their pending applications.

13. This is an  appeal  where  the  respondent  having  chosen  not  to  be
    represented at the First-tier hearing now seeks to reargue the case  by
    submitting that there has been a material error of law by this judge in
    assessing the appellants' Article 8 claims.  There is  no  such  error.
    On the evidence that was before him the judge was entitled to  come  to
    the conclusions that he did having followed the two stage approach  and
    carried out the requisite balancing exercise.

14. It was conceded by Mr Norton that if the first ground  of  appeal  fell
    then so did the second.  That is the position.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.  I do not set aside the  decision  but
order that it shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 26 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

