


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/36301/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                       |Determination Promulgated        |
|on 5th May 2015                           |On 7th May 2015                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               TARA PRASAD PUN
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Smart - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Ms Manning instructed by Super Immigration Services Ltd


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. In a determination promulgated on the 18th December 2014 First-tier
        Tribunal Judge O R Williams allowed Mr  Pun's  appeal  against  the
        decision to refuse leave to remain in the  UK  as  a  spouse  under
        Appendix FM.
     2. The detailed refusal letter of the  4th  September  2014  raised  a
        number of issues one of which was the use of a proxy  to  undertake
        an English language test according at a report  received  from  the
        Educational Testing Services (ETS).  The Judge found (a) there  was
        no direct evidence from ETS of an anomaly with  the  speaking  test
        [10] (b) the statements of Mr Millington and Ms Collins are generic
        in nature and in reference to an entirely different matter and make
        no reference Mr Pun [11] (c) Mr Pun gave  credible  and  consistent
        evidence  as  to  the  type  of  English  language  examination  he
        undertook and the fact his wife did not completely corroborate  the
        test centres he mentioned was accepted as being genuine error [12].



Discussion



     3. Permisison to appeal was sought on a number of grounds one of which
        was the failure of the Judge to determine a number of other  issues
        raised in the refusal letter which went beyond the ETS issue. These
        included Suitability, Eligibility, EX.1., paragraph 276ADE and  the
        existence of exceptional  circumstances  such  that  removal  would
        result in an unjustifiably harsh outcome as per Nagre  [2013]  EWHC
        720.
     4. This ground has no arguable  merit  for  the  Judge  noted  at  the
        commencement of the hearing that the Presenting  Officer  confirmed
        that the ETS issue was the only live issue upon  which  a  decision
        was required. As the  Presenting  Officer  conceded  the  remaining
        issues the Judge was not required to determine them.
     5. The remaining ground challenges the decision in relation to the ETS
        element. The key finding by the Judge on this matter  is  that  the
        evidence provided did not warrant a finding that the  Secretary  of
        State had proved what she was alleging in relation to  the  use  of
        deception. The witness statements set out the methodology  used  by
        ETS in assessing the test results and the work  undertaken  by  the
        Home Office but it fails to make a specific connection to Mr Pun.
     6. Today Mr Smart brought with him a  copy  of  a  printout  from  the
        Secretary of States data system showing information  received  from
        ETS and specifically naming Mr Pun as a person in relation to  whom
        it was stated a proxy had been used to take  the  English  language
        test.
     7. This is evidence that was not produced before the Judge and it  has
        not been shown it was material that was not available at the  time.
        It cannot be an error for the Judge not to  consider  something  of
        which he or she was not made aware. No satisfactory explanation for
        the failure to provide this material to the First-tier Tribunal has
        been provided and it has not been shown that on the  basis  of  the
        evidence the Judge was asked to  consider  that  the  decision  was
        outside the range of permissible decisions.
     8. Ground 2 refers to the fact three witnesses gave evidence yet  only
        two are mentioned and  the  third  failed  to  mention  the  second
        English language test. This may be so, but it is  clear  the  Judge
        considered all the evidence made available and  has  give  adequate
        reasons for the findings made. It has not been arguably established
        that this piece of evidence carries such weight that  the  decision
        should have been reversed.  It has not been shown the  decision  is
        unsustainable on this basis.


Decision

     9. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    10. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005. I make no such order.


   Costs.


    11. Miss Manning sought costs against the Secretary  of  State  on  the
        basis the application was unwarranted in light  of  the  concession
        made that is not referred to in the grounds seeking permission. The
        application was refused as it has not  been  established  that  the
        application is an abuse of process or totally  without  merit.  The
        first point of note is that permission was  granted  to  bring  the
        appeal on the basis it appeared arguable.  The  concession  is  not
        mentioned which made the first ground unarguable but Ground  2  was
        arguable and not affected by the concession even though  the  claim
        eventually failed for the reasons set out above.
    12. It not an appropriate case in which to make a costs award.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 6th May 2015












