

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Numbers:
IA/36586/2013

                                          IA/36859/2014
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 16 December 2014                      |On 12 January 2015        |
|                                         |                          |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL

                                   Between

                                     M Z
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr S Sayeed, Counsel
      (instructed by UK Chinese Law Centre Limited)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
           Tribunal  Judge  Lever  on   20   October   2014   against   the
           determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge R G Walters  who  had
           dismissed the Appellant's linked appeals against (a) removal  on
           human rights (Article 8  ECHR)  grounds,  a  decision  dated  22
           August 2013 and (b) refusal  to  issue  her  with  a  derivative
           residence card under regulation 15A of the Immigration (European
           Economic Area) Regulations 2006, a decision dated 10 March 2014,
           in a determination promulgated on 2 September 2014.


      2.    The Appellant is a national of China, born on 19  January  1978.
           It is not necessary to repeat her immigration history  which  is
           set out at [11] to [12] of Judge  Walters's  determination.   In
           essence the Appellant held a multi-visit visa, and  applied  for
           leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules on 29 August  2012
           during the  currency  of  that  visa.   On  22  March  2013  the
           Appellant applied for a derivative residence card following  the
           birth of her son A, whose father Mr P XQ ("Mr XQ") is a  British
           Citizen.  Mr XQ remains married to his wife by whom he  has  two
           adult children.  Judge Walters found that  A  did  not  have  to
           leave the United Kingdom if his mother were removed and that  it
           was proportionate for her to make an entry clearance application
           as a parent or as a spouse once Mr XQ had divorced  his  current
           wife as he intended.


      3.    Permission to appeal was granted because it was considered  that
           it was arguable that the judge had erred in law in his  approach
           and had not focussed on the quality or standard of life for  the
           child if his mother left.  The judge might have  had  regard  to
           the principles in Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40.


      4.    Standard directions were made by the tribunal,  indicating  that
           the appeal would be reheard immediately if a material  error  of
           law were found.   A  rule  24  notice  dated  12  November  2014
           opposing the appeal had been filed on the Respondent's behalf.




      Submissions - error of law


      5.    Mr Sayeed for the Appellant relied on the grounds of onwards  of
           appeal and the grant of permission to appeal.   In  summary,  he
           accepted that EX.1 of Appendix FM could not  be  relied  on  and
           that the Immigration Rules were not  met.   In  approaching  the
           derivate residence card appeal the judge had failed to  consider
           Harrison [2012] EWCA Civ 1736.  There had been no assessment  of
           the effect  on  the  child's  quality  of  life.   [24]  of  the
           determination which referred to the  provision  of  nannies  was
           insufficient.  The judge had not given sufficient  attention  to
           the components of section 117B of the  Nationality,  Immigration
           and Asylum Act 2002.  The public interest did  not  require  the
           Appellant's removal  in  view  of  her  genuine  and  subsisting
           relationship with a child for whom  it  was  not  reasonable  to
           expect to leave the United Kingdom.  The principles of Chikwamba
           [2008] UKHL 40 were applicable and should have been considered.


      6.    Mr Tufan for the Respondent relied on the rule  24  notice.   MA
           and SM (Zambrano: EU Children outside the EU) Iran  [2013]  UKUT
           00380 (IAC) applied.  The EU child had to be compelled to leave,
           which was not the case here by  any  means,  as  the  judge  had
           properly found.  The test had a high threshold.  Nor was section
           117B(6) was satisfied as the child did not  have  to  leave  the
           United Kingdom with  the  Appellant.   Alternative  arrangements
           were possible, as the judge had found.  The judge had reached  a
           properly  reasoned  decision  and  there  was   no   basis   for
           interfering with it.


      7.    Mr Sayeed addressed the tribunal briefly in reply.  The  judge's
           determination produced a  result  which  was  unduly  harsh  and
           harmful to the child.


      8.    The tribunal indicated at the conclusion of submissions that  it
           found no material error of law and  reserved  its  determination
           which now follows.




      No material error of law finding


      9.    The judge's treatment of the evidence was more  than  sufficient
           and he set out his essential findings with clarity in a  careful
           and well  structured  determination.   The  judge  set  out  the
           relevant part of section 117B of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
           and Asylum Act 2002 in full and plainly paid close attention  to
           it.  The particular factual matrix found by the  judge  was  not
           covered by the Immigration Rules,  specifically  the  additional
           unmarried partner of a British Citizen whose leave to enter  the
           United Kingdom was temporary and to whom a British Citizen child
           had been born. The judge was entitled to find that  the  British
           Citizen child would not have to leave the United Kingdom.  As Mr
           Tufan pointed out, the applicable threshold is high one and  the
           judge was right not to be swayed by irrelevant factors.  As  the
           judge stated at [63] of his determination, the  decision  as  to
           whether the child should travel to China with his mother pending
           her obtaining entry clearance to return to  the  United  Kingdom
           was one for the Appellant and Mr XQ to  reach.    There  were  a
           number of possibilities open to them which in no way could  harm
           the child.


      10.   The judge gave consideration throughout his determination to the
           quality of life which A would enjoy in the event of the  various
           options being exercised.  It was obvious  that  his  quality  of
           life would be good since he had a loving  and  competent  father
           who was well able to meet to meet  his  needs  in  his  mother's
           temporary absence.  His mother was also  competent  and  loving,
           and able to meet his needs in the event of temporary  separation
           from his father.  The  principles  of  Harrison  (above),  which
           decision incidentally stresses the high threshold required for a
           breach of regulation 15A, were followed.


      11.   The judge went on, correctly, to conduct a free standing Article
           8 ECHR evaluation.  His conclusions were manifestly open to him,
           and were consistent with his regulation 15A findings.


      12.   The tribunal accordingly finds that there was no error of law in
           the determination and there is no basis for interfering with the
           judge's decision.


      DECISION


      The making of the previous decision did not involve the making  of  an
error on a point of law and stands unchanged

      Signed                                  Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell








