
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/36831/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2 July 2014                                |On 14th July 2014            |
|Prepared 2 July 2014                          |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                ms Habarakada Henadeerage Buddhika Maheshini

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Martin, of Counsel, instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The Secretary of State appeals, with permission, against a decision  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Powell who in a determination dated 10
    March 2014 allowed the appeal of  Ms  Habarakada  Henadeerage  Buddhika
    Maheshini against a decision of the Secretary of State  to  refuse  her
    leave to remain on human rights grounds.

2.   Although the Secretary of State is the appellant before me I  will  for
    ease of reference refer to  her  as  the  respondent  as  she  was  the
    respondent in the First-tier Tribunal.  Similarly I will  refer  to  Ms
    Habarakada Henadeerage Buddhika Maheshini as the appellant as  she  was
    the appellant in the First-tier Tribunal.

3.   The appellant, a citizen of Sri Lanka, who was born on 10 October  1986
    entered  Britain  as  a  student  on  4  October  2008.   She  attended
    Nottingham Trent University to undertake a BA honours degree in fashion
    and textile management.  She hoped to study for  four  years  and  then
    undertake two  years'  post-study  work.   However  after  successfully
    completing the first two years of her course she took  up  a  placement
    for one year which meant that her fourth year of study was completed in
    May 2012 by which time the post-study work visa had been abolished  and
    she was therefore not able to undertake post-study work here.

4.   The appellant then made  an  application  to  remain  on  human  rights
    grounds on 1 October 2012 placing weight on  the  fact  that  she  had
    missed the opportunity of applying  for the post-study work visa "by  a
    matter of weeks."  That application was refused on 15 January  2013  on
    the basis that  the  requisite  fee  had  not  been  paid.   A  further
    application was then submitted and  was  refused  without  a  right  of
    appeal.  However after further submissions had been  made  a  right  of
    appeal was granted on 16 September 2013.

5.   The basis of the refusal was that the appellant  did  not  qualify  for
    leave to remain  under  the  provisions  of  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration  Rules  and  moreover  that  there  were   no   exceptional
    circumstances which would  make  it  appropriate  that  she  should  be
    granted leave to remain under the ECHR.

6.   At the hearing of the appeal before Judge  Powell  the  appellant  gave
    evidence and the judge took into account the evidence  of  two  further
    witnesses, although that evidence is not recorded in the determination.



7.   It was accepted by the appellant's representative that  she  could  not
    meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  In  paragraph  19  the
    judge stated that he was not satisfied the appellant had lost all  ties
    with Sri Lanka although he recognised that "her preference  is  not  to
    return there".  In paragraphs 20 onwards he  found  the  appellant  was
    exercising family and private life here.  He described her relationship
    with her sister who is resident in Britain as  being  "unusually  close
    and it was stated that she was financially dependent on her sister with
    substantial assistance from their father who lives and works in Italy."
     He stated that the appellant and her sister  were  dependent  on  each
    other for support and friendship and that the appellant was treated  as
    her sister's responsibility culturally because although  the  appellant
    is 27 years old, educated and independent, she was unmarried and looked
    to her family to continue to support her  physically,  financially  and
    emotionally as if she was still a dependent child.

8.   Having referred to the judgment of the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Kugathas
    [2002] EWCA Civ 31 the judge stated that he would consider the question
    of dependency objectively.  He noted that the appellant had  not  lived
    with her sister between 2003 and 2008 as at that time the appellant had
    lived in Sri Lanka with other  siblings  while  her  sister  was  here.
    Moreover the appellant had not lived with her parents who  had  visited
    every three or four months from  Italy.   Between  2008  and  2012  the
    appellant had been at university in  Britain.  Although  the  appellant
    would visit her sister every fortnight in Swindon and received  regular
    visits from her sister while she was in Nottingham they had  not  lived
    together.  It was  only,  the  judge  concluded  since  2012  that  the
    appellant has lived with her sister.   The  relationship  had  deepened
    since that time.   The  judge  concluded  that  family  life  genuinely
    existed between them.

9.   The judge went on to state that  the  appellant  was  in  a  "full  and
    subsisting relationship" with a Mr David Marsh which was a relationship
    built on the foundation of friendship over a number of years "that  has
    only relatively recently become romantic."

10.  He also found that the appellant had made strong contacts in her  local
    community which was shown by the attendance of the Mayor of Swindon  to
    speak on her behalf.  She had friends and contacts arising out  of  her
    studies and work placements.  The judge then turned to  the  fact  that
    the appellant had told him that she had originally come to England with
    a six year plan which would involve four years of university, plus  two
    years of work experience but that after completing  two  years  of  her
    studies she had opted for a sandwich course in  her  third  year  which
    meant that she had been too late to apply for the post-study work visa.



11.  The judge stated it was a matter of record that changes had  been  made
    to the Immigration  Rules  which  meant  that  only  students  who  had
    completed their degrees before April 2012 were able to apply for  post-
    study work visas.  The appellant had  therefore  been  unable  to  work
    after obtaining her degree.

12.  The judge took into account  the  funds  invested  in  the  appellant's
    education and stated that:

         "Her legitimate  expectation  she  would  be  able  to  follow  her
         entirely respectable plan went unmet because of  a  change  in  the
         Immigration Rules that had,  until  that  change,  enabled  her  to
         follow her plan".

13.  Having referred to the determination in CDS  (PBS  "available"  Article
    8) Brazil [2010] UKUT 305 the judge stated that the appellant had shown
    that she had established both family and private  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Having considered that her removal would be  an  interference
    in that private life but that that was for a legitimate purpose and  in
    accordance  with  the  law,  the  judge  went  on   to   consider   the
    proportionality of the refusal.

14.  Although the judge referred to "the  decision  in  Gulshan"  and  noted
    that the appellant could not meet the requirements of  the  Immigration
    Rules he stated that there was an arguable case for the grant of  leave
    to remain outside the Rules as there were factors  in  the  case  which
    were not covered by the Rules.  These were her "particularly  unusually
    close relationship with her sister" and the circumstances in which  her
    plans to study and then work in Britain had been overtaken  by  changes
    in Immigration Rules.

15.  He stated that these factors were sufficiently  compelling  to  warrant
    him going on to consider the appellant's case further to decide whether
    it was proportionate to remove her to Sri Lanka.

16.  He reminded himself that a successful appeal under Article  8  did  not
    bring with it indefinite leave to remain but said that he  was  placing
    particular weight on the disruption of the appellant's  six  year  plan
    caused by a change in the Immigration  Rules  in  the  context  of  the
    appellant enjoying an unusually  close  relationship  with  her  sister
    "that amounts to recent dependency."  He also referred to  her  private
    life being coloured by her relationship with Mr  Marsh  which  he  said
    appeared to have a good prospect of durability and which  might,  given
    time, lead to the appellant seeking leave to remain as a fianc�e.

17.  He  emphasised  the  appellant's  good  character,  her  good  progress
    educationally and the high regard for her  work  by  professionals  and
    others in the textile industry and the fact  she  was  well  liked  and
    supported by many people in her local  community.   He  said  that  the
    appellant's sister had health difficulties and had described  the  care
    and support she received from the appellant which evidence he accepted.
     Although  he considered that the appellant had not lost all ties  with
    Sri Lanka and that she had qualifications that would  not  prevent  her
    from taking  up  what  the  appellant  had  "fairly  described  as  job
    opportunities in Sri Lanka in the textile industry" and the  fact  that
    her parents and sister would be willing to support her  financially  in
    Sri Lanka and her father contemplated retiring  to  Sri  Lanka  in  due
    course, he went on to state in paragraph 55:-

         "In this case, the appellant knew  that  her  time  in  the  United
         Kingdom was limited.  It was indeed her plan to study and then work
         for a short time before returning to Sri Lanka.  She has built  her
         family and private life in the knowledge that both were  temporary,
         time limited and did not give rise to an expectation that she would
         be able to remain in this country unless she met  the  requirements
         to do so under the Immigration Rules."

18.  He referred to the case as being finely  balanced  but  said  that  the
    balance was tipped in favour of  the  appellant,  concluding  that  the
    appellant's right to respect for her family and private life outweighed
    the public interest in favour of removal.
19.  He went on to say that it was  for  the  respondent  to  determine  the
    length of any period of leave granted but that he  had  identified  two
    matters as outweighing the public interest.  The first relating to  the
    appellant's six year plan and the second was her relationship with  her
    sister.  He described his conclusions on  that  relationship  as  being
    "very much a snapshot of the current position" and that  therefore  his
    decision should not be regarded as requiring the  grant  of  indefinite
    leave to remain.

20.  The Secretary of State appealed.  The grounds of appeal  asserted  that
    the judge had failed to identify  any  compelling  circumstances  which
    would justify granting the  appellant  leave  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The appellant had failed to meet the requirements of the  Rules
    and a close relationship with her sister and a desire to complete a six
    year plan did not amount to compelling  circumstances.   Reference  was
    made to the decision of the Tribunal in Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC)
    which had emphasised that  an  Article  8  assessment  should  only  be
    carried out where there are compelling circumstances not recognised  by
    the Rules.  It was stated  that  the  judge  had  not  identified  such
    compelling circumstances.

21.  Moreover the   determination  in  Gulshan  emphasised  that  an  appeal
    should only be allowed where there are exceptional circumstances - the
    grounds referred to the judgment of Sales J in Nagre  [2013]  EWHC  720
    (Admin).

22.   It  was  pointed  out   that  the  appellant  had  had  no  legitimate
    expectation to remain in Britain, she did not meet the requirements  of
    the Rules and that any interference with her private  and  family  life
    was proportionate in the context  of maintaining effective  immigration
    control.  The grounds referred to the judgment of the House of Lords in
    Patel [2013] UKSC 72 which stated that Article 8 should not be used  as
    a means of subverting the criteria of the grant of leave to remain  set
    out in the Rules.  Even a near miss under the Rules could  not  provide
    substance to a human rights claim which was otherwise lacking in merit.
     Although the judge had referred to the determination of  the  Tribunal
    in CDS Brazil [2010] UKUT 305 (IAC) that had stated that Article 8  did
    not provide a general discretion to dispense with the  requirements  of
    the Rules merely because their impact might be unduly harsh.

23.  It was asserted that it was difficult to imagine how the  private  life
    of someone with no prior nexus to  the  United  Kingdom  would  require
    admission outside the Rules for the purposes  of  work.   Moreover  the
    appellant's relationship with the British citizen could  continue  from
    abroad.

24.  At the hearing of the appeal Mr Melvin relied on the judgment in  Nagre
    in  which  Sales  J  had  stated  that  a  residual  discretion   fully
    accommodated the requirements of Article 8 and he  emphasised  that  in
    the judgment in Haleemudeen [2014] EWCA Civ 558 it was made clear  that
    the new Rules required stronger bonds with the  United  Kingdom  before
    leave will be given under them.  In Nagre Sales J had  stated  that  it
    was necessary to find particular factors in individual cases which were
     especially compelling where the balance would  fall  in  favour  of  a
    grant of leave to  remain  even  though  those  facts  were  not  fully
    reflected in the new Rules and that it was also necessary  to  consider
    whether there are compelling circumstances not sufficiently  recognised
    under the new Rules to require the grant of  such  leave.    Mr  Melvin
    argued that the new Rules were not merely  a  starting  point  for  the
    consideration of proportionality under  Article 8.

25.  Mr Melvin  referred to the grounds of appeal emphasising the  ratio  of
    the judgment of the Supreme  Court  in  Patel -  those  who  had  been
    admitted on a temporary basis did not have a legitimate expectation  to
    be able to work here and the fact that there was a "near miss" was  not
    a basis for concluding that the rights of an appellant under Article  8
    were infringed by the decision.

26.  He argued that there were no exceptional ties in  this  case  and  that
    the judge ignored the higher test  which,  after  the  changes  in  the
    Rules, now prevailed when considering Article 8 rights.

27.  In reply Mr Martin stated  that  the  Secretary  of  State's  case  was
    nothing more than a disagreement with conclusions which the  judge  had
    properly reached - there was nothing to justify a  reasons  challenge.
    It was clear that the judge had followed relevant authorities which  he
    had cited in his determination.  He was correct  to  find  that  family
    life existed between the appellant and her sister and having so  found,
    then to have gone on to consider  whether  removal  was  proportionate.
    This  he  had  done  placing  weight  on   the   appellant's   romantic
    relationship with Mr Marsh, her strong community links - the fact  was
    that the mayor of Swindon had been so impressed by her  community  work
    that he had attended the hearing -  and the fact that the appellant had
    expected to be able to undertake post-study work and had been prevented
    from doing so.  She was an appellant who had been  a  diligent  student
    and had made considerable investment in her studies  and  it  was  only
    fair that her academic studies should be put to practical use here,  as
    that would have an impact on her further career.  He stated  the  judge
    had taken into account all relevant factors and  had  not  ignored  the
    public interest in immigration control but had found that the balancing
    exercise weighed in favour of the grant of leave to remain albeit for a
    limited period.  He asked me therefore  to  dismiss  the  Secretary  of
    State's appeal.

Discussion

28.  This is in many ways a  well  structured  determination  in  which  the
    judge found the appellant's  right  to  the  composite  of  family  and
    private life would be infringed by her removal and then concluded  that
    the removal of the appellant would be disproportionate.  However,  what
    I consider the judge did not do was place  appropriate  weight  on  the
    structured approach to the issue of rights under Article 8 as  set  out
    in the Rules.  Although he referred to the decision of the Tribunal  in
    Gulshan he did not appear to have placed weight on the fact  that  this
    appellant could not succeed under the  Rules  and  therefore  something
    exceptional  or  compelling  needed  to  be  shown  to  conclude  that,
    notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the  appellant  did  not   meet   the
    requirements of the Rules, she should still be given leave  to  remain.


29.  The reality is that the  judge  referred  to  three  or  possibly  four
    factors in concluding that  the  removal  of  the  appellant  would  be
    disproportionate.

30.  Although he had properly recorded the fact that the appellant  and  her
    sister had not lived together in Sri Lanka after  2002  and  that  even
    while the appellant was studying here  she  was  not  living  with  her
    sister he  considered that the appellant  was  exercising  family  life
    with her sister.  While it is  easy  to  accept  that  the  appellant's
    relationship with her sister is close there is nothing in the papers to
    indicate that the  appellant's  sister  and  the  appellant  are  in  a
    relationship which is in  any  way  greater  than  normal  family  ties
    between adult siblings.  The appellant is not the carer for her  sister
    nor vice versa and while it is easy to accept that they are very  close
    siblings, that simply does not overcome the relevant test  set  out  in
    Kugathas.

31.  Similarly the reality is that the fact that the appellant's  "six  year
    plan" was disrupted by changes in the Rules  does  not  mean  that  the
    appellant should be granted permission to work here for two years.   As
    is made clear in the judgment of the Supreme Court in Patel [2013] UKSC
    72 the fact that the appellant could not comply with  the  Rules  by  a
    very short period of time is not a reason to apply  Article  8  as,  in
    effect, a means of causing the Rules to have no effect.  Effectively it
    is relevant that Article 8 is not a  "general  dispensing  power."   As
    Carnwath LJ stated in Patel at paragraph  57  "the  opportunity  for  a
    promising student to complete  his  course  in  this  country,  however
    desirable in general terms, is not in itself a  right  protected  under
    Article 8."

32.  The third basis on which  the  judge  appeared  to  consider  that  the
    interference  with  the  appellant's  rights  under   Article   8   was
    disproportionate was her  relationship  with  Mr  Marsh.   The  reality
    appears to be that Mr Marsh has known the appellant for many years as a
    friend and also it appears that the relationship is  now  a  "romantic"
    one, there is nothing to suggest that the relationship is one  of  such
    depth that it has a long term future - there is  nothing  to  indicate
    that the appellant and Mr Marsh will become  engaged  or  set  up  home
    together.  There can simply be no reason why a strong  friendship  such
    as that between the appellant and  Mr  Marsh  could  be  sufficient  to
    enable leave to remain under Article 8.

33.  I consider that, having analysed the evidence there was  no  basis  for
    the judge's conclusion that the appeal should be allowed under  Article
    8 of the ECHR.  To do so involved, I consider, a material error of law,
    in that he did not place appropriate weight on the Rules  and  moreover
    placed undue weight on the various  factors  which  I have  identified
    above.  While the weight to be placed on various factors which may make
    up an Article 8 consideration,  is a matter for the judge who hears the
    appeal, the reality is that  the  weight  must  be  shown  to  lead  to
    compelling or exceptional circumstances and that has not been  done  in
    this case.

34.  I therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

35.  I put to Mr Martin that should I find a material error of  law  in  the
    determination I would consider going on to  remake  the  decision.   I
    asked  him  for  any  other  factors  which  should   be   taken   into
    consideration.  He submitted that the appellant's relationship with her
    sister, her relationship with Mr Marsh and her work  in  the  community
    would all be factors which would mean that, over time the  strength  of
    her rights under Article 8 would increase.

36.  I however do not  consider  that  that  is  correct.   Even  the  judge
    acknowledged  in  paragraph  58  that  his  view  of  the   appellant's
    relationship with her sister was very much a snapshot  of  the  current
    position and it might not be an enduring position over  any  particular
    period.  He  reached  that  conclusion  stating  inter  alia  that  the
    appellant's relationship with Mr Marsh might develop.  The  reality  is
    that not only was there no reason why the judge should have  considered
    that  the  relationship  between  the  appellant  and  her  sister  was
    compelling, but also that the judge took the view that her relationship
    with her sister might weaken over time.  That would surely  be  correct
    given that the appellant is likely at some stage  to  develop  her  own
    life away from that of her sister - whether or not she takes work away
    from Swindon and, of course, she did not study there, or indeed forms a
    relationship with Mr Marsh or anyone else.

37.  Secondly the reality is that the relationship with  Mr  Marsh  has  not
    developed to the extent that he and the  appellant  have  decided  that
    they would wish to live together or marry despite the  fact  that  they
    have known each other for many years.  Even if the relationship were to
    develop further it could, of course develop  when  the  appellant  left
    Britain - Mr Marsh has visited Sri Lanka and indeed the appellant  and
    her family in Sri Lanka in the past.

38.  The appellant does, as the judge acknowledged have ties with Sri  Lanka
    and has a sister there although it appears they have  fallen  out.   In
    the past her  parents,  who  live  in  Italy  have  visited  Sri  Lanka
    regularly, there  is  no  reason  why  they  and  indeed  possibly  the
    appellant's sister could not do so in the future.  While I accept  that
    the  appellant is  undertaking  community  work  here   she  would,  of
    course, be able to do so in Sri Lanka.

39.  Finally with regard to the appellant's work she  will,  it  appears  to
    have been acknowledged by all, have to start work  in  Sri  Lanka  and,
    given her age and the fact that she left university two years ago it is
    surely appropriate that she starts that as soon as possible.

40.  The judge did not consider that the  appellant  would  be  entitled  to
    remain in Britain indefinitely.  There is no present basis on which she
    could do so and I therefore consider that it is perhaps less than  kind
    to give her the hope of doing  so by granting her a further  period  of
    leave to remain.





41.  For the above reasons, having set aside the determination of the First-
    tier Judge I remake the decision  and  dismiss  this  appeal  on  both
    immigration and human rights grounds.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

