
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/36726/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |      Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 September 2015                    |           On 5 November 2015         |
|                                       |                                      |

                                   Before


                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             ROSE MARIE minnell
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Murphy, of Counsel, instructed by Cleveland Law
Ltd

                            DECISION AND REASONS
      Introduction

     1. Both members of the panel have contributed to this decision.


     2. This appeal is against the decision promulgated on 31 March 2015 of
        First-tier Tribunal Judge Beach ("the  judge")  which  allowed  the
        respondent's appeal outside the Immigration  Rules  (hereafter  the
        "Rules") on the basis of Article 8 of the 1950 European  Convention
        on Human Rights ("ECHR").


     3. The appellant is the Secretary of State. However, for  convenience,
        we shall refer to her as the Secretary of State and to  Ms  Minnell
        as the claimant.


Immigration history

     4. The claimant, born on 29 September 1965, is a citizen  of  Jamaica.
        She came to the United Kingdom on 21 December 2001  with  leave  to
        enter valid until 21 June 2002 as a visitor. Her leave was extended
        as a student until 31 October 2003. A further application for leave
        to remain was refused on 17 November 2005. She  has  remained  here
        illegally since 1 November 2003. Further applications for leave  to
        remain were made on 23 August 2010, 8 April 2013, and 10 May  2013.
        They were all refused with no right of appeal.


     5. The application that led to the appeal before the judge was made on
        25 April 2014. It was refused on 3 September  2014  on  the  ground
        that refusal would not place the United Kingdom in  breach  of  its
        obligations under the Human Rights Act 1998. On 3 September 2015, a
        decision was made to remove the claimant by way of directions under
        s.10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999. The claimant  appealed
        against this decision. This was the appeal that  was  before  Judge
        Beach.

      Relevant legal provisions


     6. The judge considered para 276ADE(vi) of the Rules and s.117B of the
        Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the "2002 Act").  She
        set out s.117B fully at paragraph  40  of  her  decision,  relevant
        paragraphs of which we quote at  our  paragraph  9  below.  In  our
        assessment, we have referred to EX.1 (a) of Appendix FM.   We  will
        therefore now quote para 276ADE and EX.1(a):

           Requirements to be met by an applicant for leave  to  remain  on
           the grounds of private life
           276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave
           to remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are  that  at
           the date of application, the applicant:
           (i)   does not fall for refusal under  any  of  the  grounds  in
                 Section S-LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. in  Appendix
                 FM; and
           (ii)  has made a valid application for leave to  remain  on  the
                 grounds of private life in the UK; and
           (iii) has lived continuously in the UK for  at  least  20  years
                 (discounting any period of imprisonment); or
           (iv)  ...; or
           (v)   ...; or
           (vi)  subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years  or  above,
                 has lived continuously in the UK for  less  than  20  years
                 (discounting any period of imprisonment) but there would be
                 very significant obstacles to the  applicant's  integration
                 into the country to which he would have to go  if  required
                 to leave the UK.

           EX.1. This paragraph applies if
           (a)   (i)   the applicant has a genuine and subsisting  parental
                       relationship with a child who-
                 (aa)  is under the age of 18 years, or was  under  the  age
                       of 18 years when the  applicant  was  first  granted
                       leave on the basis that this paragraph applied;
                 (bb)  is in the UK;
                 (cc)   is  a  British  Citizen  or  has  lived  in  the  UK
                       continuously for at least the  7  years  immediately
                       preceding the date of application; and

                 (ii)  it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
           leave the UK; or

      The judge's decision

     7. The judge considered whether the claimant satisfied  the  Rules  at
        paragraphs  33-35  of  her  decision.  Having  concluded  that  the
        claimant did not  satisfy  the  Rules,  the  judge  considered  the
        claimant's Article 8 claim outside the Rules, at paragraphs  36-45.
        She decided that the decision would be in breach of the  claimant's
        rights under Article 8 and therefore allowed the appeal outside the
        Rules.


     8. No  application  for  permission  to  appeal  against  the  judge's
        dismissal of the appeal under the Rules was made by  the  claimant.
        Accordingly, the judge's finding that the claimant did not  satisfy
        para 276ADE of the Rules stands. In any event, it was not suggested
        to us that the claimant did satisfy para 276ADE.


     9. We now quote paragraphs 33-45 (the underlining is ours):

           33.   The [claimant] left Jamaica in 2001 and  has  remained  in
                 the UK since that date. She has therefore lived in  the  UK
                 for 14 years. She states that she has no family in  Jamaica
                 but I find that the [claimant] and her sister  have  sought
                 to minimise the [claimant]'s connections to  Jamaica.  Both
                 were evasive in answering questions about visits to Jamaica
                 and were quick to explain  that  the  family  members  only
                 stayed for short periods of time. It is inevitable that the
                 [claimant] will have stronger family ties to the  UK  given
                 that 3 of her children, her grandchildren and siblings  are
                 all in the UK. It is likely too that she has little  or  no
                 family in Jamaica given that many  of  her  family  members
                 have emigrated from Jamaica and  the  [claimant]'s  parents
                 are dead. However, her family members have visited  Jamaica
                 and one of her daughters is married to a Jamaican national.
                 The wedding took place in Jamaica and there  are  therefore
                 some family connections with Jamaica. The [claimant]  spent
                 her formative years in Jamaica. Her family members  in  the
                 UK work. They are a close family  and  I  do  not  find  it
                 credible that they would not seek to assist the  [claimant]
                 in whatever way possible if she had to relocate to  Jamaica
                 including providing whatever financial help they  are  able
                 to provide.


           34.   The [claimant] states in her witness  statement  that  she
                 was the victim of domestic abuse in Jamaica.  This  is  the
                 first time that she has  mentioned  this.  Indeed,  in  her
                 application form the [claimant] stated that she  had  taken
                 full responsibility for her youngest daughter  because  the
                 father of her youngest daughter disappeared  following  her
                 birth. The [claimant] sought to  explain  this  comment  by
                 stating that he returned when her youngest daughter was  18
                 months old but this is not stated in the  application  form
                 where the [claimant] gives the distinct impression that the
                 father of her daughter  disappeared  and  did  not  return.
                 Either the [claimant] was being evasive in her  application
                 form to give the impression that she was the only  one  who
                 had cared for her daughter or she was being dishonest about
                 her relationship in Jamaica. The [claimant]  provided  some
                 photographs which  she  said  showed  injuries  which  were
                 caused by her ex-partner. There was no accompanying medical
                 report so it is left to me to assess the evidence before me
                 in  making  findings  with  regard  to  this   issue.   The
                 [claimant] gave an  explanation  of  how  each  injury  was
                 caused which was given in a manner which appeared to be  an
                 open manner. The explanation for  the  injuries  was  quite
                 specific and the [claimant]'s explanation of how they  were
                 caused was unusual in some respects. I find that there is a
                 real likelihood that  the  [claimant]  was  in  an  abusive
                 relationship at some point, possibly in Jamaica, but I find
                 there is no evidence to suggest that she would be  at  risk
                 in Jamaica now as a result of this relationship.


           35.   It would of course be  difficult  for  the  [claimant]  to
                 relocate to Jamaica having spent a considerable  period  of
                 time in the UK and having never worked in Jamaica and  with
                 only few friendship or familial ties to Jamaica. However, I
                 find  that  the  [claimant]  has  not  shown   that   these
                 circumstances  amount  to  very  significant  obstacles  in
                 reintegrating into Jamaica. I therefore find that she would
                 not face very significant  obstacles  if  she  returned  to
                 Jamaica.

             36. The [claimant] cannot fulfil the requirements of  Paragraph
                 276ADE I must also consider whether  there  are  compelling
                 circumstances that mean it would be  appropriate  to  grant
                 leave  to  remain  outside  the  Immigration   Rules.   The
                 [claimant] has lived in the UK for a number of  years.  She
                 does not fall within  the  provisions  of  the  Immigration
                 Rules but has strong family ties to the UK which should  be
                 considered.  I  find   that   there   remain   sufficiently
                 compelling circumstances such that  it  is  appropriate  to
                 consider whether leave to remain should be granted  outside
                 the Immigration Rules.


             37. ...


             38.  The [claimant] arrived in the UK in 2001. She has  studied
                 and worked in the UK. The [claimant]'s  3  children  and  a
                 number of grandchildren all  live  in  the  UK  as  do  the
                 [claimant]'s siblings and  nieces  and  nephews.  There  is
                 clearly a strong family network in the UK. The [claimant]'s
                 evidence (which was not significantly challenged) was  that
                 she plays an integral part in the lives of her children and
                 grandchildren and that some of her  grandchildren  spend  a
                 considerable period of time with her each week. Of  course,
                 it is not unusual for  grandparents  to  be  involved  with
                 their grandchildren's daily lives  but  the  [claimant]  is
                 involved with them to a significant  degree.  She  collects
                 some grandchildren from school and looks after them  for  a
                 number of hours. She also has  her  grandchildren  to  stay
                 with her every weekend. There is a degree  of  family  ties
                 within this setup which I find  is  more  than  the  normal
                 family ties between such relatives. The family are  clearly
                 a close knit family  and  the  [claimant]  has  significant
                 input into her  grandchildren's  lives.  I  find  that  the
                 [claimant] has established a family and private life in the
                 UK. Even if I am wrong about the family life  I  find  that
                 the [claimant]'s relationships with her family members  are
                 a significant part of the [claimant]'s private life. If the
                 [claimant] were removed from the UK I find that this  would
                 cause an interference of sufficient gravity  as  to  engage
                 Article 8.


             39.  The [claimant]  cannot  fulfil  the  requirements  of  the
                 Immigration Rules. The interference with her  private  life
                 is therefore in accordance with the law and  necessary  for
                 the purposes of democratic society.


             40.  I therefore consider the proportionality of the  decision.
                 I have taken account of the statutory public interest  when
                 considering the [claimant's] application. Section 19 of the
                 Immigration Act 2014 amends section 117 of the Nationality,
                 Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. Section 117B states:


                 (1)   The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is
                 in the public interest.
                 (2)   It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in
                     the interests of the economic well-being of the  United
                     Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter  or  remain  in
                     the United Kingdom are able to speak  English,  because
                     persons who can speak English-


                       (a)   are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
                       (b)   are better able to integrate into society.


                 (3)   It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in
                     the interests of the economic well-being of the  United
                     Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter  or  remain  in
                     the United Kingdom are financially independent, because
                     such persons-


                       (a)   are not a burden on taxpayers, and
                       (b)   are better able to integrate into society.


                 (4)   Little weight should be given to-


                       (a)   a private life, or
                        (b)    a  relationship  formed  with  a   qualifying
                 partner,
                       that is established by a person at a  time  when  the
                     person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.


                 (5)   Little weight should  be  given  to  a  private  life
                     established by a person at a  time  when  the  person's
                     immigration status is precarious.


                 (6)   In the  case  of  a  person  who  is  not  liable  to
                     deportation, the public interest does not  require  the
                     person's removal where-


                        (a)    the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
                        parental relationship with a qualifying child, and
                       (b)   it would not be reasonable to expect the  child
                        to leave the United Kingdom.


             41.  The [claimant] has lived in the UK  for  14  years  having
                 arrived here in 2001. Much of that time  has  been  without
                 leave and so any private life formed in that time  must  be
                 given little weight. The  [claimant]  was  aware  that  her
                 status in the UK was limited because  she  had  been  given
                 leave to remain as a student. The [claimant] has  a  strong
                 family network in the UK and she clearly assists her family
                 with many aspects of their lives  including  childcare.  It
                 has  been  said  that  it  would  be  difficult   for   the
                 [claimant]'s children to continue with their employment  if
                 the [claimant] were not here because  of  childcare  issues
                 but this is something which many parents have to manage. It
                 cannot be a reason for  saying  that  a  person  should  be
                 allowed to remain in the UK when  they  are  not  otherwise
                 entitled to be here.


             42.  However, the [claimant] does have  a  strong  relationship
                 with her children and grandchildren and under section 55 of
                 Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 I  must  take
                 account of the best interests of the children as a (but not
                 the) primary consideration. I therefore consider the effect
                 on the grandchildren if the [claimant]  were  removed  from
                 the UK. Despite the fact that  I  suspect  there  was  some
                 exaggeration of the  role  the  [claimant]  played  in  her
                 grandchildren's lives, the [claimant]  was  specific  about
                 what times she saw the grandchildren and spoke  about  them
                 with  warmth.  There  were  numerous  letters  and  witness
                 statements  before  me  supporting   the   [claimant]   and
                 mentioning her involvement in  her  grandchildren's  lives.
                 The family members attended  the  hearing  to  support  the
                 [claimant]. I find, therefore, that the [claimant] plays  a
                 strong and significant part in  her  grandchildren's  lives
                 and that they  have  regular  contact  with  them.  If  the
                 [claimant] were not in  the  UK  then  the  grandchildren's
                 close relationship with their grandmother will be  severed.
                 Contact visa  [sic]  email,  Skype  and  occasional  visits
                 cannot replace the current strong relationship between  the
                 [claimant] and her grandchildren and would not  be  in  the
                 grandchildren's best  interests  given  the  importance  of
                 their relationship with the [claimant] to them.


             43.  The [claimant]'s daughter applied for leave to  remain  at
                 the  same  time  as  the   [claimant]   and   was   granted
                 discretionary leave to remain as a reflection of the  years
                 she  had  spent  in  the  UK.  It  seems  likely  that  the
                 [claimant]'s  daughter  would  have   fallen   within   the
                 Immigration Rules given that she had spent more  than  half
                 her life in the UK but even still it is a  relevant  factor
                 in that it recognised the potential difficulties that would
                 be faced by  the  [claimant]'s  daughter  in  returning  to
                 Jamaica having spent so long in the UK. The [claimant]  has
                 spent more years in Jamaica prior to coming to the  UK  and
                 so is more aware of life in Jamaica but even still she  has
                 been outside her home country  for  14  years  which  is  a
                 significant  period  of  time.  The  [claimant]  has   made
                 applications at various time during  her  time  in  the  UK
                 although it is also true to say that there were periods  of
                 time when they were no outstanding  applications  with  the
                 Respondent and the [claimant] did not have leave to remain.




             44.  It will be difficult  for  the  [claimant]  (sic)  tor  e-
                 establish herself in Jamaica. Although I  have  found  that
                 she will have some support from  contacts  in  Jamaica  and
                 from her family in the UK it must be  recognised  that  the
                 [claimant] has been away from Jamaica for 14 years  and  is
                 now at a time in her life when it is harder to re-establish
                 oneself. I have not found that these are  very  significant
                 obstacles but this is not the test in respect of Article  8
                 where I must make a proportionality assessment and where  a
                 lesser degree of hardship  remains  relevant  in  assessing
                 proportionality.


             45.  The [claimant] has a wide family network in the UK and has
                 worked and studied in the UK. If granted leave to remain in
                 the  UK  it  is  likely  that  she  would  be   financially
                 independent.  She  speaks  English.  The  removal  of   the
                 [claimant] from the UK would cause a great wrench  to  that
                 family life. I was informed  that  the  [claimant]'s  niece
                 relies heavily on the  [claimant]  because  of  her  mental
                 health but I was not provided  with  any  real  substantive
                 evidence regarding this and I have placed little weight  on
                 this factor. However, what is clear is the strength of  the
                 relationship between the [claimant] and her family  members
                 in particular her  grandchildren  who  would  be  adversely
                 affected if the [claimant] were removed from the  UK.  This
                 is a finely balanced case but  I  find  that  these  strong
                 relationships  coupled  with  the   likely   hardships   in
                 attempting to re-establishing herself in Jamaica as well as
                 the [claimant]'s length of residence in the UK  making  her
                 ties with Jamaica weaker outweigh the  public  interest  in
                 maintaining  effective  immigration  control.  I  therefore
                 find, taking account  of  all  of  the  evidence  including
                 relevant case law such as Beoku-Betts, Shahzad and Gulshan,
                 that it would not be proportionate to remove the [claimant]
                 from the UK.

      The Secretary of State's grounds:

    10. There  were  three  grounds  in  support  of  the  application  for
        permission to appeal. However, ground 2 in fact  comprises  of  two
        limbs and ground 3 comprises of three limbs.


    11. Ground 1 was that the judge had failed to  adequately  explain  why
        she found that the claimant had established family life, given  the
        evidence that the claimant's children  had  established  their  own
        families. It was contended that, in the absence of such an adequate
        explanation,  the   Secretary   of   State   was   prevented   from
        understanding the nature of any interference.

    12. Ground 2 was as follows:


          (1)     Although the judge noted that s.117B(4) of  the  2002  Act
                 required that little weight be given to private  life  that
                 is formed at a time when an individual has no valid  leave,
                 she in fact failed to give little weight to the  claimant's
                 private life, private life which it was contended had  been
                 formed whilst the claimant had no leave. The target of this
                 ground   was   the   claimant's   relationship   with   her
                 grandchildren.


          (2)     The judge erred in finding and taking  into  account  that
                 the claimant was likely to be financially independent. This
                 is because s.117B(3) requires that those seeking  leave  to
                 remain are financially independent.

    13. Ground 3 was as follows:


            (1)   The judge had erred in failing to take  into  account  the
                 Secretary of State's policy as evidenced by, and  what  she
                 was trying to achieve through, the Rules  by  reference  to
                 Appendix FM.


            (2)   The judge had erred in failing to take  into  account  the
                 Secretary of State's policy as evidenced by, and  what  she
                 was trying to achieve through, the Rules  by  reference  to
                 para 276ADE.


                  In relation to grounds 3(1) and  3(2),  the  Secretary  of
                 State relies upon PG (USA) v Secretary  of  State  for  the
                 Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 118 at paragraph 28,  which
                 reads:


      It is clear that under the versions of the Rules in force at the  time
                       of the decisions on 20 June 2012 (the application for
                       entry clearance) and 20 March 2013  (the  application
                       for leave to  remain),  the  Government's  consistent
                       approach was that migrant workers should not be  able
                       to bring a wide group of relatives or  dependents  to
                       the UK to live for an extended period or to settle in
                       this country. This  was,  potentially,  an  important
                       consideration when assessing the  proportionality  of
                       an interference with the appellant's Article 8 rights
                       outside  the  Rules.  In  the   instant   case,   the
                       Immigration Rules do not provide  a  "complete  code"
                       and although "the proportionality test (was) more  at
                       large" (MM (Lebanon) and others v  SSHD  [135]),  the
                       Rules nonetheless help illuminate the regulatory  and
                       policy context which the judge needed  to  take  into
                       account, along with a range  of  other  factors.  The
                       First Tier Tribunal judge did not  analyse  what,  in
                       this sense, is said to  be  the  legitimate  end  the
                       respondent was seeking to achieve. The expression  by
                       the  judge  at  [39]  of  his   Decision   that   the
                       interference may  not  have  been  justified  at  all
                       appears to indicate that he did not take  account  of
                       the respondent's policy to restrict the  category  of
                       relatives of migrant workers who are able to join the
                       person  who  is  temporarily  living  in  the  United
                       Kingdom and  to  limit  the  circumstances  in  which
                       someone in the appellant's position can qualify as  a
                       dependent. I stress that the existence of this policy
                       was not in any sense necessarily  determinative,  but
                       it should have formed part of the  judge's  reasoning
                       on the issue of proportionality.

            (3)  Whilst it was accepted that the proportionality  assessment
                 was "more at large outside the  Rules",  it  was  contended
                 that the judge had erred in stating at paragraph 44 of  her
                 decision that "a lesser degree of hardship remains relevant
                 in  assessing  proportionality"  when  compared   to   para
                 276ADE(vi).


    14. First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer granted permission  to  appeal  on
        all grounds, although stating, in particular, that it was  arguable
        that the judge had misapplied s117B of the 2002  Act  in  ascribing
        the future earnings potential of the claimant as a relevant factor.





Submissions on the error of law issue

    15. In relation to ground 1, Miss Holmes submitted that it was  unclear
        from paragraph 45 of the judge's decision whether the  family  life
        found by the judge to have been established was  family  life  with
        her adult children, or her minor grandchildren,  or  both.  In  any
        event, the judge inadequately explained why she found  that  family
        life existed.  In addition, there was a contradiction  between  the
        evidence recorded at paragraph 10 of the judge's decision, that the
        claimant "has the older two grandchildren most weekends on Saturday
        and Sunday", and the finding the judge made at paragraph  38,  that
        "She also has her grandchildren to stay with her every weekend."


    16. In relation to ground 2(1), Miss Holmes submitted  that  the  judge
        failed to attach little weight to the claimant's private  life  and
        she erred in treating as family life what is  usually  regarded  as
        private life, i.e.  the  claimant's  relationship  with  her  adult
        children and her grandchildren.

    17. In relation to ground 2(2), Miss Holmes submitted  that  the  judge
        erred at paragraph  45  in  finding  that  the  claimant  would  be
        financially independent. She  submitted  that  s.117B(3)  does  not
        extend to the future prospects of the claimant obtaining employment
        because the relevant  phrase  in  s.117B(3)  is  expressed  in  the
        present tense ("are financially independent").


    18. In relation to grounds 3(1) and 3(2), Miss Holmes  submitted  that,
        applying PG (USA) by analogy or  extension,  the  judge  failed  to
        factor into her balancing exercise in relation  to  proportionality
        the Secretary of State's policy as evidenced by the Rules  and  her
        intention as to what she was trying to achieve through  the  Rules,
        contrary to PG (USA).


    19. We asked Mr Murphy to address us on the question whether the  judge
        had speculated in making the finding that  the  claimant  would  be
        able to obtain employment and be financially independent  since  it
        was difficult to see what evidence was before  the  judge  in  this
        respect.

    20. Mr Murphy submitted that there was nothing wrong with  the  judge's
        decision.

    21. In relation to ground 1, Mr Murphy drew our attention to  the  fact
        that the judge had followed the  five-step  approach  explained  at
        paragraph 17 of the judgment of the House of Lords in Razgar [2004]
        UKHL 7. There was no significant challenge  to  the  evidence  that
        this was  a  close-knit  family  into  which  the  claimant  has  a
        significant input. The ties were  more  that  normal  family  ties.
        There is a  rich  tapestry  of  family  life.  The  judge  properly
        considered s117B of the 2002 Act at paragraphs 40-41 and s55 of the
        Borders, Citizenship, and Immigration Act 2009 at paragraph 42. The
        claimant's daughter came to the UK when she was 7  years  old.  The
        judge found at paragraph 43 that the daughter would  succeed  under
        the Rules. Mr Murphy submitted that the judge was entitled to  find
        that family life existed. The judge found both dependency  and  the
        existence of a family life as per Gurung & Others  v  Secretary  of
        State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 8 at [45]. The  judge
        explained adequately why family life existed.

    22. In relation to ground 2(1), Mr Murphy submitted that s.117B(4) only
        applies to private life, whereas the judge found that the  claimant
        had established family life as to which,  in  his  submission,  the
        judge had made no material error of law.

    23. In relation to ground 2(2), Mr Murphy submitted that  with  regards
        to s117B, it would be extraordinary  if  a  judge  could  not  take
        account of future earnings. If,  for  example,  a  claimant  was  a
        doctor, he submitted that the Tribunal would be  entitled  to  take
        into account that the claimant would be able to obtain a job, given
        the shortage of doctors  in  the  UK.  Parliament  could  not  have
        intended that the possibility of  employment  being  obtained  once
        leave  is  granted  could  not  be  taken  into  account.  Such   a
        proposition would be irrational.


    24. Mr Murphy submitted that the Secretary of State's challenge to  the
        judge's finding that it was  likely  that  the  claimant  would  be
        financially independent was a rationality challenge.  He  submitted
        that the claimant could find  work.  We  asked  what  evidence  was
        before the  judge  that  the  claimant  would  be  able  to  obtain
        employment. Mr Murphy said that the claimant was  able  bodied  and
        could find work. It was not irrational for the judge to have  found
        that   it  was  likely  that  the  claimant  would  be  financially
        independent, although another judge might have reached a  different
        finding.


    25. We asked what evidence there was before the judge that the claimant
        had worked in the UK. Mr Murphy took instructions and then informed
        us that the claimant said she had worked in a care home  from  2003
        to 2007 (cf her oral evidence before us in  the  re-making  of  the
        decision on the appeal, paragraph 61 below). There were payslips in
        the bundle before the judge that only  covered  a  period  of  four
        months, from 12 April 2010 to 12 August 2010.  Mr Murphy  submitted
        that, if the claimant is granted leave to remain, she would be able
        to obtain work.

    26. Mr Murphy did not address us on grounds 3(1) and 3(2). In  relation
        to ground 3(3), he submitted that VW (Uganda) v SSHD; AB  (Somalia)
        v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ  5  is
        relevant. The test for Article 8 purposes is not  that  of  whether
        there were very significant obstacles but reasonableness which is a
        less onerous test. He submitted that, even if (by analogy) the  gap
        between whether there are insurmountable obstacles to  family  life
        continuing outside the UK and whether it is reasonable to do so  is
        small in cases where family life has been  established  at  a  time
        when the  immigration  status  of  the  claimant  in  question  was
        precarious (R (Nagre) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
        [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) at paragraph 43), there was nevertheless  a
        gap and thus a difference in the tests  to  be  applied.  Thus,  he
        submitted that this was all the judge meant in saying in the  final
        sentence of paragraph 44 of her decision that there was  "a  lesser
        degree of  hardship  ...  relevant  in  assessing  proportionality"
        outside the Rules.



      Discussion and decision on the error of law issue

    27. We start with ground 1. Although we accept  Ms  Holmes'  submission
        that the position of grandparents is not to  be  aligned  with  the
        position of biological parents, especially if the children involved
        are actually living with their parents  who  remain  their  primary
        carers and who remain responsible for their care and overall needs,
        this does not mean (and we did not understand Ms Holmes to suggest)
        that  grandparents  cannot  establish  family   life   with   their
        grandchildren. The question whether  a  grandparent  enjoys  family
        life with a grandchild is a fact specific issue, depending  on  all
        of the circumstances in each case.


    28. We accept that the judge did not say, in terms, whether  she  found
        that family life had been established between the claimant and  her
        children or the claimant and her grandchildren or both.  The  judge
        did not mention any evidence of any dependency between the claimant
        and her children, nor was there any discussion in her  decision  as
        to whether the nature of the relationship between the claimant  and
        her children amounted to family life. We  are  therefore  satisfied
        that, if she made a  finding  that  the  claimant  had  established
        family life (and we  are  satisfied  that  she  did),  the  finding
        concerned the claimant's relationship with  her  grandchildren.  It
        did not concern her relationship with her children.


    29. At paragraph 38 of her decision, the judge referred to the evidence
        of the contact between the claimant and her grandchildren and  then
        said: "There is a degree of family ties within this setup  which  I
        find is  more  than  the  normal  family  life  ties  between  such
        relatives."  In the final sentence of paragraph 38, the judge said:
        "Even if I am wrong about the family life ...". It  is  clear  from
        this sentence that the judge did find that  family  life  had  been
        established. We are equally clear, as we have said,  that  she  did
        not make a finding that family life was being enjoyed  between  the
        claimant and her adult children. Whilst the phrase: "...a degree of
        family life ties..." falls short of the clarity one expects, we are
        nevertheless satisfied, when  the  paragraph  is  considered  as  a
        whole, that the judge did find that  the  claimant  enjoyed  family
        life with her grandchildren.


    30. The next question in relation to ground 1 is whether the judge  had
        adequately explained why she found that  family  life  was  enjoyed
        between the claimant and her grandchildren.


    31. In our judgement, the judge gave adequate reasons for finding  that
        the relationship that the claimant had with her grandchildren  went
        beyond  that  normally  existing  between  a  grandparent  and  her
        grandchildren. The evidence before the judge was that the  claimant
        provided care and support on a daily basis for one or other of  her
        (then) four grandchildren whilst the parents went to work for  many
        hours. The judge found at paragraph 38 that "she plays an  integral
        part in the lives of her children and grandchildren...some  of  her
        grandchildren spend a considerable period of  time  with  her  each
        week...the [claimant]  is  involved  with  them  to  a  significant
        degree. She collects some grandchildren from school and looks after
        them for a number of hours. She also has her grandchildren to  stay
        with her every weekend. ... The family are  clearly  a  close  knit
        family  and  the  [claimant]  has  significant   input   into   her
        grandchildren's lives."


    32. In our judgement, the judge was entitled to make those findings  on
        the evidence that was before her, although it is true to  say  that
        another judge may have found otherwise, given that all the evidence
        showed that the parents of the children  remained  responsible  for
        the children and that the children were living with their parents.

    33. There is no material discrepancy between the evidence  recorded  at
        paragraph  10 of the judge's decision, that the claimant  said  she
        "has the older two children most weekends on Saturday and  Sunday",
        and her finding at paragraph 38 which records that she  said:  "She
        also has her grandchildren to stay  with  her  every  weekend."  At
        most, this was a small discrepancy  which was not material  to  her
        finding that family life had  been  established,  given  the  other
        reasons she gave for her finding.


    34. We are therefore satisfied that ground 1 is not established.


    35. Ground 2(1) is not established either. We have concluded  that  the
        judge did not err in law in making her finding  that  the  claimant
        had established family life with her grandchildren. The  target  of
        ground 2(1) was the claimant's relationship with her  grandchildren
        which we have concluded the judge found  amounted  to  family  life
        whereas s117B(4) applies to private life that is established  by  a
        person at a time when he or she is in the UK unlawfully.


    36. We are satisfied that ground 2(2)  is  established.  There  was  no
        evidence before the judge that the claimant had any firm  offer  of
        employment. The judge did not have any up-to-date evidence  of  the
        claimant's qualifications. All she had were  four  payslips  for  a
        period of four months, from 12 April 2010 to 12 August 2010, in the
        total period of the  claimant's  residence  of  14  years  and  the
        documents referred to in the  refusal  letter,  summarised  at  our
        paragraph 65 below, from which it can be seen  that  three  of  the
        five qualifications that  the  claimant  had  obtained  during  her
        studies were no longer valid. The judge did not have  any  evidence
        of the claimant's likely income if she did obtain a job nor did she
        have any evidence of the claimant's outgoings. Given  the  evidence
        that was before the judge, we have no hesitation in concluding that
        the judge erred by speculating when she made her finding that it is
        likely that the claimant will be financially independent.


    37. We turn to ground 3(1), that the judge erred  in  failing  to  take
        into account the Secretary of State's policy as evidenced  by,  and
        what she was trying to achieve through, the Rules by  reference  to
        Appendix FM. The Secretary of State relies upon paragraph 28 of  PG
        (USA) which we have quoted at paragraph 13 above.


    38. For the purposes of this decision, it is only necessary to  give  a
        brief summary of the background facts in PG (USA).  The  applicant,
        who was independently wealthy and thus financially independent  and
        who had health insurance to cover any period of  infirmity,  wished
        to live with her daughter and  son-in-law  in  the  UK  during  the
        period when the son-in-law had leave to  remain  in  the  UK  as  a
        Minister of Religion under Tier 2 of the Points Based  System.  The
        daughter and son-in-law hoped to live in the  UK  indefinitely.   A
        judge of the First-tier Tribunal allowed the applicant's Article  8
        claim outside the Rules. The  applicant  could  not  bring  herself
        within the categories of relatives who could join migrant relatives
        who were lawfully in the UK as Tier 2 migrants because  eligibility
        was limited to spouses, partners and children of  the  migrant  who
        was admitted as a Tier 2 migrant.


    39. The Court of Appeal held that,  whilst  the  Secretary  of  State's
        policy in restricting the category of relatives  who  are  able  to
        join a Tier 2 migrant who is living temporarily in the UK "was  not
        necessarily determinative", the judge had  nevertheless  failed  to
        take into account the policy, that migrant workers  should  not  be
        able to bring a wide group of relatives or dependents to the UK  to
        live for an extended period or settle in the UK,  which  the  court
        said "was, potentially, an important consideration  when  assessing
        the proportionality of an interference with the appellant's article
        rights outside the Rules".


    40. Of course, the policy of limiting the  category  of  relatives  who
        could join individuals living temporarily  in  the  UK  as  Tier  2
        migrants is not of relevance in the instant case. However, it  does
        not follow that the Rules do not provide the legislative and policy
        context in which the proportionality exercise is to be carried out.
        The proper legislative and policy context is to  be  understood  by
        examining whether the Rules do provide coverage for the  Article  8
        claim in question and, if so, understanding why the  claimant  does
        not qualify under the rule or rules in question: Secretary of State
        for the Home Department v SS (Congo) and Others [2015] EWCA Civ 387
        at paragraphs 44 and 48.


    41. In this particular case, the claimant relies upon her  family  life
        with her grandchildren. Whilst Ms Holmes addressed us on PG  (USA),
        she assumed that the penultimate sentence of paragraph  28  of  the
        judgment was directly applicable without further analysis, whereas,
        as we have said above, the  policy  of  limiting  the  category  of
        relatives who could join individuals living temporarily in  the  UK
        as Tier 2 migrants is not relevant in the instant case. As we  said
        at  paragraph  26  above,  Mr  Murphy  did  not  address   us   the
        applicability or  otherwise  of  PG  (USA),  and  whether,  if  the
        penultimate sentence was not relevant, there was coverage  for  the
        claimant's Article 8 claim within the Rules.  Ms  Holmes  drew  our
        attention  to  EX.1   of   Appendix   FM   under   which   parental
        responsibility for the child in  question  must  be  shown  for  an
        individual to succeed. We raised para 317 of the IRs.


    42. It is possible to take the view that the Rules do provide  coverage
        for an Article 8 claim based on family life between  a  grandparent
        and a grandchild. It is also possible to take the view that they do
        not. It is possible to justify both views, as follows:


            i)    First, in support of the proposition  that  the  Rules  do
                 provide such coverage, one can point to the following:


                  a)   the fact that para 317 of the Rules  makes  provision
                       for a grandparent who is wholly or  mainly  dependent
                       on the grandchild and who  can  be  accommodated  and
                       maintained  adequately  without  recourse  to  public
                       funds; and


                  b)   the fact that EX.1(a) of Appendix FM makes  provision
                       for adults, including grandparents, who have parental
                       responsibility for the grandchild or grandchildren,


                  as  demonstrating  that  Parliament  has  decided  that  a
                 grandparent will only succeed under  the  Rules  if  either
                 para 317 or EX.1 is satisfied.


            ii)   In support of the alternative view, it is possible to  say
                 that:


                  a)   para 317 of the Rules does not assist because, whilst
                       it provides a route for grandparents to settle in the
                       UK, it is not listed in Appendix FM which is the part
                       of the Rules in which the Secretary of State has  set
                       out the requirements for leave to  be  granted  under
                       the Rules on the basis of Article 8 and, furthermore,
                       para 317 may apply even if family life is  not  being
                       enjoyed; and


                  b)   EX.1(a) of Appendix FM does not provide such coverage
                       because EX.1(a) requires it to be shown that there is
                       a parental relationship between  the  child  and  the
                       adult in question, whereas family life can be enjoyed
                       between a grandparent and a  grandchild  without  the
                       grandparent having a parental relationship  with  the
                       child.


    43.  We did not  hear  argument  on  these  opposing  views.  In  these
        circumstances, we decided to apply the view that is  more  generous
        to the claimant, i.e. the second view.


    44. On this basis, we concluded that ground 3(1),  which contends  that
        the judge had erred in failing to take into account  the  Secretary
        of State's policy as evidenced  by  and  what  she  was  trying  to
        achieve through the Rules by  reference  to  Appendix  FM,  is  not
        established. Applying the second of the  opposing  views  explained
        above, the legislative and policy context in relation  to  EX.1  is
        not relevant. The position is otherwise in relation to ground  3(2)
        which is better dealt with after a discussion of ground 3(3).


    45. We turn to consider ground 3(3).


    46. At the hearing, we did  not  consider  it  necessary  to  give  our
        decision on whether ground 3(3) was established. We will  now  deal
        with ground 3(3) which contends that the judge erred in stating  at
        paragraph 44 that "a lesser degree of hardship remains relevant  in
        assessing proportionality" when compared to para 276ADE(vi).


    47. In cases where the issue is whether family life can be enjoyed in a
        claimant's home country, the test for  the  purposes  of  EX.1.  of
        Appendix FM is whether there are insurmountable obstacles to family
        life being enjoyed in that country. It is now established that  the
        gap between the test of "insurmountable obstacles" in  relation  to
        EX.1. and whether it is reasonable for family life to be enjoyed in
        the home country is small where family life  has  been  established
        when the immigration status of the claimant is precarious: Sales  J
        (as he then was) in Nagre at paragraph 43.


    48. This was approved by the Court of Appeal in R (Agyarko) and  others
        v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA  Civ  440,
        where, at paragraph 30, the Court said:

                 Thus it is possible that  a  case  might  be  found  to  be
                 exceptional for the purposes of  the  relevant  test  under
                 Article 8 in relation to precarious family life even  where
                 there are no insurmountable obstacles to continuing  family
                 life overseas. This means  that  there  is  a  gap  between
                 section EX.1 of  Appendix  FM  and  what  Article  8  might
                 require in some cases: see  Nagre,  paras.  [41]-[48].  But
                 this does not mean that the issue whether there are or  are
                 not insurmountable obstacles to relocation drops out of the
                 picture where there is reliance  on  Article  8.  It  is  a
                 material factor to be taken into account: see Nagre, paras.
                 [41]  and  [47];  Rodrigues  da  Silva  and   Hoogkamer   v
                 Netherlands, para. [39]; and Jeunesse v Netherlands, paras.
                 [107] and [117]. In  relation  to  precarious  family  life
                 cases, as I observed  in  Nagre  at  para.  [43],  the  gap
                 between section EX.1 and the requirements of Article  8  is
                 likely to be small.


    49. We are satisfied that, in saying:  "a  lesser  degree  of  hardship
        remains relevant in assessing proportionality"  outside  the  Rules
        when  compared  to  the  requirement  to  show  "very   significant
        obstacles" to the  claimant's  reintegration  in  Jamaica  in  para
        276ADE(vi), the judge fell into material  error,  for  the  reasons
        given at paragraphs 50-52.


    50.  Firstly, by making a comparison between two concepts  which  could
        not  legitimately  be  compared.  The  requirement  to  show   very
        significant  obstacles   focuses   only   on   the   obstacles   to
        reintegration. The nature and quality of private  life  established
        in the UK plays no part in that assessment,  whereas  the  question
        whether it is reasonable for a person to enjoy his/her private life
        in the country to which they would have to go in the assessment  of
        proportionality   outside   the   Rules   (if   the   question   of
        reasonableness is relevant in any  individual  case)  will  involve
        considering the nature and quality of private life enjoyed  in  the
        UK and whether it is reasonable to expect the individual  to  enjoy
        his/her private life  in  all  in  its  essential  aspects  in  the
        country.   In other words, the judge was  not  comparing  like  for
        like.


    51. Secondly, and in any event, we do not accept Mr Murphy's submission
        that  the  phrase  "very  significant  obstacles"  sets  a   higher
        threshold than is applied in assessing Article 8 claims outside the
        Rules. Where an individual has established his or her private  life
        in the UK during a period when his or  her  immigration  status  is
        precarious or unlawful, the  phrase  "very  significant  obstacles"
        sets the appropriate threshold which takes account of the weight to
        be given to the state's interests in the balancing  exercise.   The
        weight to be given to the public interest does not reduce when  one
        is considering the claim outside the Rules because  the  individual
        does not satisfy the requirements of  a Rule that provides coverage
        for his/her Article 8 claim. That is the reason why it is necessary
        for the individual to show compelling circumstances. In saying  (at
        paragraph 44) that "a lesser degree of hardship remains relevant in
        assessing proportionality" outside the Rules when compared to  para
        276ADE(vi), the judge reduced  the  weight  given  to  the  state's
        interest when she considered the private life aspect of the Article
        8 claim outside the Rules because she  ignored  the  policy  behind
        para 276ADE. The judge considered the private life  aspect  of  the
        claimant's case outside the Rules in a freestanding way instead  of
        considering  whether  there  were   compelling   circumstances,   a
        formulation which takes into account the policy behind para 276ADE.




    52. We are therefore satisfied that the judge did err in law  when  she
        said  at paragraph 44 that "a lesser  degree  of  hardship  remains
        relevant in  assessing  proportionality"  outside  the  Rules  when
        compared to para 276ADE(vi).


    53.  For  these  reasons,  we  are  satisfied  that  ground   3(2)   is
        established.


    54. For the  same  reasons,  we  are  satisfied  that  ground  3(3)  is
        established.


    55. In summary, therefore, we are satisfied that the judge  made  three
        errors of law, as follows:


          i)      (Ground 2(2)) The judge erred in finding and  taking  into
                 account that the claimant  was  likely  to  be  financially
                 independent.


            ii)   (Ground 3(2)) The judge erred  in  failing  to  take  into
                 account the Secretary of State's policy  as  evidenced  by,
                 and what she was trying to achieve through,  the  Rules  by
                 reference to para 276ADE.


            iii)  (Ground 3(3)) The judge erred in law  when  she  said   at
                 paragraph 44 that "a  lesser  degree  of  hardship  remains
                 relevant in assessing proportionality"  outside  the  Rules
                 when compared to para 276ADE(vi).


    56. We are also satisfied that each of these errors  were  material  to
        the judge's decision to allow the appeal outside the  Rules,  given
        that the judge said at paragraph 45 of her decision, that "This  is
        a finely balanced case".


    57. At the hearing, we announced our decision that grounds  2(2),  3(1)
        and 3(2) were established  and  that  each  of  these  errors  were
        material. We did not consider it necessary to reach a  decision  on
        ground 3(3). We then informed the parties that  we  set  aside  the
        decision of the judge to allow the appeal outside the IRs  and  the
        findings that we considered should be preserved.  We  proceeded  to
        hear the parties on the re-making of the decision on the claimant's
        appeal, limited to considering the  Article  8  claim  outside  the
        Rules.


    58. Having reflected on the issue, we have now decided that ground 3(1)
        is not established. We have reached a decision on ground  3(3)  and
        concluded that it is established.  We  considered  whether  it  was
        necessary to recall the  parties  and  decided  that  it  was  not.
        Neither party is prejudiced because we  are  still  satisfied  that
        each of grounds 2(2) and 3(2) are established, as the parties  were
        informed at the hearing.


      Re-making the decision: The evidence


    59. The judge summarised the evidence before her at paras 10-20 of  her
        decision. We heard evidence from the claimant  as  to  her  current
        position. Members of her family waited outside whilst the  claimant
        gave evidence in case Mr Murphy wished to call them. In  the  event
        he chose not to do so.


    60. We note from the file that the claimant's daughter Dacia (born on 8
        July 1981) has a daughter, D (born in May 2009), and L,  who  is  4
        months old. The claimant is also the mother of Darion  (born  on  8
        July 1986) who is the father of R1 (born in July 2011), R2 (born in
        February 2006), and T (born in November 2005). The claimant's other
        child is Dana (born on 22 February 1993).  All  of  the  claimant's
        children are adults with the youngest being 22 years old.

    61. In evidence, the claimant said that she worked as a care  assistant
        in 2010 and could do so in the future as she has  certificates  and
        training. She has been to various homes working via an agency.  She
        confirmed that she had only worked for a period of 4  months,  i.e.
        the period to which the payslips from 12 April 2010  to  12  August
        2010 relate. She has qualifications in handling  and  lifting,  and
        giving medication to residents from Veridian  in  2010.  She  could
        earn 950 per month plus overtime if her  job  was  permanent.  She
        could live on this. She could earn a further 250  per  month  from
        overtime.


    62. The claimant said she lives with her cousin. She does not pay rent.
        She did not pay rent while she worked illegally. She  paid  10  to
        20 for electricity, 10 for gas, and 50 for food per week.


    63. The claimant said she looks after D, R1  and  L.  She  leaves  home
        every day at 7am to take D to school and has been doing this  since
        Easter 2015. She drops her off at 8 a.m. She then  goes  and  cares
        for L until she either takes R1  to  school  or  picks  D  up  from
        school. On a Thursday and Friday she leaves home at 11am to take R1
        to school for midday after which she returns to  care  for  L.  She
        leaves home at 2.45pm to pick D up from school. She brings her home
        and makes sure she has something to eat until Dacia  gets  home  by
        4pm or 4.30pm. She then leaves to collect R1 at 5pm to take him  to
        Darion at 6pm or 6.30pm. She has been doing  this  since  September
        2014.  She sees R2 and T every other weekend, but  if  she  is  not
        with them, she is with D, R1 and L. This is likely to continue.


    64. The claimant said that, if she gets a job, she can change her  care
        routine for the grandchildren and help after school. If she has  to
        work she will. She would do shift work to enable her to continue to
        help with the grandchildren. She would work  it  out  and  try  and
        arrange shifts  around  her  family  commitments.  If  the  job  is
        available she would ask her children to sort out the grandchildren.
        She would have to take whatever was available.


    65. The Secretary  of  State's  refusal  letter  states  that  she  had
        previously submitted certificates in Emergency First Aid valid  for
        1 year (16 February 2005), Infection Control valid for 2  years  (9
        March 2005), Moving/Handling and Transferring of Patients valid for
        1 year (25 July 2005), Health & Safety at Work  (25  August  2005),
        and  Food  Hygiene  (12  September  2005).  These  documents   were
        submitted to us under cover of a letter dated 9 September 2015 from
        the claimant's representatives.


    66. The refusal letter also states that  she  has  been  registered  at
        Spring Park Medical Practice since 14 June 2002, payslips and  bank
        statements had been produced to establish work between 4 April 2010
        and 8 August 2010, and there was evidence she had been a full  time
        student from July 2002 to December 2005, and she had passed a  Life
        in the UK test on 25 October 2008.


      Re-making of the decision: Submissions

    67.  Miss  Holmes  submitted  that  the  claimant  is  not  financially
        independent now and that, as s117B(3)  is  in  the  present  tense,
        given the words "... are financially independent...",  the  section
        precluded potential future earnings from being taken into  account.
        Ms Holmes submitted that the claimant would not be self  sufficient
        as she would not earn enough and that her complex child care regime
        would reduce her income.  Ms  Holmes  submitted  that  no  specific
        income  level  is  prescribed  for  a  person  to  be  regarded  as
        "financially independent". Ms Holmes submitted that,  if  she  does
        work, this would adversely impact on the relationship she has  with
        her grandchildren which she submitted was a relevant  consideration
        in the balancing exercise given that it is  her  potential  removal
        from the grandchildren that forms the basis of her Article 8  claim
        outside the Rules. It is also relevant to take into account in  the
        balancing exercise the fact that she is not the  primary  carer  of
        any of the grandchildren. She has  family  in  Jamaica.  Ms  Holmes
        submitted that only an exceptional case will  succeed  outside  the
        Rules and that there was  nothing  exceptional  about  any  of  the
        individual relationships.

    68. Mr Murphy submitted that there is a rich tapestry of  family  life.
        Dana has lived with her for years. Dana  currently  does  not  have
        permanent status but she should  qualify  under  para  276ADE.  The
        claimant is dependent on her family in the UK. She  is  less  of  a
        burden on the taxpayer than many others  in  similar  circumstances
        because she has strong family support. It is accepted that she does
        not contribute to public  services  such  as  the  police,  defence
        forces, NHS, or local authorities. Mr Thomas submitted that she  is
        fully integrated into society and that, if allowed to remain in the
        UK,  she  would  be  financially  independent.  He  submitted  that
        potential earnings fall within s.117B and therefore that  s.117B(3)
        is in the claimant's favour.

      Re-making of the decision: Assessment

    69. We have underlined the findings of the judge that we have preserved
        at paragraph 9 above. Given these findings, it is not necessary for
        us to conduct a full five-step analysis of the Article 8  claim  of
        the claimant outside the Rules.  The only issue for us to  consider
        is proportionality.

    70. We consider the following in turn:

            i)    The approach to be followed in deciding the weight  to  be
                 given to the public interest in the instant case.

            ii)   The parties' submissions  on  the  interpretation  of  the
                 phrase "are financially independent" in s.117B(3).

            iii)  Consideration of the evidence and proportionality  in  the
                 claimant's specific case.

      i) The approach to be followed in deciding the weight to be  given  to
    the public interest


    71. As the Court of Appeal explained in SS (Congo), the first  step  is
        to identify whether there are any relevant Rules in order to assess
        the force of the public interest that is given expression in  those
        Rules. This will identify the degree of weight to be given  to  the
        expression of public policy in the substantive part of the Rules in
        the particular context in question (SS (Congo) at paragraph 48).

    72. In relation to non-entry  clearance  cases,  the  Court  of  Appeal
        explained, inter alia (at paragraphs 28-33 of the judgment), that:


            a)    In cases involving deportation of foreign  criminals,  the
                 Rules set out a test of "exceptional  circumstances"  which
                 must be shown for the state's interests in the  deportation
                 of the foreign criminal to  be  outweighed.  The  Court  of
                 Appeal in SS (Congo) referred (at paragraph 30) to the fact
                 that the Court of Appeal in MF  (Nigeria)  v  Secretary  of
                 State for the Home Department [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192  held
                 that  "very  compelling  reasons"  would  be  required   to
                 outweigh the public  interest  in  deportation  of  foreign
                 criminals whose cases did not fall within  the  substantive
                 provisions in paras 399 and 399A.


      We observe that para 398 of the Rules has been amended so that it  now
                 states, in terms, that "very compelling circumstances" over
                 and above  those  described  in  paras  399  and  399A  are
                 required to outweigh the state's interests.


            b)    In cases not involving children where family life has been
                 established whilst the immigration status of one  party  to
                 the relationship was precarious, it will  be  necessary  to
                 show that there are  "exceptional  circumstances"  for  the
                 state's  interests  to  be  outweighed  outside  the  Rules
                 (paragraph 31).


            c)    In other cases, if (our emphasis) the Secretary  of  State
                 has sought to formulate Rules to reflect a fair balance  of
                 interests under Article 8  in  the  general  run  of  cases
                 falling within their scope, the general  position  is  that
                 "compelling circumstances" will need to  be  identified  to
                 support a claim for grant of leave to  remain  outside  the
                 new Rules in Appendix FM (paragraphs 32 and 33).

    73. The Court of Appeal did not say, in terms, what the approach should
        be if a particular case does not  fall  within  the  scope  of  any
        particular Rule, although it was accepted by Sales J in  Nagre  and
        by the Court of Appeal in R (MM (Lebanon)) v Secretary of State for
        the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ  985  that  the  Rules  do  not
        provide coverage for all possible cases.

    74. In our view, the approach to be  followed  in  non-entry  clearance
        cases is as follows. If a non-deportation case does not fall within
        the scope of any Rule, it must  be  considered  outside  the  Rules
        following the step-by-step approach explained at  paragraph  17  of
        the judgment of Lord Bingham in Razgar. In such a case, there is no
        applicable Rule that provides the legislative  and  policy  context
        "in which the interests of immigration control are balanced against
        the interests and rights of people who have come  to  this  country
        and wish to settle in it" (Beatson LJ in Haleemudeen v Secretary of
        State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 558 at paragraph 40).
        Put another way, there is  no  substantive  Rule  that  assists  in
        assessing the force of the public interest and therefore the weight
        to be attached to the expression of public policy in  the  Rule  in
        question (SS (Congo) at paragraphs 44 and 48). This means  that  it
        will be for a decision maker or judge to decide the  weight  to  be
        given to the public interest, which will vary  from  case  to  case
        depending on the circumstances, and decide whether, in all  of  the
        circumstances,  the  decision  brings  about   a   disproportionate
        interference with rights protected by Article 8. Needless  to  say,
        it will always be necessary to consider  not  only  factors  in  an
        individual's  favour  but  engage  with  the  factors  against  the
        individual as being  in  the  public  interest.  It  will  also  be
        necessary to apply the public  interest  considerations  in  s.117B
        wherever its provisions are  applicable.   For  example,  s.117B(3)
        will always apply. In  addition,  it  should  be  remembered  that,
        pursuant to s.117A, the considerations listed  in  s.117B  are  not
        exhaustive. This means, for example, it will be necessary  to  take
        into account criminal conduct  which  does  not  bring  the  person
        within the definition of "foreign  criminal"  in  s.32  of  the  UK
        Borders Act 2007 or s.117D of the 2002 Act and also conduct such as
        gaining entry to the UK on a false passport, if  found  to  be  the
        case, even if not prosecuted.

    75. Accordingly, insofar as the  claimant  relies  upon  her  right  to
        private life,  para  72.  c)  above  applies  because  para  276ADE
        provides coverage for the right to private life. The claimant  will
        therefore need to show that there are "compelling circumstances" to
        succeed outside the Rules on the basis  of  her  right  to  private
        life.

    76. Insofar as the claimant relies upon her right to family  life  with
        her grandchildren, we have explained at paragraph 42 that there are
        two opposing views as to whether the Rules provide coverage  for  a
        family life  claim  between  a  grandparent  and  a  grandchild  or
        grandchildren. If the first view is  correct,  that  the  Rules  do
        provide coverage for an  Article  8  claim  based  on  family  life
        between a grandparent and  a  grandchild,  then  the  fact  that  a
        grandparent does not satisfy the requirements of para 317  or  EX.1
        of Appendix FM provides the policy context  in  which  a  judge  or
        decision maker should carry  out  the  balancing  exercise  in  the
        consideration of proportionality  outside  the  Rules.  This  means
        that, pursuant to paragraphs 32 and 33 of SS (Congo), the applicant
        would need to show  that  there  are  compelling  circumstances  to
        succeed outside the Rules on the basis of Article 8.

    77. If, on the other hand, the opposing view is correct, that the Rules
        do not provide coverage for an Article 8 claim based on family life
        between a grandparent and a grandchild, the approach  explained  at
        paragraph 74 above applies in assessing the Article 8  claim  based
        on such family life outside the Rules.

    78.  Given that we did not hear submissions on these opposing views, we
        will apply the view that is more generous to the claimant, i.e. the
        approach explained at paragraph 74 above. Accordingly, in  carrying
        out the proportionality exercise outside the Rules, it will be  for
        us to decide the weight that is to be given to the public interest,
        applying where relevant,  the  public  interest  considerations  in
        s.117B of the 2002 Act.

      ii) The parties' submissions on the interpretation of the phrase  "are
    financially independent" in s.117B(3).

    79. Ms Holmes and Mr Murphy made submissions in writing on whether  the
        Rules make provision for the level of income that must be shown for
        an individual to be  considered  financially  independent  for  the
        purposes of s.117B(3).

    80.  Ms Holmes informed us that she saw  nothing  in  the  Rules  which
        might assist us, with the exception of para 266  which  relates  to
        'Retired persons of independent means'. Para  266(ii)(a)   provides
        that such a person must have "under his control and  disposable  in
        the UK an income of his own of not less than  25,000  per  annum".
        Further, para 266(ii)(b) requires the individual to  be  "able  and
        willing to maintain and  accommodate  himself  and  any  dependents
        indefinitely in the United Kingdom from his own resources  with  no
        assistance from any other person and without taking  employment  or
        having recourse to public funds".

    81. Mr Murphy submitted that the submission of Ms Holmes that para  266
        may be  a  useful  aid  in  the  interpretation  of  s.117B(3)  was
        unsustainable, given that the claimant's case is not  a  retirement
        case  and  that  the  claimant  is  a  long  way  from  retirement.
        Accordingly, he submitted that the analogy was wide off the mark.

    82. At the hearing, we also asked the parties to address us in  writing
        on the question whether the  income  threshold  of  18,600  for  a
        couple that is applicable in the case  of  applications  considered
        under the partner route in Appendix FM may  be  of  assistance.  Ms
        Holmes did not address this point in her  written  submissions.  Mr
        Murphy referred us to the fact that the income threshold of 18,600
        was considered by Parliament to be sufficient for the support of  a
        couple, whereas this case concerns only the claimant. He  submitted
        that the claimant's oral evidence was that, if  granted  leave  and
        allowed to work, she would be able to earn approximately 15,000 to
        16,000. He submitted  that  an  income  at  this  level  would  be
        sufficient for  the  claimant  to  show  that  she  is  financially
        independent for the purposes of s.117B(3).

    83. We make the observation  that  it  would  have  been  open  to  the
        Secretary of State to make specific provision in the Rules for  the
        income threshold that must be satisfied for a person to be regarded
        as financially independent for the purposes of  s.117B(3)  but  she
        did not do so. Given that she did not  do  so,  we  agree  with  Mr
        Murphy that it would be inappropriate to draw an analogy with  para
        266 of the Rules which  concerns  retired  persons  of  independent
        means, nor for that matter do we consider it appropriate for us  to
        embark upon an adjustment of the figure set as the  minimum  income
        threshold for a couple of 18,600 to reflect  the  fact  that  this
        case  concerns  a  single  person.  The  process  of  making   such
        adjustments  would  raise  obvious  difficulties  such   as,   what
        principles are to be brought to bear and how does one  ensure  that
        there is some consistency in application in different scenarios  so
        as to ensure that the decisions in particular cases are not made in
        a way that is seen to be arbitrary. It is not appropriate  for  the
        Tribunal to be engaged in  setting  an  income  threshold  or  even
        adjusting the income threshold of 18,600 to reflect the fact  that
        this case concerns a single person.

    84. We therefore conclude that, on  the  question  of  the  quantum  of
        resources that must be shown,  the  cases  that  provided  guidance
        prior to the amendments of the Rules by HC 194 on 9 July 2012 as to
        the adequacy of maintenance and accommodation without  recourse  to
        public funds continue to be of assistance since the  Rules  do  not
        make specific provision for the minimum income threshold that  must
        be demonstrated in this particular case. Accordingly, the following
        cases (to which  we  referred  at  the  hearing),  amongst  others,
        continue to apply:

            i)    In KA and others (Adequacy of maintenance) Pakistan [2006]
                 UKAIT 00065, the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal held  that
                 the level of  income  and  other  benefits  that  would  be
                 available if  the  individual/family  were  drawing  income
                 support is the yardstick by which it is to be decided  that
                 the individual/family would be adequately accommodated  and
                 maintained without recourse to public funds.

            ii)   In French v Entry Clearance Officer (Kingston) [2011] EWCA
                 Civ 35, the Court of Appeal said that as explained  in  KA,
                 the amount payable  by  way  of  income  support  could  be
                 accepted as representing the Government's assessment of the
                 sum  required  for  adequate   maintenance   and   was   an
                 appropriate benchmark for assessing whether  parties  could
                 maintain themselves and their dependants adequately.

    85. The next question is whether third party support is precluded for a
        person  to  be  "financially  independent"  for  the  purposes   of
        s.117B(3). In our view, the independence that s.117B(3)  refers  to
        is independence of the state.  It follows that third party  support
        of the type that was accepted in cases decided prior to 9 July 2012
        will not preclude an individual from being found to be  financially
        independent for the purposes of s.117B(3).

    86. The next question is whether future  earnings  can  be  taken  into
        account to decide whether a person is financially  independent  for
        the  purposes  of  s.117B(3).  It  may  be  that  the  phrase  "are
        financially independent" does not mean that future earnings are  to
        be left out of account. Mr Murphy asked us to consider the  example
        of a claimant who is a fully qualified doctor. He submitted that it
        could not be the case that the fact that there  is  a  shortage  of
        doctors in the UK must be ignored  simply  because  the  individual
        does not have a job  offer.  We  can  see  the  attraction  of  his
        argument.

    87. Nevertheless, it seems to us that the use of the word "are" in  the
        phrase "are financially independent" is important. The  word  "are"
        means that the evidence must be such that it must  be  possible  to
        say  that  the  individual  or  individuals  concerned  is  or  are
        financially independent. In our view, the word "are" indicates  the
        strength and cogency of the evidence required for s.117B(3) to be a
        positive factor  in  favour  of  an  individual  in  the  balancing
        exercising. For s.117B(3) to assist a claimant, he/she  would  need
        to produce clear evidence that, if granted leave to remain,  he/she
        will secure resources which  will  be  such  that  he/she  will  be
        financially independent. Evidence of outgoings will be  needed.  It
        is otherwise difficult to see how it can be said that such  persons
        "are financially independent".

    88. In his oral submissions, Mr Murphy submitted that, if an individual
        satisfies (a) and  (b)  of  s.117B(3),  then  s.117B(3)  should  be
        applied in his/ her favour. He submitted that the claimant is not a
        burden  on taxpayers because she is supported by  her  cousin  with
        whom she is living and who pays  for  all  of  her  outgoings.  The
        claimant also receives money from her children. She does not  claim
        benefits. He submitted that she is fully integrated  into  society.
        Thus, she fulfils s.117B(3)(a) and (b) and, accordingly,  s.117B(3)
        should be applied in her favour even if we find that  the  claimant
        would be unable to obtain  employment  or  earn  sufficient  to  be
        financially independent.

    89. We have no hesitation in rejecting this submission.  The  focus  of
        s.117B(3) is financial independence. Even if it is possible for  an
        individual to show that he/she is not a burden on taxpayers in that
        they have not had recourse to public funds or is  fully  integrated
        into  society  notwithstanding  that  he/she  is  not   financially
        independent, s.117B(3) will not avail them  precisely  because  the
        focus of s.117B(3) is financial independence.

    iii)  Consideration  of  the  evidence  and  proportionality   in   the
    claimant's specific case

    90.  We do not accept the  claimant's  evidence  that,  if  allowed  to
        remain in the UK, she would be able to obtain a job. We  find  that
        there  is  no  realistic  prospect  of   the   claimant   obtaining
        employment, for the following reasons :

            i)    As  is  clear  from  paragraph  65  above,  three  of  the
                 claimant's qualifications have now lapsed.  There can be no
                 guarantee that she will pass these tests if she  took  them
                 again simply because she passed them 10 years ago.

            ii)   It was clear from her evidence to us that she had not made
                 any formal enquiries from any nursing  homes  for  possible
                 vacancies for someone with her educational  background  and
                 work experience. Her evidence as to what work  she  thought
                 she would be able to obtain and her possible  earnings  was
                 wholly unsupported and, we find, entirely speculative.

            iii)  In relation to her work experience,  the  evidence  before
                 the judge was that the claimant had not worked in  Jamaica.
                 Although she  has  lived  in  the  UK  for  14  years,  she
                 confirmed in oral evidence before  us  that  she  was  only
                 employed in the UK for a period of  4  months,  from  April
                 2010 until August 2010. Accordingly, as at the date of  the
                 hearing before us, she was nearly 50 years old, with only 4
                 months of work experience.

    91. For these reasons, we find that  the  likelihood  of  the  claimant
        obtaining employment which will make her financially independent is
        little more than fanciful, at best.

    92. Mr Murphy submitted that  the  claimant  has  been  maintained  and
        accommodated without recourse to public funds. He relied  upon  her
        oral evidence in that respect.  However, no evidence was  submitted
        to us to show that she will have resources sufficient to enable her
        to be maintained and accommodated without recourse to public  funds
        pursuant to KA and others and  French  v  Entry  Clearance  Officer
        (Kingston) and  thus  make  her  financially  independent  for  the
        purposes of s.117B(3). Applying  paragraphs  83  to  87  above,  we
        reject  her  unsupported  oral   evidence   as   being   manifestly
        insufficient to show that she is financially independent.

    93. Accordingly, s.117B(3) does not assist the claimant. We  find  that
        it has not been shown that she is financially independent.

    94. In any event, given that the claimant has only worked in the UK for
        a period of 4 months, we do not accept that she is fully integrated
        into society notwithstanding  that  she  speaks  English  fluently.
        Although we accept, of  course,  that  the  fact  that  she  speaks
        English fluently means that she is better integrated  into  society
        than if she did not speak English, there was no evidence before  us
        that she is integrated into society. Furthermore, given our finding
        that the likelihood of the claimant obtaining employment which will
        make her financially independent is fanciful and that there was  no
        cogent evidence to show that she will have access to  resources  to
        make her independent  of  the  state,  she  will  be  a  burden  on
        taxpayers if allowed to  remain  in  the  UK.  There  is  a  strong
        likelihood that, if allowed to remain in the UK, she will  need  to
        access services, such as, for example, medical services,  at   some
        point in the future. Accordingly, we do not accept that, if allowed
        to remain, the claimant will not be a burden on taxpayers.

    95. The judge found  that,  although  there  are  no  very  significant
        obstacles to reintegration in Jamaica, it will be difficult for the
        claimant to relocate to Jamaica because she is now at a time of her
        life when it is harder to re-establish oneself (paragraph 44 of her
        decision), she has spent a considerable period of time in  the  UK,
        she never worked in Jamaica and she has only a  few  friendship  or
        familial ties in Jamaica (paragraph 35 of the judge's decision).

    96. These findings went in the  claimant's  favour  because  the  judge
        considered that  a  lesser  degree  of  hardship  was  relevant  in
        assessing proportionality outside the Rules than is needed to  show
        "very  significant  obstacles"  in  order  to  succeed  under  para
        276ADE(vi). We have explained at paragraphs 50 to 52 above that the
        judge erred in this regard. There is nothing about  the  claimant's
        circumstances which shows that any difficulties she may  experience
        in reintegrating in Jamaica are compelling, given that the claimant
        lived in Jamaica for 36 years of her life and the judge's  findings
        (which are preserved) that:

            i)    The claimant  sought  to  minimise  to  the  Tribunal  her
                 connections to Jamaica. She has some family connections  in
                 Jamaica albeit that she has little or no family in  Jamaica
                 (paragraph 33).

            ii)   It was not credible that her  family  members  in  the  UK
                 would not seek to assist her in whatever  way  possible  if
                 she had to relocate to Jamaica including providing whatever
                 financial help they are able to provide (paragraph 33).

    97. As we have said above, the judge did not  find  that  the  claimant
        enjoyed family life with her adult children. Although the  claimant
        does not enjoy family life with her children, her  ties  with  them
        are part of her private life. We take into account that  the  judge
        found that the claimant's relationships with her family members are
        a significant part of her private life (paragraph 38). This  aspect
        of her private life claim is not fully addressed in the context  of
        para 276ADE. It falls for consideration outside the Rules.

    98. The claimant does not live with Dacia or  Darion.  Both  Dacia  and
        Darion have formed their own independent families.

    99. The claimant came to the UK with her daughter, Dana, who is now  22
        years old.  At paragraph 43 of her decision, the  judge  said  that
        Dana had been granted discretionary leave to remain as a reflection
        of the number of years she had spent in the UK. The mere fact  that
        Dana qualified for discretionary leave whereas the claimant did not
        satisfy para 276ADE does not, of itself, mean that removal would be
        disproportionate,  given  that  the  Rules  have  to  draw  a  line
        somewhere and it is inevitable that there will  be  many  cases  of
        individuals within the same family who fall on different  sides  of
        the line. Separation in those circumstances, where family  life  is
        not being enjoyed between those who  may  otherwise  be  separated,
        will not of itself be enough  to  render  removal  disproportionate
        notwithstanding that proportionality will be more at large  outside
        the Rules in this respect. We find that Dana must  inevitably  have
        her own daily routine as it has not been  suggested  at  any  stage
        that she assists the claimant with her child care duties.

   100. The claimant came to the UK 14 years ago lawfully. Her  status  was
        precarious until 31 October  2003.  She  made  an  application  for
        extension of her leave which as refused on 17 November  2005  since
        which time her status was unlawful.  Her  private  life  ties  with
        Dacia and Darion have been formed whilst her immigration status was
        precarious and unlawful. When the claimant and Dana arrived in  the
        UK, Dana was a minor, from which it must follow that  the  claimant
        and Dana enjoyed family life with each other then. At  some  point,
        on the judge's findings, they ceased to enjoy family life with each
        other, their  relationship  comprising  part  of  their  respective
        private lives. The claimant's private life in the UK (including her
        private life with her adult children) has  therefore  been  largely
        (in relation to her relationship with Dacia and  Darion)  developed
        in the knowledge of her precarious and unlawful immigration  status
        to which we give little weight pursuant to s.117B(4) and (5).

   101. Turning to the claimant's family life with her  grandchildren,  the
        judge found that the claimant's removal would cause a great  wrench
        to the family life being enjoyed with her grandchildren  (paragraph
        45). She found that the claimant plays  a  strong  and  significant
        part in her  grandchildren's  lives  and  that  they  have  regular
        contact with them. If the claimant were not in  the  UK,  then  the
        grandchildren's close relationship with their grandmother  will  be
        severed as their close personal relationship with her will  not  be
        replaced adequately via email, Skype  and  occasional  visits.  She
        found that it would not be in the  grandchildren's  best  interests
        for the claimant to  be  removed  given  the  importance  of  their
        relationship  with  the  claimant  to  them.  These  findings   are
        preserved. There was nothing in the evidence we heard  which  leads
        us to make findings which are  any  different.  We  make  the  same
        findings.

   102. The best interests of the claimant's grandchildren  are  a  primary
        consideration. They are not paramount and not determinative.

   103. The claimant is not the primary carer of any of the  grandchildren.
        She is not in a  parental  relationship  with  them.  Although  the
        claimant's removal would cause a great wrench to  the  family  life
        being enjoyed with her grandchildren, the children will continue to
        live with their  biological  parents  whilst,  at  the  same  time,
        remaining part of the extended family comprising of the siblings of
        their parents and their cousins. This extended family will  provide
        mutual support to all,  including  the  grandchildren.  It  is  not
        suggested that  the  grandchildren's  parents  lack  the  skill  in
        helping them come to terms with the claimant  leaving  their  daily
        lives, or that they lack the ability to  find  alternative  support
        with childcare if it was required either  from  amongst  themselves
        through their closely knit family unit or  externally.  It  is  not
        suggested that any of the grandchildren  will  leave  the  care  of
        their parents or that it would be in their best interests to do  so
        in order to be with the claimant.

   104. If she returns to Jamaica, the claimant will  be  relieved  of  her
        childcare responsibilities and will have time to work in employment
        which is commensurate with such qualifications as she now has.  Her
        family can visit Jamaica as they have in the  past.  They  can  use
        modern means of communication to remain in contact, albeit that  we
        take into account that this cannot by any measure replace the close
        daily contact and family life with her grandchildren  as  currently
        enjoyed.

   105. We give such weight as we  consider  appropriate  to  each  of  the
        circumstances in the claimant's favour.

   106. There is a legitimate public interest in maintaining  the  economic
        well being of the country and maintaining immigration control.  The
        claimant has lived in the UK unlawfully since 1 November 2003.  She
        made no attempt to regularise her  status  until  23  August  2010,
        nearly seven years later. She then made four applications  each  of
        which were refused. She did not leave the UK as she was obliged  to
        do. For the reasons given above, we have found that, if allowed  to
        remain, the claimant will be a burden on  taxpayers.  In  addition,
        the claimant worked when she did not have permission to do so for 4
        months in  2010.  In  these  circumstances,  we  decided  to  place
        considerable weight on the public interest in immigration control.

   107. In all of the circumstances and having taken all  relevant  matters
        into account (whether or not expressly referred to above), we  have
        concluded that removal would be proportionate and not in breach  of
        the rights of the claimant or any member of  her  family  including
        the grandchildren under Article 8.   The  decision  to  remove  the
        claimant is a  proportionate  response  to  the  need  to  maintain
        immigration control and for the economic well being of the country.




   108. We make the point that we would have reached  the  same  conclusion
        even if a lesser  degree  of  hardship  is  relevant  in  assessing
        proportionality outside the Rules than  is  needed  to  show  "very
        significant obstacles" in order to succeed under  para  276ADE  and
        even if the claimant did not need to show compelling  circumstances
        in order to succeed outside the Rules in  respect  of  her  private
        life established in the UK. We would still have found  that  it  is
        reasonable to expect her to  relocate  to  Jamaica  and  enjoy  her
        private life there, for the reasons given at  paragraph  95.i)  and
        ii) above. We would still have found that removal was proportionate
        and not in breach of Article 8. In this regard, we  draw  attention
        to the fact that, notwithstanding that the judge  materially  erred
        in law in speculating that, if allowed to remain  in  the  UK,  the
        claimant would be financially independent, she said that this was a
        "finely balanced case".


   109. We therefore dismiss the claimant's appeal in relation  to  Article
        8.

      Decision:

      The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve  the
    making of a material error on a point of law. We have set it aside  the
    decision. The  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    therefore succeeds.

      We have re-made the decision on the claimant's appeal. We dismiss  her
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary of  State  on  immigration
    grounds and on human rights grounds (Article 8).






Signed                            Date: 3 November 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
