
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/36038/2013
     IA/36039/2013
     IA/36040/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17 June 2014                               |On 2 September 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

                      mr baljit singh (first appellant)
                    mrs amandeep kaur (second appellant)
                   master yashvir singh (third appellant)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr H Samra, Counsel instructed by Harbans Singh & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellants are citizens of India.  They are father, mother and  son
    whose dates of birth are 18 February  1981,  29  October  1979  and  12
    August 2005 respectively.  An  immigration  decision  was  made  on  19
    August 2013 to remove the first appellant Mr Baljit Singh together with
    his wife and son.  Their appeal was heard before a Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Pygott who in a determination promulgated on 17  February
    2014 dismissed the appeals on immigration and on human rights grounds.

2.   This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there  was  a  material  error  of  law   in   the   Tribunal   Judge's
    determination.

Background

3.   The appellant and his wife entered the UK on visit visas issued  on  18
    June 2004 valid until 18 December 2004.  On 12 August  2005  their  son
    Yashvir was born.  The appellant was encountered in March 2006 and made
    an  asylum  application  which  was  subsequently  withdrawn.   Further
    encounters with the immigration authorities led to the appellant making
    an application for asylum with his wife and son as dependants which was
    refused and certified on 21 January 2010.   On  22  February  2012  the
    parties were served with notices as overstayers.  On  2  May  2012  the
    appellants applied for leave to remain having established a private and
    family life in the UK.

4.    In  a  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  the   respondent   refused   the
    applications having regard to Appendix FM and  paragraphs  276ADE-276DH
    of the new Immigration Rules including Section EX1(a) of  Appendix  FM.
    The respondent also considered Section  EX1(b)  of  Appendix  FM.   The
    respondent  considered  the  application  outside  of  the  Rules  with
    reference to the five stage process in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.   Finally
    consideration was given to the provisions under paragraph 353B  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

5.   In his determination promulgated on 17 February 2014  First-tier  Judge
    Pygott set out the detailed applicable law in paragraphs 21-29.

6.   In his findings at paragraph 30 he sets out that the  appellant  relies
    on Article 8 ECHR and further he concludes that none of the  provisions
    in Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules are  applicable.  His reasoning
    is set out in paragraph 33 namely that the third  appellant  (the  son)
    had not lived in  the  UK  continuously  for  seven  years  immediately
    preceding the  date  of  the  application.   For  the  same  reason  he
    concludes that the third appellant does not meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE(iv) and the first and second appellants  do  not  meet
    any of the requirements under the Immigration Rules.

7.   From paragraph 39 the Tribunal considers the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds and considers the situation as at the date of hearing, at which
    point the third appellant was over 8 years old.  In light of that  fact
    and that his parents had been in the UK for over nine years  the  judge
    found  arguably  good  grounds  for  granting  leave  outside  of   the
    Immigration Rules by  reference  to  Article  8.   There  would  be  no
    interference to family life as the family would be returning as a unit.



8.   The main issue related to the third appellant's private life.   Factors
    with regard to proportionality and the issue of public interest are set
    out in paragraph 44 with regard to the  first  and  second  appellants.
    The Tribunal considered the third appellant's position  from  paragraph
    45.  It took into account that the appellant  has  special  needs,  the
    fact he has an older brother and maternal and paternal grandparents  in
    India, he speaks and understands Punjabi and  in  the  absence  of  any
    evidence to the contrary he would be able  to  receive  an  appropriate
    education notwithstanding special needs in India.

Grounds re Permission to Appeal

9.   The appellant submitted that the judge erred in law  having  regard  to
    the fact that the appellant had lived in the  UK  for  at  least  seven
    years immediately preceding the date of the hearing.  The  approach  to
    Article 8 ECHR was erroneous and ought to have  followed  the  step  by
    step approach articulated in Razgar.  The judge failed to consider  all
    evidence in assessing proportionality and or the best interests of  the
    child.

Permission to Appeal

10.  Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Davidge
    on 10 March 2014.  She found the grounds  to  be  misconceived  as  the
    appellant's representative had  conceded  that  the  appeal  could  not
    succeed under Appendix FM.  She  considered  the  judge  had  correctly
    applied the date of decision as the  relevant  date  under  the  Rules.
    With regard to Article 8 she concluded that the  judge  had  considered
    the family's position and the best  interests  of  the  child  and  the
    grounds did not reveal any arguable material error of law.

Grounds seeking Permission to Appeal from the Upper Tribunal

11.  The appellant submitted grounds for reconsideration.

    (a)  FTJ Davidge erred as the appeal was not against entry clearance as
         a spouse or a refusal in May 2013.   The  appeals  were  not  under
         Appendix FM but rather EX1 Exceptions and Article 8.

12.  The grounds seeking permission to appeal against the  determination  of
    Immigration Judge Pygott were reiterated in the further grounds.

Permission to Appeal (Reconsideration)

13.  In a decision dated 8 April 2014 Upper Tribunal Judge  Freeman  granted
    permission to appeal for the following reasons.

    Arguably the permission judge's  mistake  about  the  nature  of  these
    appeals (against removal, not refusal of entry clearance)  did  matter,
    because it led her to take the date of the decision under appeal as the
    relevant date, rather than the date of hearing.   Unless  there  is  an
    objection within the time set out in the attached letter, there will be
    a fresh hearing before the First-tier Tribunal on that basis."


Rule 24 Response

14.  The respondent opposed the appeal by way of a  response  dated  14  May
    2014.  In terms the First-tier Tribunal directed  itself  appropriately
    and at paragraph 33 the judge identified that the  appellants  did  not
    satisfy  EX1(b)  given  their  son  had  not  been  living  in  the  UK
    continuously for at least seven years immediately preceding the date of
    the application.  The grounds seek to disagree with the cogent findings
    of the judge who came to a conclusion based on the evidence before  him
    and does not disclose any error.  The respondent  opposed  the  grounds
    and requested an oral hearing.

Error of Law Hearing

15.  Mr Samra submitted that the respondent's Rule 24 Response  was  out  of
    time and that no application had been made for any  extension  of  time
    under Rule 5(3) and or under Rule 7(8).  He submitted that pursuant  to
    the directions made by Upper Tribunal Judge Freeman the  matter  should
    be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing afresh.

16.  Mr Deller indicated  that  he  had  in  mind  the  possibility  of  any
    procedural unfairness however he submitted that  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    directions related to the refusal of permission by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Davidge and was not  in  relation  to  the  substantive  decision
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Pygott unless and until  an  error  of
    law had been found.  It was conceded that a mistake was made by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Davidge.  However that  did  not  support  or  what
    justify remittal to the First-tier without proper consideration of  the
    error of law issue.

Decision on Preliminary Issue

17.  I heard submissions from both representatives and rejected the  initial
    submissions made by Mr Samra.  It is conceded that an error was made by
    Judge Davidge in her refusal of permission.  There  was  correspondence
    in the file between the Upper Tribunal and the  appellant's  solicitors
    confirming that the matter would be dealt with  as  a  full  appeal  in
    light of the response received from the respondent.   It  would  appear
    that the Rule 24 Response had not been taken to  be  out  of  time.   A
    letter had been  sent  by  the  appellant's  solicitors  dated  21  May
    indicating that the response was out of time and it would  appear  that
    no response had been provided with this particular specific point.  The
    matter had been put before Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan on 30  May  2014
    who directed as follows "The appeal will not proceed on 17th June  2014
    as a pre-hearing review as you suggest.  It will proceed  as  the  full
    appeal."

18.  There has not yet been a finding that there has been an  error  of  law
    on a point of law and only the Upper Tribunal can determine this.   Nor
    has the Upper Tribunal decided, if such an error is  found,  to  remake
    the decision.  If the determination is to be remade,  the  question  of
    whether it is appropriate to direct the appeal is reheard in the First-
    tier Tribunal must be decided by the Upper Tribunal Judge deciding  the
    error of law and  by  reference  to  paragraph  17.2  of  the  Practice
    Statements of the Senior President of 25 September 2012.

19.  If the Upper Tribunal decides it is unnecessary to  direct  the  appeal
    is reheard in the First-tier Tribunal, the  Upper  Tribunal  will  only
    permit fresh evidence to be adduced if there is a need for such further
    evidence.  There was a substantial amount of evidence provided  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal which the Upper Tribunal is able to consider,  much
    of which is uncontroversial.  The application fails to make out a  need
    for further evidence.  Production of further evidence must comply  with
    the Procedure Rules and any relevant direction given in the appeal.

20.  Having regard to the direction made by Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan  and
    the submissions made by Mr Deller with which I concurred,  I  proceeded
    to hear submissions on the issue of whether or not there was  an  error
    of law in the Tribunal decision.

Substantive Submissions

21.  Mr Samra relied on his grounds of appeal and submitted that  the  judge
    erred in particular at paragraphs 33 and 37 of the determination.   The
    third appellant was 8 years old at the time  of  the  hearing  and  the
    length of residence for a child had  been  incorporated  into  the  new
    Immigration  Rules  and  was  thus  of  significance  when  considering
    proportionality.

22.  Secondly, the judge  failed to give sufficient  reasons  under  Section
    55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

23.  Mr Deller submitted that it had been acknowledged at paragraph 30  that
    the appellants did not meet the requirements under Appendix FM and they
    were consequently not eligible under Appendix EX(b).   As  regards  the
    child it was necessary to have been living in the UK for seven years as
    at the date of the application and the period of residence had not been
    met.  A further application could be made in the event  that  the  only
    issue was the length of qualifying residence.

24.  It was the respondent's position that under  paragraph  276ADE  it  was
    also necessary for the  reasonableness  issue  to  be  considered.   Mr
    Deller submitted that the judge had considered  this  aspect  and  made
    appropriate findings.

25.  Mr Deller submitted  that  the  respondent  and  the  judge   correctly
    applied the new Rules having regarding to transitional provisions under
    paragraph A277C.  Further he submitted that if it was accepted that the
    new Rules had not been met because of the qualification residence  then
    the judge had appropriately  considered  the  guidance  under  Gulshan,
    admittedly not specifically stated  but  whilst  he  appeared  to  have
    looked outside of the Rules at all matters,  it  was  the  respondent's
    position that there was not sufficient to meet the Gulshan test.

26.  Mr Deller further argued that the third appellant's  private  life  had
    been fully considered and factored into the determination by the  judge
    who was aware that by the time of the hearing the appellant  had  lived
    in the UK for over eight years.  The appellant needed to show not  only
    the residence qualification but also to meet the reasonable test  under
    paragraph 276ADE.  The conclusion made under Article 8  was  sound  and
    there was no material error of law.

Discussion and Decision

27.  At the end of the hearing I  announced  my  decision  that  I  find  no
    material error of law in the Tribunal Judge's decision.  My reasons are
    as follows.  I heard submissions from both representatives on the issue
    of error of law in the First-tier Tribunal decision.  I have  read  the
    thorough and detailed determination  prepared  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Pygott  and I  am  satisfied  that  she/he  fully  and  carefully
    considered all of the relevant issues including  the  provisions  under
    EX.1 which is clearly referred to at paragraph 33 of the  determination
    and which the judge concluded is not applicable because  the  appellant
    has failed to meet the requirements that he has lived  continuously  in
    the UK for at least seven years preceding the date of the  application;
    and (ii) it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
    UK.  This  conclusion  is  repeated  at  paragraph  38  and  the  judge
    concluded correctly that none of the appellants meet  the  requirements
    under Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE of the new Rules.

28.  The judge goes on to consider the appeal  under  human  rights  grounds
    from paragraph 39 of the determination and at that stage  it  is  clear
    that she/he has in mind that she must consider the circumstances at the
    date of hearing which includes the fact that the  appellant's  son  was
    well over 8 years old and he had been in the UK for a further 18 months
    since his father's application and at such time his parents had been in
    the UK for well over nine years.  Whilst not  specifically  citing  the
    case of Gulshan the  judge  in  the  final  sentence  of  paragraph  39
    concluded that there may be arguably good grounds  for  granting  leave
    outside the Rules for  the  aforementioned  reasons.   The  judge  then
    proceeded to consider family and private life following the appropriate
    stage by stage guidance in Razgar and in my view has taken into account
    all the relevant issues including in particular the  third  appellant's
    special educational needs which are set out in  paragraph  42-43.   The
    judge considered the proportionality issue insofar  as  the  first  and
    second appellants are concerned at paragraph 44 and took  into  account
    their poor immigration history, the fact the appellant has been working
    illegally and that they have family and connections in India.

29.  The Judge separately  considered  the  issue  of  proportionality  with
    regard to the  third  appellant  and  also  considered  that  his  best
    interests are a primary consideration.  The considerations,  assessment
    and conclusions are sound and the judge found the  decision  to  remove
    the appellants to be proportionate.

Decision

I dismiss the appeal.

The determination shall stand.






Signed                                  Dated as amended 1.9.2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
