
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/36376/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 January 2016                   |On 13 January 2016                   |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                             NURUL HUDA MOJUMDER
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

      1. The Respondent refused  the  Appellant's  application  for  an  EEA
         Residence Card as a confirmation of the  right  to  reside  in  the
         United Kingdom on 26 August 2014. His appeal against that  decision
         was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Raikes  ("the  Judge")
         following a hearing on 17 April 2015.

      2. No one had attended for the Appellant by  the  time  the  case  was
         called on to be heard at 11.00. There was no request for the matter
         to be adjourned. I was satisfied  I  should  proceed  to  hear  the
         appeal in the absence of anyone for  the  appellant  in  accordance
         with Rule 38 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.
         That is because the Appellant had been given  notice  of  the  date
         time and place of the hearing, there was  no  good  reason  not  to
         proceed, and the  appeal  could  be  justly  determined  given  the
         issues.

    The relevant Regulations

      3.  The  Immigration  (European  Economic   Area)   Regulations   2006
         (hereinafter called "the Regulations" or "Regs") state.

             '8. - "Extended family member"

             (1) In these Regulations  "extended  family  member"  means  a
             person who is not a family member of  an  EEA  national  under
             regulation  7(1)(a),  (b)  or  (c)  and  who   satisfies   the
             conditions in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).

             (2) A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if  the
             person is a relative of an EEA national,  his  spouse  or  his
             civil partner and-

                  (a)  the person is residing in a country  other  than  the
                  United Kingdom and is dependent upon the EEA  national  or
                  is a member of his household;

                  (b)  the person satisfied the condition in  paragraph  (a)
                  and is accompanying the EEA national to the United Kingdom
                  or wishes to join him there; or

                  (c)  the person satisfied the condition in paragraph  (a),
                  has joined the EEA national  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
                  continues to be dependent upon him or to be  a  member  of
                  his household.

             (3) A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if  the
             person is a relative of an EEA national or his spouse  or  his
             civil  partner  and,  on  serious  health  grounds,   strictly
             requires the personal care of the EEA national his  spouse  or
             his civil partner.

             (4) A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if  the
             person is a relative of an EEA national  and  would  meet  the
             requirements  in  the  immigration  rules  (other  than  those
             relating to entry clearance) for indefinite leave to enter  or
             remain in the United Kingdom as a dependent  relative  of  the
             EEA national were  the  EEA  national  a  person  present  and
             settled in the United Kingdom.

             (5) A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if  the
             person is the partner of an EEA national (other than  a  civil
             partner) and can prove to the decision maker that he is  in  a
             durable relationship with the EEA national.

             (6) In these Regulations "relevant  EEA  national"  means,  in
             relation to an extended family member, the EEA national who is
             or whose spouse or  civil  partner  is  the  relative  of  the
             extended family member for the purpose of paragraph  (2),  (3)
             or (4) or the EEA national who is the partner of the  extended
             family member for the purpose of paragraph (5).'

Relevant case law

      4. Secretary of State for the Home Department v Rahman & Others  (Case
         C-83/11) CJEU (Grand Chamber), states that, among other things,  if
         someone is relying on the prior dependency  route,  the  dependency
         must have existed at the time that the non-EEA national came to the
         United Kingdom.

      5. Oboh and others v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department;
         Halauder v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2013]  EWCA
         Civ 1525  states  that  Rahman  confirmed  that  the  situation  of
         dependence must exist in the country from which the  family  member
         concerned came at the time  when  he  applied  to  join  the  Union
         citizen, thus indicating a requirement  that  the  dependency  must
         have existed in another country as well as the host Member State.

      6. Dauhoo (EEA Regulations - reg 8(2)) [2012] UKUT 79 (IAC) guides  me
         to the view that under the Regulation 8 (2), a person  can  succeed
         in establishing that he or she is an "extended family  member"   in
         any one of four different ways, each of which  requires  proving  a
         relevant connection both prior to arrival in the United Kingdom and
         in the United Kingdom:

          1. prior dependency and present dependency

          2. prior membership of a household and present  membership  of  a
             household

          3. prior dependency and present membership of a household

          4. prior membership of a household and present dependency.

The grant of permission

      7. Designated Judge Shaerf granted permission to appeal (6 July  2015)
         only on the ground that;

             "... it would appear the Judge failed to take account of  Reg.
             8(6) of the Regs".

The Judge's findings

      8. The Judge found as follows;

             "[35]      ...I  do  not  accept  that  the  Appellant  was  a
             dependent of the Sponsor prior  to  coming  to  the  UK  on  a
             student visa and whilst there is now evidence of  the  Sponsor
             and Appellant living at the same address in the UK and  indeed
             the Sponsor supporting him now, I  do  not  accept  that  such
             dependency was in existence prior to his arrival in the UK. He
             was, on the evidence presented, living with  his  parents  and
             whilst the Sponsor may have made small  periodic  payments  to
             both him and his family whilst in Portugal they were not  only
             made via her husband's income rather than hers  but  were  not
             made to wholly support the Appellant's  life  as  asserted  by
             them. I find that evidence of his dependency on his sister was
             largely unsupported and significant in its absence."

Submissions

      9. The Appellant did not attend the hearing. In the grounds in support
         of the application for permission to appeal it is said that;

             "... the Judge has made a material error by believing that the
             appellant's sponsor must be at work in the country  where  she
             is a national to support her dependent."

     10. The Respondent's rule 24 notice stated that;

             "... the Judge did not find it credible that the appellant was
             dependent on his sister prior to entry to the UK, that  was  a
             matter of credibility and a matter of fact which can  only  be
             usurped on grounds of perversity."

     11. Mr Mills submitted that given the authorities including Dauhoo (see
         above [6] for citation) there was no material error of law.

Discussion

     12. Upon reading the Judge's determination and in particular [35] which
         summarises the evidence heard and findings made, it is clear to  me
         that the Judge made findings open to him that, irrespective of  the
         position now, prior to any of them coming to  the  United  Kingdom,
         the Appellant was not dependent on his Sponsor or her husband or  a
         member of the same household.

     13. I am therefore satisfied that the Judge made no material  error  of
         law.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set aside the decision.


Signed:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
12 January 2016
