
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/36776/2014
                                                               IA/07016/2015
                                                               IA/07021/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th August 2016                  |On 28th September 2016               |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

              MRS Sithy Rayeeza Rasheed Khan (First appellant)
              Mr Mohamed Faslee Rasheed Khan (second appellant)
             Miss Farhath Fathima Rasheed Khan (third appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr Khan, Universal Solicitors London


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary  of  State  however
    for convenience I shall now refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellants are citizens of Sri Lanka born on 6th August 1958,  29th
    October 1993 and 30th June 1997 respectively.  The first  Appellant  is
    the mother of the second and third Appellants.

 3. The first Appellant appeals against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    dated 20 April 2013 refusing her leave to enter the United Kingdom  and
    cancelling the student leave she had.  The second and third  Appellants
    appeal against the  decisions  of  the  respondent  refusing  to  issue
    residence cards to them, pursuant to the Immigration (European Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006 which decisions are  dated  4th  February  2015.
    The three appeals were linked and were heard by Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal M  Davies  on  24th  November  2015.   He  allowed  the  first
    Appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules.   The  appeals  of  the
    second and third Appellants were withdrawn at that hearing pursuant  to
    Rule 17 of the Procedure Rules.  I am therefore only dealing  with  the
    appeal of the first appellant.

 4. An application for permission to appeal was lodged  by  the  Respondent
    and permission was granted by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Chohan
    on 21st July 2016.  This only relates to Ground 2  of  the  grounds  of
    application which is that the First-tier Judge committed  a  procedural
    or other irregularity capable of making a material  difference  to  the
    outcome of the fairness  of  the  proceedings.   Paragraph  24  of  the
    decision is referred to.  This deals with the  Appellant  obtaining  an
    English language qualification by deception.   The  judge  states  that
    this issue was raised for the first time at the hearing. It is referred
    to in the Respondent's Explanatory Statement in the Respondent's second
    bundle.  The permission states that  the  Explanatory  Statement  makes
    reference to the ETS/TOEIC English language certificate at paragraph 19
    but there is nothing to suggest that  this  Explanatory  Statement  was
    first served on the day of the hearing.  The permission states that the
    judge seems to  have  dealt  with  other  aspects  of  the  Explanatory
    Statement but not with said paragraph 19 and this has  resulted  in  an
    arguable error of law.  Judge Chohan refused permission on Ground 1  of
    the grounds of application, which is that the judge applied  the  wrong
    standard of proof by referring to the standard of proof  as  one  of  a
    "balance of probabilities but at the higher end of the spectrum."

 5. An application for permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
    submitted relating to Ground  1  of  the  application.   Permission  to
    appeal on Ground 1 was granted on 29th  July  2016  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Goldstein.  This permission states that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge may have applied the wrong standard of proof and if he did,  this
    error of law may have infected the  entire  decision.   The  permission
    also states that the judge's reliance  on  JC  [2007]  UKAIT  00027  at
    paragraph 29 of his decision was misconceived.  Reference  is  made  to
    the case of NA and Others Cambridge College of Learning Pakistan [2009]
    UKAIT 00031.

The Hearing

 6. I established that no adjournment request was made  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing.

 7. The Presenting Officer submitted that a second Respondent's bundle  was
    served with an  amended  memorandum  but  the  judge  rejected  it.  He
    submitted that the judge should have  considered  it.   The  Presenting
    Officer submitted that he is relying on  both  grounds  of  application
    submitting that the judge's decision to deal with the standard of proof
    at the higher end of the balance  of  probabilities  has  infected  his
    decision.  The Presenting Officer stated that  the  second  bundle  was
    served ahead of the hearing but Mr Khan for  the  Appellant  said  that
    that is not what happened. He said the second bundle was served at  the
    hearing.  The Presenting Officer submitted that if the judge  had  felt
    unable to deal with any of the crucial matters in this claim he  should
    have adjourned the hearing.  He submitted  that  the  First-tier  Judge
    went off at a tangent and  I  was  referred  to  paragraph  24  of  the
    decision which states that if the Respondent wishes  to  now  interview
    the  Appellant  about  her  suspicion  that  she  obtained  her   TOEIC
    certificate by using a proxy, that is a matter for the  Respondent  but
    it does not form part of the decision the Appellant appeals against  on
    this occasion.  The Presenting Officer submitted that the judge  should
    have made a decision  on  this  matter  as  it  was  before  him.   The
    Presenting Officer submitted that as this matter was not dealt with  by
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge the claim should be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal for a full hearing on all issues.

 8. The Appellant's representative submitted that he is relying on his Rule
    24 response and skeleton argument.  I was referred to  paragraph  8  of
    the skeleton argument and paragraph 29 of the  decision,  which  states
    "The consequences of the refusal  of  leave  to  enter  for  breach  of
    conditions are serious for an individual and therefore the standard  of
    proof is at the higher end of the spectrum of balance of  probability."
    The representative submitted that the case of NA and Others deals  with
    this point. Mr Khan submitted that the judge gave anxious  scrutiny  to
    the evidence.   He  submitted  that  paragraph  29  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's decision stresses the seriousness of the situation for
    the Appellant, if the allegation of dishonesty is found to be  correct.
    I was referred to paragraph 9 of the skeleton argument and the case  of
    Muhandiramge [2015] UKUT 00675 (IAC).  This refers to the precedent  of
    the burden of proof resting on the Secretary of State and the  standard
    of proof being  at  the  higher  end  of  the  balance  of  probability
    spectrum.  I was also referred to the case of SM and Qadir [2016]  UKUT
    00229  (IAC).   The  representative  submitted  that  the   fundamental
    judicial task is to decide whether, having regard to  the  context  and
    the evidence adduced, the matter is of sufficient  cogency  to  warrant
    the conclusion that the burden of proof  has  been  discharged  to  the
    civil standard.  He submitted that it is clear in this  case  that  the
    judge has applied the correct standard of proof.

 9. I was then referred to paragraph 33 onwards of  the  decision  and  the
    judge's findings and reasons  therein.   The  representative  submitted
    that in First-tier Tribunal Judge Chohan's permission at  paragraph  3,
    he states that when one looks at  the  judge's  decision  as  a  whole,
    whether the judge applied the standard of proof to a higher end or just
    on the balance of probabilities, based on the  judge's  reasoning,  the
    outcome would have been no different.  He submitted that  at  paragraph
    36 of the decision it is clear that the judge has considered everything
    before him on the ordinary balance of probabilities.  He submitted that
    the Respondent's case was not made out at the appeal hearing.

10. I was referred to paragraph 14 of the skeleton argument in which it  is
    stated that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  gave  no  less  than  seven
    compelling reasons why the Respondent's evidence lacked the  sufficient
    cogency required to discharge the burden of proof which rested on  her.
    I was referred in particular to paragraph 48 of the decision  in  which
    the judge states that the decision maker made the decision based  on  a
    misapprehension of material facts as  at  no  place  in  the  interview
    record did the Appellant state that she had been working cash  in  hand
    for Vens Solicitors or that she had last been  paid  by  them  in  June
    2013, five months after her residence permit and leave  to  remain  had
    been granted.  The refusal  decision  was  dated  in  April  2013.   He
    submitted that the Grounds of Appeal do not  challenge  this  paragraph
    and when the Appellant's  employment  history  is  considered  she  was
    working part-time from 2009 until 2012  which  was  permitted  although
    this changed after 2012.

11. The representative submitted that even if the judge did use too high  a
    standard of proof, had he  used  the  correct  standard  of  proof  his
    decision would have been no different.   He  submitted  that  there  is
    nothing irrational in the judge's decision relating to the first Ground
    of Application.

12. With regard to the second  ground  of  application  the  representative
    submitted that the judge did not refuse to adjourn  the  appeal  as  no
    application was  made  for  an  adjournment.   He  submitted  that  the
    Explanatory Statement had not been in  the  Respondent's  bundle  dated
    24th April 2015 and before the date of the hearing no  separate  bundle
    was lodged so there was no reference to the English language  test  and
    there was no allegation of deception against the Appellant but  at  the
    date of the hearing  a  new  bundle  was  produced  by  the  Respondent
    addressed to Croydon and delivered to Croydon on 11th November 2015  so
    it had been wrongly served.  The representative submitted that when the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge got the second Respondent's bundle he rose so
    that the Appellant's representative could consider  it.   He  submitted
    that this is referred to in the decision and at paragraph 24 the  judge
    deals with this.  He goes on to make his decision based on whether  the
    Appellant worked in breach of the terms of her visa but not relating to
    the English test.

13. The representative pointed out that the date of the decision  was  20th
    April 2013 and the Explanatory Statement was dated two and a half years
    after that.  He submitted that the judge's view  that  the  Explanatory
    Statement did not form part of the Respondent's decision is correct.

14. I was referred by the representative to the decision which  is  in  the
    Appellant's original bundle.  The reasons given in this for  cancelling
    the Appellant's continuing  leave  are  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    working in breach of her conditions of stay and there was  a  right  of
    appeal on  this  basis.   Her  leave  to  enter  was  refused  and  her
    continuing leave was cancelled.  He submitted that the judge was  right
    not to consider the  allegation  made  against  the  Appellant  in  the
    Explanatory Statement.  The judge explains this at paragraph 24 of  his
    decision.

15. In his decision the judge states that the appeal had been adjourned  on
    two occasions before November 2015 when it was eventually  heard.   The
    adjournments were dated in April 2015 and September 2015.  He submitted
    that had the judge  allowed  the  introduction  of  the  allegation  of
    deception in the English language test, he would have  had  to  adjourn
    the hearing again.  He submitted that before the  hearing  no  one  was
    aware of this allegation.

16. I was asked to consider paragraphs 14, 15 and 16 of the decision.   The
    representative submitted that it is clear  that  the  judge  has  taken
    everything into account and there is no material error of law.   I  was
    asked to uphold the decision.

17. The Presenting Officer submitted that there was a decision relating  to
    deception, being that  the  Appellant  had  worked  without  permission
    against the terms of her visa and this  decision  was  waiting  for  an
    appeal to be heard.   In  the  meantime  another  deception  point  was
    raised.  He submitted that this was served on time but in any case this
    issue was before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  He submitted  that  if
    the judge felt that this matter could not be considered by him  another
    adjournment should have  been  granted.   He  gave  the  example  of  a
    deportation case where, if something else comes up, this forms part  of
    the evidence, even if it is not included in the deportation  order  and
    the judge requires to deal with it.  He submitted that the judge should
    have dealt with the ETS/TOEIC matter in this case.  He  submitted  that
    the fact that the judge did not deal with it is  a  material  error  of
    law.

18. The Appellant's representative submitted that the judge set out all his
    reasoning in the decision.  The judge stated that now  this  new  issue
    has been raised, the Respondent can make a further decision relating to
    it.  I was referred to paragraphs 50 and 51 of the  decision  in  which
    the judge allows the appeal and states that the Respondent now needs to
    take a decision as to what action is required in the light of  his, the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision.  He submitted that the judge  was
    right to find that the allegation about the ETS/TOEIC language test did
    not require to be decided by him.  It was  not  part  of  the  original
    refusal.

19. The Presenting Officer submitted that the  decision  is  based  on  the
    Appellant's deception.  He submitted that the explanatory letter raises
    another deception point.  He submitted that it came to  light  recently
    but this does not mean that the judge should not  have  considered  it.
    He submitted that it should have been  dealt  with  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge and because he did not do so this is a material error of
    law.

20. The Appellant's representative submitted that the original decision  is
    not based on a deception issue but a breach of visa conditions which is
    different.  I was asked  to  uphold  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    decision.



DECISION AND REASONS

21. There was conflicting evidence as to when the Explanatory Statement was
    served and whether the Appellant and her representative were  aware  of
    it before the date of the hearing.  It seems to have been issued at the
    beginning of November 2015 but it was wrongly served so the first  time
    the Appellant and her representative were made aware of it was  at  the
    appeal hearing on 24th November 2015.

22. This does not mean that the judge should not have  considered  it.   It
    was before the judge.  He should have  considered  it  along  with  the
    matter raised in the refusal letter  about  the  Appellant  working  in
    breach of the terms of her visa.  The judge made a  material  error  of
    law by not dealing with the allegation about the ETS/TOEIC certificate.
     If he felt he was unable to deal with it  at  the  appeal  hearing  he
    should have adjourned the hearing. The fact  that  the  case  had  been
    adjourned before is not relevant.

23. The said cases of Muhandiramge and SM and Qadir  are  relevant  to  the
    standard of proof used  by  the  judge.  The  judge  decided  that  the
    Appellant did not work in breach of the terms of her visa and he  found
    that the respondent had not discharged the  burden  of  proof  on  this
    issue but it is not clear what standard of proof he  used.  Balance  of
    probabilities is not flexible.

Notice of Decision

24. As I find that there are material errors of law in the judge's decision
    it has to be set aside.

25. No findings of the First-tier Tribunal can stand. Under  section  12(2)
    (b) (i) of the 2007 Act and  Practice  statement  7.2  the  nature  and
    extent of judicial fact finding necessary for the decision to be remade
    is such that it is appropriate to remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. The member(s) of the First-tier Tribunal chosen to reconsider
    the case are not to include Judge Davies.

26. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray           28th September 2016



