

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/36633/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 7 May 2015                        |On 18 May 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR ALPHA ROBINSON
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Harrison (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr Timson (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant ('the SSHD') appeals against  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge De Haney dated 20 January 2015 in which he  allowed  the
    respondent's (the claimant's) appeal to the extent that he remitted  it
    to the SSHD.

 2. Both representatives agreed to a proposed way forward in this case.  Mr
    Timson accepted that the SSHD was correct to point out in  the  grounds
    of appeal  that  Judge  De  Haney  was  entitled  to  and  should  have
    determined the appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.  He submitted, and I
    accept that the Judge erred in law in  failing  to  take  into  account
    276AO(iii), which  provides  that  276ADE(1)  does  not  apply  'in  an
    appeal'.

 3. This means that the First-tier  Tribunal  has  erred  in  law  and  the
    decision must be remade.

 4. Mr Harrison accepted that Judge De Haney has already considered Article
    8 and the relevant evidence, and  reached  clear  preliminary  findings
    about it [14-16].  He agreed with Mr Timson, that the most  appropriate
    way of dealing with this case is for it to  be  remitted  to  Judge  De
    Haney for him to re-make the decision on Article 8 in light of all  the
    relevant updated evidence.  I agree that this  is  the  most  fair  and
    proportionate way in which to deal with this case having regard to para
    7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statements and given the  nature
    and extent of  the  factual  findings  already  made  and  required  in
    remaking the decision.

Decision

 5. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of law.  Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.

 6. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard by  Judge
    De Haney.  He shall remake  the  decision  in  light  of  his  previous
    observations and the relevant updated evidence.

Directions

      1) The appeal relating to Article 8 of the ECHR shall be  remitted  to
         the First-tier Tribunal (TE: 2hrs) and remade by Judge De Haney  on
         the first available date (which  takes  into  account  Mr  Timson's
         availability).

      2) Before 12noon on Thursday 21 May 2015 the claimant shall  file  and
         serve an indexed and paginated  bundle  (to  replace  all  previous
         bundles) containing only those documents relevant to the Article  8
         appeal.

      3) Before 12 noon on Thursday 28 May 2015 the claimant shall file  and
         serve a short  skeleton  argument  particularising  his  Article  8
         submissions by cross-referencing to pages within the bundle and the
         appropriate legal framework on Article 8.



Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date: 8 May 2014
