
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/36676/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Sent                         |
|On 1st April 2014                             |On 8th April 2014            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                       THE HON MR JUSTICE JEREMY BAKER
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN


                                   Between

                            MRS LAURETTA BLANKSON
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr J Collins of counsel instructed by Kilic and Kilic
solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr G Saunders a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


   1. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana who was born on 7 June 1980. She
      has been given permission to appeal the determination of First-Tier
      Tribunal Judge Brennells ("the FTTJ") who dismissed her appeal against
      the respondent's decision of 11 July 2013 to remove her from the UK
      following the refusal to grant her leave to remain outside the
      provisions of the Immigration Rules as the ex-wife of a former work
      permit holder.


   2. The appellant arrived in the UK on 26 September 2006 with a work
      permit holder visa as the spouse of a work permit holder and was
      granted leave to enter for a period expiring on 21 September 2008. On
      10 August 2007 her then husband made an application for leave to
      remain as a work permit holder and named her as his dependant spouse.
      Both of them were granted leave to remain until 10 August 2012. On 13
      March 2011 the respondent was informed by her husband's former
      employer that he was no longer employed by them. On 11 August 2011 his
      leave was curtailed with effect from 9 October 2011 and her leave was
      also curtailed in line with his.


   3. On 26 July 2012 the appellant applied for indefinite leave to remain
      on the grounds that she was the ex-wife of a work permit holder. The
      respondent refused the application because it was made for a purpose
      not covered by the Immigration Rules. It was considered on private and
      family life human rights grounds but refused on the basis that there
      were no exceptional reasons which were sufficiently compelling to
      allow her to remain in the UK.


   4. The appellant appealed and her appeal was heard by the FTTJ on 27
      January 2014. Both parties were represented and oral evidence was
      given by the appellant, her partner and two other witnesses. The
      appellant's representatives had submitted a 204 page bundle the
      contents of which were listed by the FTTJ in paragraph 5 (2) of the
      determination.


   5. The FTTJ considered the appeal on Article 8 human rights grounds and
      applied the step-by-step tests set out by Lord Bingham in Razgar v
      SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 concluding that the appellant had established a
      family life in the UK with her partner, that all but the last of the
      tests were answered in the affirmative and that the decision turned on
      the last, proportionality. He found that the appellant's removal would
      be a proportionate interference with her right to respect for her
      family life under Article 8.


   6. The FTTJ dismissed the appeal. The appellant applied for and was
      granted permission to appeal arguing that the FTTJ erred in law by
      failing to make necessary factual findings or to give adequate reasons
      for his conclusions.


   7. Mr Saunders accepted that the FTTJ had failed to look at some of the
      evidence. He made no further submissions. Mr Collins relied on the
      grounds of appeal and submitted that the determination was seriously
      deficient in that it lacked necessary findings of credibility and
      fact. The appellant was now pregnant. He asked us to find that there
      were material errors of law, set aside the decision and direct that it
      be remade in the First-Tier Tribunal.


   8. We said that we had reached the conclusion that there were errors of
      law such that the decision should be set aside. We would direct that
      the decision be remade in the First-Tier Tribunal. Our written reasons
      would follow.


   9. The appellant's bundle before the FTTJ included witness statements
      from the appellant and her partner, documents common to both parties
      relating to the decision making and appeals process, copies of the
      appellant's passport and her partner's British passport, a receipt
      indicating that they had booked their wedding, statements from the
      appellant's partner's father and her father, statements from family
      and friends, feedback from the radio station where the appellant was a
      part-time presenter, information about her qualifications and projects
      and photographs. In the light of all this information we find that it
      was not open to the FTTJ to say, in paragraph 16, that; "she has
      provided little evidence of private life (other than her work)..."


  10. The determination contains no clear findings as to the credibility of
      the appellant, her partner or the other witnesses. There is no summary
      of the evidence given by the witnesses and, except for limited
      findings in relation to the evidence given by the appellant and her
      partner, no findings in relation to the evidence given by the other
      two witnesses. Whilst the FTTJ accepted that the appellant had a
      family life with her partner, the findings do not address important
      aspects of their evidence including the total time the appellant has
      spent in the UK, her partner's British citizenship or the factors
      relevant to whether he should be expected to leave the UK. In
      paragraph 16, the FTTJ noted that the appellant claimed that she was
      divorced from her former husband and that she had produced no evidence
      of divorce proceedings but there is no conclusion as to whether he did
      or did not accept that she was divorced.


  11. We find that these omissions amount to material errors of law. We have
      considered whether any judge properly directing himself or herself in
      the light of all the evidence would inevitably have come to the same
      conclusion to dismiss the appeal on human rights grounds. Whilst in
      the light of current jurisprudence including Nagre v SSHD [2013] EWHC
      720 (Admin) and Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach)
      [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC) the appellant is going to have a difficult task
      we are not persuaded that she is bound to fail.


  12. We have not been asked to make an anonymity direction and can see no
      good reason to do so.


  13. Having concluded that the determination contains material errors of
      law we set aside the decision of the First-Tier Tribunal. In light of
      the directions given by the Senior President of Tribunals on 25
      September 2012 we are satisfied that the effect of the error has been
      to deprive the appellant of a fair hearing or other opportunity for
      her case to be put to and considered by the First-Tier Tribunal. We
      therefore direct that the appeal be remitted to and reheard by the
      First-Tier Tribunal.


DIRECTIONS

   1) The hearing before the First-Tier Tribunal sitting at Taylor House
      will take place on 15 August 2014 at 10 am unless the First-Tier
      Tribunal directs otherwise.

   2) Time estimate - two hours.


   3) No interpreter required.

   4) No later than 14 days before the hearing the appellant's
      representatives are to lodge with the First-Tier Tribunal and serve on
      the respondent an indexed and paginated bundle containing all the
      documents on which the appellant intends to rely including any new
      material and the material previously submitted.

   5) Any witness statements must be capable of standing as evidence in
      chief.


   6) To be heard by any First-Tier Tribunal Judge other than Judge
      Brennells.






         ......................................
    Signed:
                Date:  2 April 2014
         Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

