
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/36201/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29 May 2014                                |On 12th June 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                             Sakshyam Raj Gurung
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Puar, Solicitor


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State  has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Handley who allowed the appeal by
    the respondent against the decision refusing to vary  leave  to  remain
    and  to  remove  dated  20  August  2013  for  reasons  given  in   his
    determination dated 26 February 2014.

 2. The respondent had arrived in the United Kingdom with a student visa on
    25 June 2007 which was extended on application on various dates until 6
    June 2012.  On 31 May 2012 the respondent applied for leave  to  remain
    as the dependent son Prem Gurung, a former Ghurkha, who arrived in this
    country in 2010 with his wife.   The respondent is  an  only  son;  his
    sisters are married, one lives in Hong  Kong.   The  other  is  in  the
    United Kingdom having been previously in the United States.

 3. The respondent  and  his  family  are  nationals  of  Nepal  where  the
    respondent was born on 30 May 1984.  At the date of the hearing he  was
    therefore 29.

 4. The judge accepted that the respondent's father, his mother and  sister
    now live in the United Kingdom and that, together with the  respondent,
    they form a  family  unit.   During  their  period  of  separation  the
    respondent was financially dependent on his father and the family  unit
    remained intact.  He also accepted that family life continued after the
    respondent's father had arrived in the United Kingdom.   It  was  clear
    that the respondent had not yet founded a family of his own.  Prior  to
    coming to the United Kingdom to study the respondent had  always  lived
    with  his  parents  and  that  he  continued  to  be  financially   and
    emotionally supported by the family.

 5.  After  directing  himself  in  accordance  with  Ghising  and   Others
    (Ghurkhas/BOCs: historic wrong; weight) [2013]  UKUT  00567  the  judge
    went on to conclude at [20] of his determination as follows:

         "20. In the Appeal before me it has not  been  suggested  that  the
             appellant has failed to comply with the  immigration  laws  of
             the United Kingdom  or  that  he  has  been  involved  in  any
             criminal  activities  whilst  in  the  United   Kingdom.    As
             indicated, I accept that the appellant  has  a  strong  family
             life in the United Kingdom and I  find  that  there  are  some
             factors which would make it difficult for  him  to  return  to
             Nepal (for example the fact the sponsor has  disposed  of  the
             property he previously owned in Nepal).  I accept that a  high
             level of dependency  exists  between  the  appellant  and  the
             sponsor.  I found no factors such as a bad immigration history
             or criminal behaviour which would be  sufficient  to  outweigh
             the factors bearing on the appellant's side of the balance.

         21.  I allow this Appeal  under  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
             Convention."

 6. The challenge by the Secretary of State asserts the following:

         "i.  The judge in  the  instant  case  gave  great  weight  to  the
             historic  injustice  in  assessing  proportionality  in   this
             matter.  [After reference to the  decision  of  the  Court  of
             Appeal in Gurung and Others, R (on the application of) v  SSHD
             [2013] EWCA Civ 8.]


         ii.  However, before proportionality falls  to  be  considered,  it
             must be found that the interference in a person's family  life
             is sufficiently serious to engage Article 8  (Razgar's  second
             question).


         iii. No such finding was made in this matter.


         iv.  The  appellant  is  an  adult  and  has  been  throughout  his
             application.  He came to the UK in 2007, aged 23, without  his
             parents to study.  He retains family in Nepal.  Any  financial
             dependency arose from the appellant's status as a  student;  a
             time-limited status.  Accordingly the relationship between the
             appellant and his parents does not go beyond the  normal  ties
             of affection between adults (Kugathas) and hence Article 8 was
             not engaged.


         v.   The judge was wrong to proceed to proportionality,  and  weigh
             the historic  injustice  argument,  absent  the  finding  that
             Article was engaged."

    Mr Walker candidly accepted his difficulties.  He explained he did  not
    pursue the grounds strongly.   His  instructions  were  to  pursue  the
    appeal but he had not a great deal to say  given  that  the  judge  had
    found that there  was  family  life.   He  made  no  challenge  to  the
    consequences of that family life having been found are  with  reference
    to the decision in Ghising [2013].

 7. Mr Puar submitted that the Presenting Officer had conceded at the first
    hearing that there was family life and there was no proper basis for  a
    finding of error of law on the grounds asserted  by  the  Secretary  of
    State.

 8. My conclusions are as follows.  The challenge by the Secretary of State
    was on the basis that no finding had  been  made  that  Article  8  was
    engaged.  That is a misreading of the determination.  The  judge  found
    that the respondent had strong family life in the United Kingdom.   The
    grounds do not challenge the consequences of such a finding and even if
    they could be construed as doing so, the combined factors of:

      i) the sole reliance on effective immigration control as justification
         for interference with the family life in the  Reasons  for  Refusal
         Letter dated 20 August 2013;

     ii) the strength of the family life as found by the judge; and

    iii) the absence of any  adverse  immigration  history  or  evidence  of
         involvement in criminal activities,

    when considered in the light of the conclusion  in  Ghising  [2013]  at
    [60].

         "But, if the respondent is relying only upon  the  public  interest
         described by the Court of Appeal at paragraph 41  of  Gurung,  then
         the weight to be given to  the  historic  injustice  will  normally
         require a decision in the appellant's favour."







    demonstrate that the judge did  not  err  in  allowing  the  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds.  He reached a permissible conclusion after a correct
    direction as to the law and after making findings on the facts open  to
    him on the evidence.




DECISION

 9. The appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.






Signed
                                                      Date 12 June 2014
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

