
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA366192014
     IA366072014
     IA366142014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision sent to parties on   |
|On 12 April 2016                              |On 16 June 2016               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                           ATINUKE ADEYEMI ODIASE
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


                               SUSANNA ODIASE
                            KOLADE ADEYEMI ODIASE
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Claimants:         Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Secretary of State:     Mr P J Ward, Solicitor, James & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to  Rule  13  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
Rules 2014 and  there  has  been  no  application  for  an  anonymity  order
pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008.
I make no anonymity order because I do not consider that one is necessary.

 1. The Secretary of State has permission to appeal against the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal allowing the  appeal  of  Atinuke  Odiase,  the
    third appellant  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  In  the  cross-appeal,
    Susanna Odiase and Kolade  Odiase,  the  first  and  second  appellants
    below, have permission to appeal against the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal dismissing their appeals.

 2. The claimants are  all  Nigerian  citizens  who  appealed  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State to refuse them leave  to  remain  on
    human rights grounds, either within or outwith the Article 8 provisions
    of the Immigration Rules HC395 (as amended).

Background

 3. Susanna Odiase is the mother of the second and third claimants  and  is
    49 years old.  Her daughter Atinuke Odiase was born on 29 June 1998 and
    is 17 years old. She will be 18 on 29 June 2016, that is  to  say,  two
    weeks from today. Her son Kolade Odiase was born on 18 March  1995  and
    is 21 years old.  I will refer to the parties as the Secretary of State
    and the appellants  below  as  the  claimants,  and  individually,  the
    mother, the son and the daughter. The mother  claims  to  be  estranged
    from her husband.

 4. All of the claimants entered the United Kingdom  on  1  April  2005  as
    visitors.  They have not had valid  leave  to  enter  or  remain  since
    October 2005, in the case of the son and the  daughter,  and  (perhaps)
    January 2009 in the case of the  mother.   It  seems  that  the  mother
    departed from the United Kingdom and returned from Nigeria in 2008/2009
    but nothing turns on that, since it is clear that  thereafter  all  the
    claimants were in the United Kingdom without leave.

 5. The claimants made an Article 8  ECHR  application  in  December  2012,
    which, after a judicial review and consent order, was the subject of  a
    refusal decision of 14 September 2014 giving  an  in-country  right  of
    appeal.

First-tier Tribunal decision

 6. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal on 8 September 2015,  the
    Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  (Mr  Williams)  conceded  that   the
    daughter, who was a minor, met the requirements of paragraph 276ADE (v)
    fully as she was over 18 and under 25, and had spent more than 10 years
    of her life in the United Kingdom.  He  conceded  that  the  daughter's
    appeal fell to be allowed.

 7. In relation to the mother and the son, the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    found that they could not bring themselves within the provisions of the
    Rules.   The  mother  was  not  a  credible  witness,  having  lied  to
    immigration officers in Nigeria, on her own admission.  The  Judge  did
    not believe that the family had been supported  for  10  years  in  the
    United Kingdom only by family and their Church: he considered it likely
    that the mother had been working illegally.

 8.  He  considered  that  the  mother  had  'deliberately   deceived   the
    immigration  authorities  and  deliberately  flouted  the   immigration
    regulations in order to achieve her purpose of coming to settle in  the
    United  Kingdom'.   He  was  not  satisfied  that  there   were   'very
    significant obstacles to her integration into Nigeria' for the  reasons
    set out at paragraph 22 of his decision.  There would be no  disrespect
    for the family life of the mother and the  son  if  they  were  removed
    together, and as regards the son, he did not consider  it  unreasonable
    for him to return to Nigeria and complete  his  education  there.   The
    daughter, who is now an adult, could choose whether to return with them
    or remain in the United Kingdom, her appeal having been allowed.

 9. The Judge considered Article 8 outside the Rules, together with Part 5A
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as  amended).   He
    dismissed the appeals of the mother and son, but allowed the appeal  of
    the daughter, following the concession by the Secretary of State.

Secretary of State's appeal

10. The Secretary of State appealed  against  the  decision  to  allow  the
    daughter's appeal. Permission was granted on the basis  that  the  Home
    Office Presenting Officer, when conceding the appeal,  had  erroneously
    calculated the length of time the daughter spent in the United  Kingdom
    up to the date of hearing, rather than the  date  of  application,  and
    that the First-tier Tribunal had fallen into error in  relying  on  the
    concession by the Home Office Presenting Officer  that  the  daughter's
    appeal should be allowed.

11. The daughter, by her solicitors, filed a rule 24 reply to the grant  of
    permission, arguing that there had been no  error  in  considering  the
    length of her residence up to the date of hearing, rather than  to  the
    date of application and that the First-tier Tribunal's decision  should
    stand.

The cross-appeals

12. The mother and son cross-appealed against the decision to dismiss their
    appeals. They did so on two bases: first, that there was no evidence on
    which the First-tier Tribunal's findings of fact and credibility  could
    be based; and second, on the basis that the son was also  a  minor  and
    there had been no consideration of his section 55  best  interests.   I
    granted permission to appeal on the cross-appeal  at  the  hearing,  it
    having been overlooked by the Judge who  considered  the  Secretary  of
    State's appeal.

Directions

13. At a hearing on 12 April 2016, I set out the basis of the Secretary  of
    State's appeal and the cross-appeal, on both  of  which  permission  to
    appeal was granted.  I adjourned the material error of law hearing,  to
    allow the Secretary of State an opportunity, if so advised, to  respond
    either to the rule 24 Reply in the Secretary of State appeal, and/or by
    way of a Rule 24 Reply to the grant of permission in the cross-appeals.



14. Directions were given at the hearing and sent  to  the  parties  on  15
    April 2016, as follows:

          "Directions

          1) In the Secretary of State's appeal, the Secretary of State may
             file a Response to the third  claimant's  Rule  24  Reply  not
             later than 14 days after the sending to the  parties  of  this
             decision, to include any submissions about whether  a  further
             oral hearing is required on her appeal.

          2) In the cross-appeals, the Secretary of State may file  a  Rule
             24 Reply not later than 14  days  after  the  sending  to  the
             parties of this decision, to  include  any  submissions  about
             whether a further oral  hearing  is  required  on  the  cross-
             appeals.

          3) The first and second claimants may file a response to any such
             Reply not later than 14  days  thereafter,  to  include  their
             submissions as to whether a further oral hearing  is  required
             on the cross-appeals, or on the Secretary of State's appeal.

          4) If any party does not file a Response or Reply  under  (1)  to
             (3) above, the Upper Tribunal may consider that such party has
             nothing, or nothing further, to add to the submissions already
             made, and may proceed to dispose of the appeal or cross-appeal
             (as applicable) without a further oral hearing."

15. The Secretary of State did not take the opportunity  to  respond  under
    directions (1) and (2), and direction (3) was therefore not  triggered.



16. I approach these appeals on the basis that the Secretary of  State  has
    nothing, or nothing further, to add to her pleaded case as it stood  on
    12 April 2016.

Material error of law

Secretary of State's appeal

17. As regards  the  Secretary  of  State's  challenge  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision based on a concession by the Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer that the daughter had been in the United Kingdom for more  than
    10 years, and could therefore  meet  the  requirements  of  the  Rules,
    whether or not that was based on  an  erroneous  understanding  of  the
    Rules as now alleged (and I note that there is no  statement  of  truth
    from  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  to  that  effect),   that
    concession was a practical and pragmatic one.  The daughter could  have
    made a successful application the day after  the  hearing.   I  am  not
    prepared to find that the First-tier Tribunal erred in giving weight to
    the concession made by the Home Office Presenting Officer and I dismiss
    the Secretary of State's appeal.

18. The First-tier Tribunal Judge's failure to go on and  consider  whether
    it was reasonable for the daughter to return to Nigeria arises directly
    from that concession: it simply was not necessary, since the  Secretary
    of State had conceded that the appeal should be allowed.

19. I therefore find that there is no material error of law in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal decision concerning the decision on the daughter, and the
    Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

Cross-appeals

20. As regards the cross-appeals, the reasons challenge is  without  merit.
    The mother gave false information on a visa application in 2007, on her
    own admission (see  paragraph  10  of  the  decision)  and  there  were
    significant internal inconsistencies in her account on which the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge was entitled to place weight. He had heard and seen
    all the witnesses give their evidence and there is no proper reason  to
    go behind his findings of fact and credibility.

21. As regards the assertion that the son is a minor, that is correct,  but
    the Judge had regard to his age.  The Judge did not fix  the  son  with
    the mother's deception; he did have regard to the fact that this  child
    had spent more than half his life in the United Kingdom,  but  he  also
    took  into  account  the  decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in   EV
    (Philippines) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 874.

22. The son is not a British citizen: he is Nigerian and he is, now, almost
    an adult.  The high point of the son's argument was that he  should  be
    allowed to complete  his  secondary  school  education  in  the  United
    Kingdom, which the Judge rejected.

23. The argument as to his best interests was based on  the  son's  desire,
    and that of his mother, for him to complete his free state education in
    the United Kingdom.  Nothing else of substance was advanced. He will by
    now have completed his education, or almost:  in  the  time  since  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision was made in September 2015 and the date of
    my consideration of the son's appeal today, that has been achieved,  as
    almost all of the final academic year has passed.   I  have  regard  to
    the observations of Lord Justice Christopher Clarke at paragraphs 60-61
    in EV (Philippines), cited by the First-tier Tribunal at  paragraph  26
    of this decision:

         "58.  In  my  judgment,  therefore,  the  assessment  of  the  best
         interests of the children must be made on the basis that the  facts
         are as they are in the real world. If one parent has  no  right  to
         remain, but the other parent does, that is the  background  against
         which the assessment is conducted. If neither parent has the  right
         to remain, then that is the background against which the assessment
         is conducted. Thus the ultimate question will be: is it  reasonable
         to expect the child to follow the parent with no right to remain to
         the country of origin? ...

         60.  That is a long way from the facts of our  case.  In  our  case
         none of the family is a British citizen.  None  has  the  right  to
         remain in this country. If the mother is removed, the father has no
         independent right to remain. If the parents are removed, then it is
         entirely reasonable to expect the children to go with them. As  the
         immigration judge found it is obviously in their best interests  to
         remain with their parents. Although it is, of course a question  of
         fact for the tribunal, I cannot see that the desirability of  being
         educated at public expense in the UK can outweigh  the  benefit  to
         the children of remaining with their parents.  Just  as  we  cannot
         provide medical treatment for the world, so we cannot  educate  the
         world."

24. Such is also the case here.   While  as  a  result  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision, the adult daughter now has leave to remain, none  of
    these parties had any right to be in the United Kingdom at the date  of
    hearing.  The son was still a minor and  it  was  not  unreasonable  to
    expect him to return to Nigeria with his mother.

25. I therefore find that no material error of law has been made out on the
    cross-appeals, which are also dismissed.

DECISION

26. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error  on
    a point of law.

    I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.

Signed:  Judith A J C Gleeson                Date:  15 June 2016
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

