
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                     Appeal
Number:     IA/36526/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                  |Determination Promulgated |
|On: 25th June 2014                     |On 26 June 2014           |
|                                       |                          |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                Sirajul Islam
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr Biggs, Counsel instructed by Universal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh  date  of  birth  11th
       March 1971.  He appeals against the decision of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal (Judge Hawden-Beal) to dismiss his appeal  against  the
       Respondent's decision to make directions for  his  removal  from
       the United Kingdom pursuant to section 10 of the Immigration and
       Asylum Act 1999. That decision followed  from  the  Respondent's
       rejection of the Appellant's application for indefinite leave to
       remain on grounds of his long residence in the United Kingdom.

    2. The Appellant had claimed to have lived in the UK since  1995/6.
       The Respondent did not believe that to be the  case,  since  the
       Appellant could only produce documentary evidence dating back to
       2001. On appeal Judge Hawden-Beal agreed.   There  was  not  the
       documentary evidence to cover the entire period claimed, and  he
       could place little to no weight on the Appellant's own  evidence
       since he  had  entered  the  UK  illegally  and  worked  without
       permission; by the same  logic  the  evidence  of  the  numerous
       witnesses was discounted since they had known  this  to  be  the
       case.  Judge Hawden-Beal noted that the Appellant had produced a
       copy of a Bangladeshi passport which had been renewed in the  UK
       in 1995, but since the pages with stamps were missing  he  could
       not be satisfied that  the  Appellant  had  in  fact  been  here
       continually since that time.  In the alternative  Judge  Hawden-
       Beal found that if the Appellant has been here since  1995  then
       it would be contrary to the public interest to allow him to stay
       because he has worked illegally and used  false  documents.   On
       the same basis the Article 8 ground of appeal was rejected,  the
       Tribunal finding there to  be  no  compelling  reasons  why  the
       Appellant should be given leave to remain.

    3. On the 27th February 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Bird granted
       permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal. On the 1st May  2014
       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey found
the decision to contain errors of law such that it should be set aside.
Those errors were:

       i) The First-tier Tribunal  had  failed  to  take  into  account
          material evidence which was  before  it.  The  Appellant  had
          produced a number of letters from "responsible councillors or
          bodies" who confirmed that the Appellant had  been  known  to
          them since 1995/6. This evidence was  not  addressed  in  the
          determination.


      ii) In its finding that allowing the Appellant to stay even if he
          had accrued 14 years  long  residence  was  contrary  to  the
          public interest the Tribunal had misconstrued  the  terms  of
          the (then applicable) paragraph 276B. It was implicit in that
          paragraph of the Rules that applicants would have been living
          in the UK illegally.

    4.  Judge  Davey  set  the  decision  aside  in  its  entirety.  It
       subsequently proved difficult to have the matter relisted before
       Judge Davey and a transfer order was therefore obtained.

    5. At the hearing before me Mr  Biggs  indicated  that  there  were
       eleven witnesses in all,  a  number  of  whom  would  be  giving
       evidence through an interpreter. The  time  allocated  for  this
       appeal in my list was three hours. I did  not  think  it  likely
       that I would be able to hear evidence from eleven  witnesses  in
       that time. The determination had been set aside by  Judge  Davey
       in its entirety and was to be heard de novo. The parties  and  I
       agreed that in the circumstances, having regard to the extent of
       judicial fact finding required, that  this  was  an  appropriate
       matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.




Decisions

    6. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law
       and it is set aside.

    7. The appeal is to be heard in Birmingham IAC First-tier  Tribunal
       on the 29th July 2014. It has been listed for a whole day with a
       Sylheti interpreter.

                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                             25th June  2014
