
[pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ia/36505/2013
                                                               ia/36522/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at RCJ Belfast                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 November 2015                  |On 22 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     RT
                                      &
                                     CT
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    In person
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnyez, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are mother and son and are  citizens  of  Canada.   They
    were born on 20 August 1982 and 18 October 2003, respectively.

 2. On 12 October 2012 they applied  for  residence  cards  as  the  family
    members of an EEA national exercising Treaty rights.  The  applications
    were refused in decisions dated 21 August 2013.

 3. Their appeals against those decisions came before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge S. T. Fox on 23 January 2015 whereby he  dismissed  the  appeals.
    Permission to appeal having been  granted  by  a  judge  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal, the appeals came before me.

 4. Prior to the hearing there had been an application for  an  adjournment
    which had been refused by an Upper Tribunal Judge.  Grounds  of  Appeal
    to the Upper  Tribunal  had  been  drafted  by  legal  representatives,
    although the appellants were not  represented  before  me.   The  first
    appellant said that they were still seeking an adjournment.   She  said
    that new information had come to light and that they needed  some  time
    to consider their options.

 5. Mr Myles Wolfe, the first appellant's husband, told me  that  they  had
    been given more options by their legal  representative.   He  had  dual
    citizenship and he had been told that if he renounced his  citizenship,
    an application could be made on the basis that he is an EEA national.

 6. The first appellant added that the First-tier Judge had  said  that  he
    would not look at the documents they had brought with them because they
    had not been provided prior to  the  hearing.   He  did  however,  take
    copies of the birth certificates of their children, O and J, born on  6
    October 2014 and 24 July 2013, respectively.   She  referred  to  other
    documents that were produced  at  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Judge, also identified at [21] of the grounds of appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 7. The first appellant also said that they did not ask for an  adjournment
    at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, although the judge  said
    that there would be no point in adjourning the hearing.

 8. Mr Diwnyez informed me that he did not have  a  complete  copy  of  the
    determination of the First-tier  judge.   I  arranged  for  one  to  be
    provided to him.

 9. I explained to the  first  appellant  and  her  husband  the  issue  in
    relation to the case of Amirteymour  and  others  (EEA  appeals;  human
    rights) [2015] UKUT 00466 (IAC), and its relevance  to  the  appeal  in
    terms of Article 8 of the ECHR.  I indicated that the President of  the
    Upper Tribunal had considered it appropriate for cases which raised the
    question of Article 8 rights within an appeal against the refusal of  a
    residence card to be adjourned pending the outcome of an appeal to  the
    Court of Appeal against the Upper Tribunal's decision in that case.

10. However, I also explained to the first appellant and her  husband  what
    appeared to me to be the difficulties with their case  in  relation  to
    grant of a residence card given  Mr  Wolfe's  dual  British  and  Irish
    nationality in the light of the decision in McCarthy  [2011]  EUECJ  C-
    434/09.  I was told by the first appellant that her husband  had  never
    worked in Southern Ireland, although he had sometimes  travelled  there
    for work.

11. I decided to reserve my decision on the matters raised in  the  grounds
    but indicated that in any event the matter would have to  be  adjourned
    insofar as a decision was required in relation  to  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR, pending the outcome of the decision of the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    Amirteymour.  In other words, I decided that I may proceed to determine
    the error of law issue and any re-making on the EEA grounds, but that I
    would not make a decision in relation to  Article  8  for  the  reasons
    already explained.

12. It follows from the foregoing, that I did not consider it necessary  in
    the interests of justice to adjourn the hearing,  particularly  bearing
    in mind that I had before me written  grounds  of  appeal  against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

13. At [7] of the determination Judge Fox noted  that  standard  directions
    had been served on the parties, and although the appellants have  taken
    advice from the Law Centre in Belfast, as he  understood  it  it  would
    appear that they did not receive advice on complying with the  standard
    directions and therefore they had failed to adduce  any  statements  or
    supporting evidence before him.  At [9] he stated  that  he  had  given
    full and careful consideration to  all  the  documents,  including  the
    respondent's decision, and had considered the grounds  of  appeal.   He
    said that save what may be attached to the grounds of appeal there  are
    no new documents before him.

14. At [11] he recorded that the first appellant and her  husband  attended
    the hearing before him (although at [7] he said that the appellants had
    not sought an oral hearing).  Mr Wolfe said in evidence that he  was  a
    UK national and was born in Northern Ireland.  He stated that he worked
    in Northern Ireland but the judge said  that  he  had  been  unable  to
    demonstrate that he had worked there  by  producing  wage  slips,  HMRC
    documents or similar, proving his employment history.  He  then  stated
    that there were no additional  documents  produced  to  show  that  the
    couple were living together in the  United  Kingdom,  "as  is  normally
    required in these courts".  He recorded that the  first  appellant  and
    her husband accepted that the proofs required had  not  been  provided.
    They also accepted that they had not made  any  application  under  the
    Article 8 Immigration Rules.

15. At [12] he noted that there were no removal directions  in  place.   He
    said that he considered whether an adjournment would be "beneficial" to
    the appellants but was satisfied on the balance of  probabilities  that
    it would be better for  the  appellants  to  consider  making  a  fresh
    application with the appropriate documentation  in  support.   He  also
    noted that the first appellant and her husband indicated that they were
    keen to start afresh and to engage legal representation.  He considered
    that an adjournment was not appropriate in the circumstances.

16. He decided that the appellants were not entitled to residence cards and
    that the decision in terms of Article 8 was proportionate.

    The Grounds of Appeal

17. The Grounds contend that the judge's conclusion that the appellants are
    not entitled to residence cards  is  inadequately  reasoned,  and  that
    there was no assessment of the evidence before him.  It is also  argued
    that there is no indication from  the  determination  what  legislative
    provisions  in  terms  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regulations") were considered.

18. Similarly, it is argued  that  the  judge's  findings  in  relation  to
    Article 8 are flawed, for example because no consideration at  all  was
    given to the best interests of the first appellant  and  her  husband's
    children.

19. There is also criticism of the judge's conclusion  that  the  appellant
    and her husband had failed to produce evidence that  they  were  living
    together in the UK, the argument being that the law  does  not  require
    spouses to be living together in order to be  considered  as  a  family
    unit.

20. The failure to adjourn the hearing is also criticised in the  light  of
    the fact that the appellants wished to obtain legal representation.

21. Although the judge had said that there were  no  new  documents  before
    him, the appellants did in fact bring with them a number  of  documents
    which the judge refused to accept, these being birth certificates of  O
    and J, a letter of employment in relation to Mr Wolfe,  school  letters
    and personal references.

22. It is also suggested that the determination betrays a lack of care, for
    example in that the judge had said that the appellants had  not  sought
    an oral hearing, whereas in fact they plainly had.

    My assessment

23. Although the First-tier Judge said that he had given "full and  careful
    consideration to all the documents attached to this Appeal",  there  is
    no identification of what documents were before him.

24. It is asserted by and on behalf of the appellants that they did in fact
    produce documents at the hearing but that the judge refused  to  accept
    them.  The respondent was not represented before the  First-tier  Judge
    and accordingly no assistance can be derived from  any  contemporaneous
    notes from any representative of the respondent at  the  hearing.   The
    judge's manuscript  record  of  proceedings  does  not  illuminate  the
    matter.

25. Nevertheless, although the judge said that  no  "additional"  or  "new"
    documents were before him, as already indicated the determination  does
    not identify  what  documents  were  in  fact  before  the  judge.   In
    addition, there is nothing on the face of the determination  to  reveal
    whether or not the judge asked the  appellants  whether  they  had  any
    documents with them.

26. Although the judge gave a  summary  of  the  respondent's  reasons  for
    refusing the residence cards,  including  with  reference  to  the  EEA
    Regulations, there is no reference in the determination to the relevant
    provisions of the EEA Regulations governing the  issuing  of  residence
    cards, nor any explanation of what is meant at [11] of  the  appellants
    having failed to produce "additional documents" to show that they  were
    living together in the UK.  It does not appear that there has been  any
    issue taken by the respondent in terms of their  living  together.   If
    that is a reference to  reg.  9  of  the  EEA  Regulations  it  is  not
    explained.

27. I do not consider it necessary to resolve the issue of whether  or  not
    the appellants were prevented from producing documents at the  hearing.
    If they were, in my view the judge erred in law in refusing  to  accept
    documentary  evidence  produced  at  the   hearing   by   unrepresented
    appellants.  In any event, I am satisfied that the judge erred  in  law
    in failing to identify what documents he had before him and failing  to
    explain the basis upon which the decision was reached with reference to
    the applicable legislative framework within the EEA Regulations.

28. So far as Article 8 of the ECHR is concerned, I am also satisfied  that
    the judge erred in law in his consideration of that ground  of  appeal.
    Although at [10] he said that he had had regard to ss.117A, B and D  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002,  and  at  [14]  he
    referred to the  need  for  fair  and  firm  immigration  control,  the
    conclusion that the respondent had acted proportionately by refusing to
    issue  the  residence  cards  is  not  reasoned.   It  is  particularly
    important that there be a reasoned analysis of the  proportionality  of
    the decision where children are concerned, as here.

29. I do not however, consider that the  judge's  refusal  to  adjourn  the
    hearing reveals any  error  of  law.   It  does  not  appear  that  the
    appellants applied for an adjournment and the grounds  do  not  explain
    why legal representation had not been sought in advance of the hearing.

30. Having identified errors of law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Judge, the question then arises as to whether the  decision  should  be
    set aside.  The mere finding of an error of law, of  course,  does  not
    necessarily lead to that outcome.  Furthermore, it must be said that  I
    have doubts about the extent  to  which  the  appellants  are  able  to
    succeed in their applications for a residence card bearing in mind  the
    decision in McCarthy and the question of whether Mr Wolfe is exercising
    Treaty rights.  There does not appear to be any  basis  upon  which  to
    conclude that a residence card should be issued with reference to  reg.
    9.  For reasons explained below, the prospects for success in  relation
    to Article 8 do not seem to me to be high.

31. It is however, perfectly permissible for  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  set
    aside a decision for error  of  law  and  immediately  to  re-make  the
    decision  but  concluding  that  the  result  should   be   the   same.
    Alternatively, an error of  law  could  be  found  but  the  conclusion
    reached that the error could not  have  affected  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal.

32. In this case, I have  decided  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal should be set aside given the fact that  the  appellants  were
    unrepresented, the lack of identification of what documentary  evidence
    was before the First-tier Tribunal and the lack of detailed  engagement
    with  the  relevant  legislative  framework  governing  the  issue   of
    residence cards.

33. As indicated above, I have reservations about the extent to  which  the
    appellants are entitled to residence cards.   The  grounds  before  the
    Upper Tribunal do not in fact explain the basis on which the appellants
    are entitled to residence cards.  It is not suggested either, that reg.
    9 has any part to play in terms of Mr Wolfe having  worked  in  another
    EEA state before coming back to Northern Ireland and  having  lived  in
    that EEA state with the appellants.

34. Furthermore, in relation to Article 8,  although  as  at  the  date  of
    hearing before me the position was  that  Amirteymour  was  awaiting  a
    hearing in the Court of Appeal, on 1 December 2015 the Court of  Appeal
    gave judgement in the case of TY (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 1233  in  which,  in  summary,  the
    Court of Appeal endorsed the decision  in  Amirteymour.   It  does  not
    appear from that decision therefore, that the appellants have  recourse
    to Article 8 within this appeal.

35. Nevertheless, given that the appellants were unrepresented  before  me,
    and given that the 'Amirteymour' point has only just  been  decided  by
    the Court of Appeal, I conclude that the fair and appropriate course of
    action is to adjourn this case for further  hearing  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  This incidentally, gives  the  appellants  further  time  to
    consider the other options that were referred to at the hearing  before
    me.  However, the appellants and their now legal  representatives  must
    have regard to the directions set out below.

DIRECTIONS

 1. No later than 14 days after this decision is sent, the  appellants  are
    to notify the Tribunal as to whether the appeal against the refusal  of
    residence cards is to be  pursued.   If  not,  the  appellants  are  to
    confirm that they wish their case to be withdrawn pursuant to  rule  17
    of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

 2. If the appeals are to be pursued, the appellants must file and serve  a
    comprehensive bundle of documents no later  than  14  days  before  the
    resumed hearing, together with a  skeleton  argument  setting  out  the
    basis of the appellants' case, including with reference to Article 8 of
    the ECHR.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity in order to protect the identity of the  minor  appellant.
No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly  identify  them.
This direction  applies  both  to  the  appellant  and  to  the  respondent.
Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek  23/12/15
