
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/36965/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 4 September 2014                             |On 9 September 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Meifeng Lin
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Mr C Lam of Counsel instructed by Egmont Solicitors
LLP


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Respondent

 1. The Respondent, Meifeng Lin to whom I shall refer as the Applicant,  is
    a citizen of the People's Republic of China born on 27 May 1989.  On  1
    September 2010 she arrived with leave to enter as a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student migrant.  That leave was extended until 30 September 2012.

 2. On 5 April 2012 she married Wenshan Cai born 21 September 1985.  He  is
    also a Chinese citizen and at the time had Leave to Remain  as  a  work
    permit holder. On 17 August 2012 she applied to the  SSHD  for  further
    leave to remain as his wife. Their first child, a son, was born in  the
    United Kingdom in January 2013.

The Decision and Original Appeal

 3. On 21 August 2013 the SSHD refused the Applicant's application  on  the
    basis that her husband was in the  United  Kingdom  as  a  work  permit
    holder and she could only succeed as his partner if he was present  and
    settled in the United Kingdom.

 4. She could not succeed as the parent of her child because her child  was
    not a British citizen and had not lived in the United Kingdom for seven
    years.  Further, the Respondent refused the application under paragraph
    276ADE (private life) because the Appellant had not  been  resident  in
    the United Kingdom for sufficiently long.  The  SSHD  considered  there
    were no circumstances warranting consideration of the United  Kingdom's
    obligations under Article 8 of the European Convention.

 5. On 9 September 2013 the Applicant lodged notice of appeal under Section
    82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended.  The
    grounds set out her family circumstances and that her husband had leave
    as a work permit holder until 14 May 2014.  The grounds assert that  if
    the  Applicant  had  made  application  under  paragraph  194  of   the
    Immigration Rules and her son's  position  had  been  considered  under
    paragraphs 305-308, the applications  would  have  been  allowed.   The
    other grounds relate to the Applicant's claim based on Article 8 of the
    European Convention outside the Immigration Rules.

The First-tier Tribunal Determination

 6. By a determination promulgated on 27 May 2014 Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Archer, following an oral hearing at which both  parties  were
    both represented, the Applicant by Mr Lam,  dismissed  the  Appellant's
    appeal under the Immigration Rules and allowed it by way  of  reference
    to Article 8 of the European Convention.

 7. The SSHD sought permission to appeal on the basis that  the  Judge  had
    not considered the jurisprudence in Gulshan (Article 8 -  new  Rules  -
    correct approach) [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC).  On 13 June 2014 Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Fisher granted permission on the  ground  that  the
    Judge  had  failed  to  identify  the  compelling  circumstances  which
    warranted consideration of the Applicant's Article 8 claim outside  the
    Immigration Rules.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 8. At the start of the hearing Mr Lam produced a birth certificate of  the
    second son of the Applicant and her husband  born  in  July  2014.   Mr
    Bramble confirmed that on 28 April 2014 the  Applicant's  husband  had
    been granted indefinite leave to remain.  He noted that  subsequent  to
    the First-tier Tribunal's determination the Court of Appeal had  handed
    down judgment in R (oao MM (Lebanon) and Others) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ
    985.  He submitted that the SSHD would simply rely on the  grounds  for
    appeal.

 9. Following a discussion with the parties in chambers, I decided that the
    First-tier Tribunal's determination did not contain an error of law  of
    such materiality that the determination should be set aside.

10. I came to this conclusion because  the  Judge  made  findings  of  fact
    favourable to the Applicant.  He noted the Applicant's  pregnancy,  the
    delay of over a year between the date of  the  Applicant's  application
    and the decision under appeal  and  took  account  of  the  immigration
    status of the Applicant's husband and  their  first  child.  All  these
    matters in the context of the jurisprudence  to  which  I  refer  below
    amounted to sustainable reasons for  the  Judge's  conclusion  that  if
    further limited leave was not granted to the Applicant the State  would
    be in breach of its obligations to respect her private and family  life
    protected by Article 8 of the European Convention.

Article 8 Claim outside the Immigration Rules

11. MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] is acknowledged  to  be  a  current  leading
    judgment in the jurisprudence relating to Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention in English law.  It focuses on the application of Article  8
    both within the Immigration  Rules  and  outwith  the  Rules  in  cases
    involving  the  deportation  of  foreign  non-EEA  national  criminals.
    Paragraph 398 of the Rules which relates to deportation uses the phrase
    'exceptional circumstances'.  At paragraphs 39 and 40 the Master of the
    Rolls said:-

         (Counsel) has made it clear on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State
         that  the  new  Rules  do  not  herald   a   restoration   of   the
         exceptionality test.  We agree.  ...The Rules expressly contemplate
         a weighing of the public interest  in  deportation  against  'other
         factors'.  In our view, this must  be  a  reference  to  all  other
         factors which  are  relevant  to  proportionality  and  entails  an
         implicit requirement that they are to be taken into account.

         ...It is necessary to focus on the statement that it will  only  be
         'in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the   public   interest   in
         deportation will be outweighed by other factors'.  ...Great  weight
         should be  given  to  the  public  interest  in  deporting  foreign
         criminals....  It is only exceptionally that such foreign criminals
         will succeed in showing that their rights under Article 8(1)  trump
         the public interest in their deportation.

    At paragraph 41, the Master of the Rolls referred to the judgment in  R
    (Nagre v SSHD [2013]  EWHC  720  (Admin).   He  pointed  out  that  the
    significance of the cases cited in Nagre was in the repeated use by the
    European  Courts  of  Human   Rights   of   the   phrase   'exceptional
    circumstances'.

12. I take it he was referring to paragraph 40 of the  judgment  in  Nagre.
    With one exception each of the ECtHR cases in the  long  list  is  from
    jurisdictions other than the United  Kingdom  where  the  domestic  law
    within the margin of appreciation of
    contracting states may and in some cases does (for example  Norway  and
    Denmark) provide that the test for engaging  rights  protected  by  the
    European Convention is more stringent than the test  of  reasonableness
    established by Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL  11.  MF  (Nigeria)  makes  the
    point that in assessing the proportionality of a  deportation  decision
    it will only be in exceptional circumstances that the  public  interest
    will be outweighed by other factors.  But this  is  not  a  deportation
    case.

13. At paragraph 128 of R (oao MM and Others) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 985 in
    the leading judgment Aikens LJ in the course of a lengthy discussion of
    the relationship of the jurisprudence on Article 8 in  the  context  of
    the Immigration Rules and Strasbourg case-law said:-

        ....  Nagre does not add anything  to  the  debate,  save  for  the
        statement that if a particular person is outside the rule  then  he
        has to demonstrate, as a preliminary to a consideration outside the
        rule, that he has an arguable case that there may be  good  grounds
        for granting leave to remain outside the rules. I cannot  see  much
        utility in  imposing  this  further,  intermediary,  test.  If  the
        applicant cannot satisfy the rule, then there either is or there is
        not a further Article 8 claim.  .....

    and at paragraph 134:-

        ......  if the relevant group of IRs is not such a "complete  code"
        then the proportionality test will be more at large, albeit  guided
        by the Huang tests and UK and Strasbourg case law.

14. The test of exceptional circumstances is different  from  the  approach
    referred to in the Section of Chapter 8 of the Immigration  Directorate
    Instructions on family members dealing with Appendix FM.   Section  1.0
    Introduction provides:-

         This  guidance  reflects  the  two-stage  approach  to  considering
         applications under the family and private life Rules in Appendix FM
         and paragraph 276ADE-DH.  First, caseworkers must consider  whether
         the applicant meets the requirements of the Rules, and if they  do,
         leave under the rules should be granted.  If the applicant does not
         meet the requirements of the Rules, the caseworker must move on  to
         a second stage: whether, based on an overall consideration  of  the
         facts of the case, there are exceptional circumstances  which  mean
         refusal of the application  would  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh
         consequences for the individual or their family such  that  refusal
         would not be proportionate under Article  8.   If  there  are  such
         exceptional  circumstances,  leave  outside  the  Rules  should  be
         granted.  If not, the application should be refused.


         This two-stage approach has been endorsed by the High Court in  the
         Judicial Review in Nagre.  In the judgment Sales J finds  that  our
         regime of Rules coupled with the  Secretary  of  State's  published
         policy on  exceptional  circumstances  '...fully  accommodates  the
         requirements of Article 8' [paragraph 36]  and  '...there  is  full
         coverage of an individual's rights under Article 8 in all cases  by
         a combination of the new Rules and (so far  as  may  be  necessary)
         under the Secretary of State's residual discretion to  grant  leave
         to remain outside the Rules' [paragraph 35].  ...

    The test described in MF (Nigeria) is different  from  the  Immigration
    Directorate Instructions which is not part of the Rules: see paragraphs
    64 and 106 of the judgment in R (Alvi) v SSHD [2012] UKSC 33.

15. Further, at paragraph 54 of Patel and others v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72 Lord
    Carnwath approved the approach to Article 8 described in Huang and that
    the Rules are no more than the starting point for the consideration  of
    Article 8.

16. Indeed, the suggested logic that a test of exceptional circumstances or
    compassionate  factors  referred  to  in  the  Immigration  Directorate
    Instructions has  to  be  engaged  before  a  less  stringent  test  of
    "reasonableness" under Article 8 outside the Rules can  be  engaged  is
    difficult to follow.

17. The Judge found there were arguably good grounds  for  considering  the
    Applicant's position under Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules  for
    the reasons already mentioned at paragraph 10 above.  For  the  reasons
    just adumbrated there was no need for him to look for  any  exceptional
    circumstances. The determination did not contain an error of  law  such
    that it should be set aside.

18. The appeal was allowed on human rights grounds with a  suggestion  that
    leave should be at least until the  birth  of  the  Applicant's  second
    child.  The child has been born and in reviewing the position the  SSHD
    may now wish to have regard to the subsequent grant of indefinite leave
    to the Applicant's husband.

Anonymity

19. There was no request for any  direction  or  order  for  anonymity  and
    having considered the appeal I find there is no need for one.

DECISION

    The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error
    of law such that it should be set aside.  Accordingly, it shall stand.

    The appeal of the SSHD is dismissed with the effect that the appeal  of
    the Applicant is allowed.


Signed/Official                                                        Crest
Date 08. ix. 2014



Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

