
IAC-HW-MP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/36624/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 23rd February 2015                         |On 22nd April 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                             ABIDUR RAHMAN JUHEL
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Hudd, instructed by S Hirsch & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J Parkinson, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, said to be born  on  7th  May
    1983 and he claims to have entered the UK illegally in May 1998 and  to
    have remained in the UK since that  date.   On  3rd  February  2005  he
    submitted an SET(O) application for leave to remain in the  UK  outside
    the Immigration Rules and he made an application for  leave  to  remain
    further to Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human  Rights.   He
    appealed against the decision dated 20th August 2013 of the respondent,
    dated nearly eight years later, refusing the appellant's application.

 2. The appeal was first  dismissed  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  5th
    December 2013 but an error of law was found by Designated Judge  Zucker
    who remitted the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The matter came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lawrence  on  5th
    September 2014 and he too dismissed the appeal on 22nd September  2014.
    He noted that the appellant's representatives had made enquiries of the
    respondent to progress his application as early as 4th January 2007 and
    on  23rd  November  2010  the  respondent  issued  a  Case   Resolution
    Directorate  Form.   The  appellant's  representatives  contacted   the
    respondent four more times between 2011 and 2013 to chase the  progress
    of the matter.

 4. In essence the appellant's claim was that he lost his  parents  at  the
    age of 14 years in April 1998 in a house fire and he was brought to the
    United Kingdom by a family friend, namely Mr Razzak and he  lived  with
    someone by the name of Mr Ali and his wife Sabia Begum in Smethwick  in
    the West Midlands.  He claimed he also lived with Sabia Begum's mother,
    Mrs Nessa, who lived in Whitechapel.  He was not sent to school as  the
    family were worried that he might be brought to the  attention  of  the
    authorities and would be returned to Bangladesh.  However at the age of
    18 he was able to apply for documents in his own right without  awkward
    questions being asked as to who was the guardian and this is  what  the
    appellant  did.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lawrence  accepted  that
    documentary evidence only commenced in 2002 and the judge found he  had
    only been in the UK for eleven and a half years, not fourteen years, as
    required by paragraph 276B(i)(b) further to the  Immigration  Rules  as
    they were at the date of the respondent's decision.

 5. First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence noted that the  period  before  2002
    rested on oral evidence which he dealt with save that he failed to take
    into account the evidence of the third witness who appeared  at  court,
    Mohammed Hossein who had stated that "I have  known  Mr  Abidur  Rahman
    Juhel over ten years".  His evidence was that he had  known  him  since
    2000.

 6. It was also submitted that the judge considered the question  of  delay
    and EB (Kosovo) (FC) v SSHD [2009] 1 AC 115 but did  not  approach  the
    issue of delay, despite finding it quite extraordinary, with a view  to
    reducing the  weight  to  be  accorded  to  the  Secretary  of  State's
    position.  The judge approached this in the light of  "not  advantaging
    the appellant".  Further the judge failed  to  take  into  account  the
    enforcement instructions and guidance at  paragraph  53.1.1(iii)  which
    stated that delay of six years would constitute an  exceptional  factor
    and "where the length of delay by  the  Home  Office  in  deciding  the
    application ... [is] more than six years [this would  be  a  factor  in
    favour of a grant of leave]."

 7. I found an error of law  in  Judge  Lawrence's  determination,  not  in
    relation to the Immigration Rules but in relation to Article 8 only and
    the weight attributed  to  the  Secretary  of  State's  position.   The
    evidence given by Mr Hossein was merely that the appellant had  entered
    the UK in 2000 and therefore could not assist the appellant in terms of
    the Immigration Rules.

 8. The basic findings of fact by Judge Lawrence [9 to 23] were preserved.

 9. At paragraph 13 of Judge Lawrence's determination he reasoned that "the
    appellant claims that his family died in a  house  fire.   However  the
    accounts the appellant gave in  this  regard  is  contradictory".   The
    judge  found  that  there  was  a  contradiction  between  the  witness
    statement submitted by the appellant and his oral evidence  before  the
    judge.  He stated "there are differences in these two accounts  and  in
    my view they fundamentally affect the appellant's credibility"  and  he
    did not accept that the substance of  the  account  would  so  markedly
    change.

10. The judge did not consider that the differences in the account given in
    his statement and the one during cross-examination could be  blamed  on
    the appellant's previous solicitors as alleged by the appellant who had
    previously confirmed that the contents of his statement  were  correct.
    In effect the judge found that the first and  second  accounts  of  the
    house fire were false.

11. The judge went on to find further contradictions between  the  evidence
    given by Mr Mohammad Anam Ali and the  appellant  in  relation  to  the
    relatives in Bangladesh and found that "far from not having any contact
    with any of his relatives in Bangladesh the  appellant  has  relatives,
    distant may be, in Bangladesh and there is contact  between  them"  and
    further "the appellant 'seeks to paint  a  picture  of  destitution  in
    Bangladesh.  This has been fundamentally undermined by  Mr  M  A  Ali's
    evidence" (19).  The judge also recorded at paragraph 20 that there was
    a conflict in the evidence as to where the appellant lived.  Clearly in
    his oral evidence Mr M A Ali stated the appellant had moved  to  London
    in 2002 but noted that he was registered with  a  GP  practice  in  the
    Midlands in 2002 and that in the  2005  application  a  Smethwick  West
    Midlands address was given as his address.  When this was  put  to  the
    appellant and the witness Mr M A Ali, the  judge  recorded  "they  both
    individually changed their account and said the  appellant  moved  from
    the London address and the Smethwick address".

12. Nonetheless the judge found at paragraph 20 the  first  record  of  the
    appellant's presence in the UK was when he  registered  with  a  GP  in
    2002.  The judge clearly found that he did not enter the UK at the  age
    of 14 and that  the  evidence  that  a  school  refused  to  admit  the
    appellant was not credible.  The judge found the evidence of Mr M A Ali
    not to be a statement of truth (21).

13. At paragraph 23 the judge clearly found neither the appellant  nor  the
    witness Mr M A Ali to  be  truthful  witnesses  and  did  not  find  it
    possible that the appellant could be in the UK for four  years  without
    generating a single piece of documentary evidence.

14. At the hearing  before  me  the  appellant  stated  that  he  lived  in
    Whitechapel permanently from the start of 2013 and before the start  of
    2013 he lived in Smethwick in Birmingham.   He had stayed for three  to
    four weeks in London when he first arrived.  He confirmed that he  used
    the centre in Smethwick for Friday Prayers and he had done so since  he
    came to the UK.

15. Mr Anam Ali gave oral testimony and stated the appellant came  to  live
    with him in 1998 and stopped living with him in 2013.

16. Mr A Ali produced his passport which  confirmed  that  he  himself  had
    returned to Bangladesh in 2008, 2011, 2012 and  2014.   He  stated  his
    father was deceased and he was selling off the assets the  family  had.
    He confirmed his wife's full name was Sabia Begum.

17. Mr Sadique of 5 Ponler Street, London attended and gave oral  testimony
    and adopted his statement.  He confirmed the  appellant  came  to  live
    with him in 2013 and he had a close relationship with  him.   He  lived
    with him as he had nowhere  else  to  live.   Mr  M  Hossain,  who  had
    tendered a written statement, was his brother and he stated he saw  him
    every two to three weeks because he used to travel a lot to  Birmingham
    to visit family and friends.  He confirmed that he was  related  to  Mr
    Anam Ali.  Initially he stated that Mr Juhel was not related to Mr Anam
    Ali or to himself but then he retracted that statement.  The  appellant
    was related to Mr Anam Ali.  He confirmed that Nurum Nessa was his,  Mr
    Sadique's mother and she was the mother-in-law  of  Mr  M  A  Ali.   He
    confirmed that Mr Juhel, the appellant, lived in Smethwick from when he
    arrived to 2013.

18. It was put to Mr Sadique that  his  mother,  Nurum  Nessa,  had,  in  a
    written statement, confirmed that  the  appellant  had  left  the  West
    Midlands in 2002 and based himself in London to  2007  and  Mr  Sadique
    stated that must have been correct then as the appellant had  no  fixed
    address and therefore in fact he did not know where he lived.

19. Mr Parkinson challenged the nature of the  relationship.   The  witness
    stated he saw him in London but did not live with him.  He did not keep
    tracks on him.  He confirmed that Mr M A Ali was married to his sister.



20. Mr Parkinson made his  submissions  not  least  that  in  the  previous
    hearing neither the appellant nor Mr M A Ali were witnesses  of  truth.
    There were two very disparate accounts of where the appellant had  been
    living.  The witnesses were not credible.  He  accepted  the  appellant
    would have a private life having lived in the UK since 2002 but it  was
    difficult to assess the nature of the private life he had  established.
    He claimed that he had been in the UK since 1998 but  this  begged  the
    question  as  to  why  his  character  reference  from  the  Bangladesh
    Community Centre was not phrased to establish that point.  The question
    was taking account of the delay  of  eight  years  without  a  decision
    whether that was sufficient to reduce the weight to be accorded to  the
    Secretary of State's decision.  This did not  portray  a  dysfunctional
    system and in any event it was not determinative.  He accepted that the
    weight may be reduced but I was referred to paragraph 32 of EB (Kosovo)
    v SSHD [2008] UKHL 41.  The legitimate aim should carry  great  weight.
    The delay in this case was not such as to weight the  balance  to  make
    the interference disproportionate.  It was necessary  to  evaluate  the
    extent of the social ties in relation to the appellant's private life.

21. Mr Hudd referred me to the series of witness statements and submissions
    made in the bundle.  It was wholly illogical to suggest  that  a  human
    had not formed a degree of private life if they had been in the UK  for
    thirteen years.  The appellant had waited for a decision for eight  and
    a half years and ten years to the present day.  He had not absconded or
    gone under the radar, the Home Office had not  produced  one  piece  of
    evidence to explain the delay.  Eight and a half  years  was  excessive
    and Judge Lawrence found the delay extraordinary.   The  appellant  was
    living predominantly in Smethwick and occasionally in London.

22. Further to EB (Kosovo) the delay was important and capable of forming a
    highly relevant factor when looking at the proportionality balance.  It
    was simply not credible to  argue  that  there  should  be  significant
    weight attributed to the immigration control.

23. In addition the Enforcement Instructions should be considered and  this
    was an issue that should be taken into account.

Conclusions

24. The decision was set to be remade in respect of Article 8 only.

25. Having applied the immigration rules, Singh v SSHD [2015] EWCA  Civ  74
    confirmed, at [64], the basic point that there is no need to conduct  a
    full separate examination of article 8 outside the Rules where, in  the
    circumstances of a particular case, all the issues have been  addressed
    in the consideration under the Rules.  The Rules do  not,  to  my  mind
    cover all the points relevant in this case, not least the delay, and  I
    therefore turn directly to Razgar v SSHD UKHL 27  which  sets  out  the
    questions to be asked in relation to an Article 8 assessment.

          1.  Will  the  proposed  removal  be  interference  by  a  public
             authority with  the  exercise  of  the  applicant's  right  to
             respect for his private or family life?

          2. If so,  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such
             gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

          3. If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

          4. If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic  society
             in the interests of national security, public  safety  or  the
             economic wellbeing of  the  country,  for  the  prevention  of
             disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals,  or
             for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others?

          5. If so, is such interference proportionate  to  the  legitimate
             public end sought to be achieved?

26. I accept that the appellant must have established a private life as  it
    is accepted that he has been here since 2002.   This  was  the  finding
    made by Judge Lawrence. At the hearing Mr  M  A  Ali  stated  that  the
    appellant had lived with him from 1998 until 2013 when he went to  live
    in London.  By way of contrast Mr M A Sadique stated with reference  to
    his mother's, Mrs Nurum Nessa's witness statement,  in  which  she  had
    stated that the appellant had moved to London  between  2002  and  2007
    that that must be correct.  I therefore find that neither is a reliable
    witness.  In turn this undermines the claimed strength of the ties  and
    therefore private life with those witnesses.

27. The appellant stated at paragraph 5 of his witness statement

         "I submit that my friendships with Mr  Mohammed  Anam  Ali  and  Mr
         Mohammed Abdus Sadique and Mr  Kabir  Hossain  in  particular  most
         clearly define my  life  in  the  UK  and  they  together  with  my
         commitment to the Bangladesh Islamic Association/Centre provide  me
         with a huge sense of community support".

28. The appellant no longer lived with Mr M A Ali and he did not appear  to
    realise that the appellant had in fact lived for five years in  London,
    as claimed by Mr Sadique's mother, and Mr Abdus Sadique  did  not  know
    that until it was pointed out that in his  mother's  witness  statement
    that he had in fact lived in London during 2002 to  2007.   He  however
    confirmed that her statement must be true.  This leads  me  to  believe
    that the appellant does not have the very close relationship with those
    witnesses as  claimed by the appellant and those attending court on his
    behalf.

29. I took into account the statement of Mr Mohammed  Kabir  Hossain  whose
    own witness statement was that "I have known him since the year 2000 if
    not earlier".  First this witness does not appear to know exactly  when
    the appellant did come to the UK and when he did start to know him  and
    secondly he states that there was a "very close  relationship  with  Mr
    Mohammed Anam Ali".

30. As Mr Hossain states at paragraph 4 of his witness statement

         "... it is very difficult for Mr Juhel to rely on  others  just  to
         meet his daily needs and he clearly does his best to avoid this.  I
         know that the work he does provides  him  with  much  needed  self-
         esteem and makes him feel worthy even if it  only  enables  him  to
         afford the most basic of necessities at least he is not reliant  on
         anyone".

31. Although Mr Kabir Hossain stated that he lived with the appellant,  the
    evidence was from Mr Sadique that he has only done so  since  2013  and
    nonetheless Mr  Hossain  has  made  it  clear  that  the  appellant  is
    financially independent and relies on other forms of support.

32. Therefore, taking the above into consideration,  I  conclude  that  the
    appellant has engaged some form of private life but the strength of the
    relationships claimed and thus the private life is  not  as  strong  as
    claimed.  I take into account the numerous letters of support  but  the
    oral evidence from the witnesses who claimed to know the appellant best
    was contradictory and  in  turn  undermined  the  letters  of  support.
    However, further to AG (Eritrea) [2007] EWCA civ 801 the threshold  for
    any interference is low.

33. I find that the respondent has made a decision in accordance  with  the
    law, not least that the appellant could not comply with the Immigration
    Rules. (Indeed that is taking the claim at its  highest  because  Singh
    makes clear that following the introduction of A277B and A277C  of  the
    Immigration Rules by HC565, where  the  appellant  does  not  meet  the
    requirements for indefinite leave to  remain,  the  application  should
    also  be  decided  following  paragraph  276ADE  accordance  with   the
    principle in Odelola and that HC 565 applies to  pending  applications.
    Nonetheless this appeal was being decided in relation to Article 8 only
    as identified above).  I was referred to the Home  Office  guidance  in
    relation  to  extenuating   circumstances,   Chapter   53   Enforcement
    Instructions and Guidance.  This states "it is the policy of  the  Home
    Office to remove illegal migrants from the  United  Kingdom  unless  it
    would be a breach of the  Refugee  Convention  or  ECHR  or  there  are
    exceptional circumstances for not doing  so  in  an  individual  case".
    Paragraph 53(1) sets out when to consider exceptional circumstances but
    the guidance also makes the point that the relevant factors need to  be
    taken as a whole rather than  individually.   One  of  the  factors  at
    53(1)(iii) is the length of time in the UK accrued for  reasons  beyond
    the migrant's control after their human rights or asylum claim has been
    submitted or refused.  It is clear that the  refusal  letter  from  the
    respondent took into account the delay and pointed out that chapter  53
    states that the discretion would not be exercised on the basis  of  one
    factor alone.  It was  accepted  that  in  the  eight  years  since  he
    submitted his application he could reasonably  have  been  expected  to
    develop ties in the UK but this went on to  state  that  "the  evidence
    which you have submitted is confused and contradictory in terms of your
    place of residence and this casts doubt on your claims relating to your
    private and family life in the UK".

34. I am not persuaded that the situation has changed from this description
    and from my findings above it is clear that the appellant's evidence in
    relation to where  and  when  he  was  living  remained  contradictory.
    Nonetheless the factor of delay was taken into  account  and  is  taken
    into account in my decision.

35. That said I find that the  decision  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
    removal was made in accordance with the law.  I  shall  return  to  the
    enforcement instructions below in the assessment of proportionality.

36. I will note here that the considerations under paragraph 395C and  353B
    were dealt with by Judge Lawrence in his decision and this  appeal  was
    confined to a consideration of Article 8 only.  Indeed it was found  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Zucker that the judge  was  not  required  to
    look at paragraph 395C.  That said,  albeit  that  the  guidance  notes
    referred to above are to be considered  in  the  context  of  paragraph
    353B, the guidance does not mean that delay was not a  relevant  factor
    for the judge to consider in the wider aspects of Article 8  and  I  do
    so.

37. Any such interference in the appellant's private life must be necessary
    in a democratic society in the interests of national  security,  public
    safety or the economic wellbeing of the country, for the prevention  of
    disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals  or  for  the
    protection of the rights and freedoms of others.   Further  to  Shahzad
    (Art 8: legitimate aim) [2014] UKUT 00085 (IAC) I can accept  that  the
    removal of the appellant is  for  a  legitimate  aim,  that  being  the
    protection of the rights and freedoms of others through the maintenance
    of immigration control and for the economic wellbeing of the country.

38. I turn to the key question in this and that is one  of  proportionality
    and whether the decision is disproportionate.

39. The appellant arrived in the UK, it has been established, in  2002  and
    thus I do not accept that he was a minor when he entered the UK.  It is
    accepted that he cannot explain that he entered the UK lawfully and has
    remained in the UK illegally.  The key question to be asked is that  in
    Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11,  taking  into  account  all  the  relevant
    factors is the  interference  with  the  appellant's  private  life  is
    proportionate to the legitimate ends sought to be achieved?

40. I have identified that the appellant claims that he is involved in  the
    Bangladesh Centre but it is  clear  from  the  evidence  given  by  the
    witnesses who appeared at court that they did not  have  a  very  clear
    understanding of where he lived over the years and further to MM  (Tier
    1 PSW Article 8  "private  life")  Zimbabwe  [2009]  UKAIT  00037  when
    determining the issue of proportionality it will always be important to
    evaluate the extent of the individual's social ties  and  relationships
    in the UK.

41. The appellant can have had no expectation of a right to remain  in  the
    UK, certainly up until the time he made his application  for  leave  to
    remain in 2005.  As stated in MM, private life  claims  are  likely  to
    advance a less cogent basis for  outweighing  the  public  interest  in
    proper and effective immigration  control  than  are  claims  based  on
    family life.  Although the appellant claimed to live  with  Mr  Sadique
    and Mr  Hossain  there  was  no  suggestion  that  he  was  financially
    dependent upon them and indeed  the  evidence  submitted  was  that  he
    worked in a restaurant to  support  himself.   The  appellant  has  not
    engaged in a particular business or invested in property or married  or
    formed a relationship or have children.

42. In EB (Kosovo) [2009] IAC 115 the House of Lords held that delay may be
    relevant in three ways.

         "(i)     the asylum seeker might during the  period  of  any  delay
             develop closer personal and social ties and established deeper
             roots in the community than he could have shown earlier.   The
             longer the period of the delay, the likelier that  was  to  be
             true.  To that extent that it was true, a claim under  article
             8 would necessarily strengthened;

         (ii)     the second way was less  obvious.   An  immigrant  without
             leave to enter or remain was in a very  precarious  situation,
             liable to be removed at any time. A  relationship  so  entered
             into may well be imbued with a sense of impermanence,  but  if
             months passed without a decision to  remove  being  made,  and
             months became years, it was to be expected that that sense  of
             impermanence would fade and the expectation would grow that if
             the authorities had intended to remove the applicant (i.e. the
             Secretary of State) would have taken steps to do so;

         (iii)    thirdly, when considering the proportionality of  removal,
             delay might be relevant in reducing the weight otherwise to be
             accorded to the requirements  of  firm  and  fair  immigration
             control if  the  delay  was  shown  to  be  the  result  of  a
             dysfunctional system that yielded unpredictable,  inconsistent
             and unfair outcomes ..."

43. It should be stated at the outset that albeit that there was a delay on
    the part of the respondent of eight years, which could be construed  as
    excessive, delay is not a determinative factor.

44. It is perfectly clear that the appellant has  developed  closer  social
    ties but that said he has always known that he was liable to be removed
    at any time.  It could also be expected that a  sense  of  impermanence
    would fade and it is clear that an argument could be made  that  if  it
    was so important and of such necessity for the legitimate aim that  the
    authorities would have taken steps to remove  the  appellant  prior  to
    eight years.  I do note that in EB Kosovo the second factor in relation
    to the fading of impermanence was considered in the light of forming  a
    family life but I accept that this could too apply to private life.

45. The third and important question is whether the delay might be relevant
    in reducing the weight otherwise to be accorded to the requirements  of
    firm and fair immigration control if the delay  was  shown  to  be  the
    result of a dysfunctional system. In EB Kosovo it  was  noted  in  that
    case that the appellant's cousin had entered the country an applied for
    asylum at the  same  time  and  whose  position  was  not  said  to  be
    materially different was granted exceptional leave to remain during the
    two year period which it took the respondent to  correct  an  erroneous
    decision to refuses the appellant's  application  on  grounds  of  non-
    compliance.  Similarly in the case of JL Sierra Leone  hearing  by  the
    Court of Appeal there was a similar pattern of whereby  an  appellant's
    half brother was given leave in similar circumstances and the appellant
    was so.  As stated in EB Kosovo "a system so operating cannot  be  said
    to be predictable consistent and fair  as  between  one  applicant  and
    another" or as yielding "consistency of treatment between one  aspiring
    immigrant and another" and "To the extent that this is shown to be  so,
    it may have a bearing on the proportionality of removal".

46. The appellant in his witness statement set out that he had remained  in
    the UK waiting for a decision during the prime years of his  life  from
    the ages of 21 � to 30 years.   He referred to  the  correspondence  to
    the Home Office on 4th January 2007 reminding of the application of 1st
    February 2005 and he stated this showed that the Home Office were asked
    for permission for him to work but did not act on this, in  effect,  to
    prevent him from working.  The fact is that  the  appellant  'requested
    permission to work' which is not the same  as  actually  informing  the
    respondent that the appellant was working.  Further chasing letters  to
    the respondent were sent on 23rd February 2010, 7th May  5th  June  and
    13th June 2013.  Finally a method of entry questionnaire  was  sent  to
    the appellant on 24th June 2013.  The response to the delay by the Home
    Office was that it was 'deeply regrettable'.

47. Even if I find that the delay was excessive  and  was  a  result  of  a
    dysfunctional system that yielded unpredictable inconsistent and unfair
    outcomes, it is still only one factor which is capable of reducing  the
    weight to be accorded to the Secretary of State's case.  Indeed further
    to Akaeke v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 947 even if it is accepted that  there
    is unreasonable delay on the part of the Secretary of State is  capable
    of being a relevant factor then the weight to be given  to  it  in  the
    particular case is a matter for the Tribunal.

48. As Mr Parkinson submitted the extent of the  appellant's  private  life
    was not underlined by the witnesses who did not seem to know where  the
    appellant lived for stretches of time.  It does  not  appear  that  the
    appellant has established a very strong private life.

49. I have also considered the factor  that  enforcement  instructions  and
    guidance invite that the length of delay by the Home Office in deciding
    the application  or  where  there  factors  preventing  departure,  the
    caseworker following  an  individual  assessment  of  the  prospect  of
    enforcing removal and where the factors  outlined  in  "character"  and
    "compliance" do not weigh against the individual,  concludes  that  the
    person will have been in the UK for more than six years.

50. I take these into account and note that the appellant does not  have  a
    previous criminal record and that he has worked (albeit  illegally)  in
    the United Kingdom. Bearing in mind the conflict in the evidence as  to
    his living arrangements and the  lack  of  specific  reference  to  the
    appellant's  length  of  time  in  the  UK,  in  the  letter  from  the
    Bangladeshi Islamic Association Centre, dated 18th October 2013,  I  do
    not find  that  there  is  demonstrated  an  entrenched  tie  with  any
    particular organisation or that the appellant would be  precluded  from
    joining such an organisation in Bangladesh. This letter from the Centre
    merely stated that the author had known him 'for many years' and he was
    a 'user of' the centre.

51.  I  return  to  the  enforcement  instructions  and  note  that   those
    instructions simply state that where there has been  significant  delay
    not  attributable  to  the  migrant  the   respondent   should   merely
    ''consider' the fact.   Although the reference to six  years  delay  is
    given in an example, due  weight  should  still   be  accorded  to  the
    relevant factors and the cases should be considered on a case  by  case
    basis.  However, I find that the weight to be accorded to the Secretary
    of State's position is weakened by the delay and the failure to respond
    to follow  up  requests,  and  I  take  into  account  the  Enforcement
    Instructions and thus I accord reduced weight to the  position  of  the
    Secretary of State in effecting immigration control.

52. The appellant has spent, by the date of the hearing, over 13  years  in
    the United Kingdom but I must also assess the weight to be accorded  to
    the Appellant's Article 8 case and I must  take  into  account  further
    factors to assess the strength of the appellant's private  life.   This
    appeal is now, post July 2014,  to  be  decided  within  the  framework
    Section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  and  I
    must have regard when deciding questions of public interest to  Section
    117B of the same.  The Tribunal cannot just rely on the  listed  public
    interest factors as a basis for rejecting a claim but must carry out  a
    balancing exercise where a person's circumstances engage  article  8(1)
    to decide whether the proposed interference is proportionate in all the
    circumstances. I set out  the  relevant  aspects  of  Section  117  for
    clarity.

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
         cases

            (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in
            the public interest.

            (2)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
            interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,
            that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
            are able to speak English, because persons who can speak
            English-

                (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                (b) are better able to integrate into society.

            (3)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
            interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,
            that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
            are financially independent, because such persons-

                (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                (b) are better able to integrate into society.

            (4)  Little weight should be given to-

                (a) a private life, or

                (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

                that is established by a person at a time when the person is
                in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

            (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life
            established by a person at a time when the person's immigration
            status is precarious.

53. According to Section 117B little  weight  should  be  accorded  to  the
    appellant's private life on  two  counts.   First  that  the  appellant
    entered the UK unlawfully and secondly little weight should be accorded
    to  the  appellant's  private  life  when  he  has  had  a   precarious
    immigration status. Even though I accept that the  Secretary  of  State
    was 'chased' for a decision and delay ensued, the appellant had  always
    known that his status was unlawful and precarious. I  accept  that  the
    appellant must be able to speak some English as he has been in  the  UK
    since 2002.  I note that the appellant claims that he has been  working
    and been financially independent.

54. Not only has  the  appellant  always  known  that  he  entered  the  UK
    unlawfully and that it has been found that he did not enter the UK as a
    minor.  He was found to have entered in 2002 and did not make  a  claim
    until 2005.  Throughout this period and the  period  of  delay  he  has
    known that he has been in the UK  on  a  precarious  and  risky  basis.
    Despite the second point regarding delay in EB Kosovo the very fact  of
    his solicitors chasing the respondent indicates that he remained  fully
    aware of the instability of his position and  that  he  was  unable  to
    work.

55. Despite his distant family relatives,  I  did  not  consider  that  the
    appellant showed any actual family life in the United Kingdom  or  that
    he had displayed ties beyond the normal emotional ties one  might  have
    with cousins.  There was no  indication  of  financial  dependence  and
    although the appellant claimed he lived with his cousin the history  of
    his accommodation and  relationships,  on  review  of  the  letters  of
    support provided, did not indicate that  the  appellant  had  forged  a
    particular bond with any one person. His  witness  statement  confirmed
    that he had worked in the Indian Restaurant Industry both as  a  waiter
    and kitchen porter (albeit unlawfully) in order to sustain himself.

56. I accord therefore when  assessing  his  private  life  overall  little
    weight to that life established whilst in the UK.

57. I also turn to a consideration of what might be his ties in  Bangladesh
    particularly as submissions had been made in respect of his ties there.
     A rounded assessment should be made with respect  to  his  ties.   The
    appellant claimed that he had no relatives in Bangladesh.  That is  not
    correct.  It is clear that Mr M A  Ali  has  visited  Bangladesh  on  a
    number of occasions in the last five years and he himself  stated  that
    he had relations in Bangladesh.  In his evidence to Judge Lawrence Mr M
    A Ali stated that he had other relatives in Bangladesh and  as  Mr  Ali
    and the appellant are related and as  was  confirmed  in  the  evidence
    before me, I find that the appellant too has relatives and contacts  in
    Bangladesh  with  whom  he  can  reconnect.  Mr  Ali  has  returned  to
    Bangladesh on  numerous  occasions  and  clearly  retains  contact.   I
    conclude that the appellant therefore  also  retains  contact.  He  can
    speak the language and it was not accepted that there were any  reasons
    why he would fear a return to Bangladesh.

58. Further to Huang v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2007]
    UKHL 11, taking full account of all considerations, the length  of  the
    appellant's stay in the  UK,  the  connections  with  friends  and  the
    reduced weight accorded to the respondent's position I am not persuaded
    that any family life  of  the  claimant  was  prejudiced  in  a  manner
    sufficiently serious to amount to a breach  of  the  fundamental  right
    protected by Article 8. I also considered the factors as they relate to
    the private life of the appellant as described above.   It  was  argued
    that nothing in Section 117 B displaces the factors in  EB  Kosovo  but
    that case still refers to the proportionality exercise and a  reduction
    in weight and does not rule that delay is a  deciding  factor.  I  have
    also considered whether the appellant has been prejudiced by the  delay
    in that he is now 'caught' by Section 117 but the factors  spelled  out
    are factors which have always been issues to take into  account  it  is
    merely that their consideration is now mandatory.

59. Simply is the decision proportionate?  I take into account  the  length
    of time the appellant has  spent  in  the  UK  and  the  delay  by  the
    Secretary of State who took eight years to make a decision but in  view
    of my findings above on the strength of the appellant's case,  and  the
    application of  Section  117B,  I  am  persuaded  that  even  with  the
    substantial reduction  in  weight  accorded  to  the  position  of  the
    respondent, that the Secretary of State has shown that the decision  is
    proportionate. I therefore dismiss the claim with respect to Article 8.

Order

Appeal dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed      Date 21st April 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was payable and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed      Date 21st April 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
