
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/36902/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 August 2015                    |On 23 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before


                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                        KIRTANKUMAR THAKORBHAI PATEL
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Rai, Counsel (Direct Access)
For the Respondent:    Miss A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of India born on 3 August  1980  and  on  14
    June 2014 he made a combined application for leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant under the  points-
    based system (PBS) and that application was refused by the Secretary of
    State on 5 September 2014 on the basis that he had failed to provide  a
    CAS reference number with his application, contrary to Paragraph  245ZX
    (c) with reference to Paragraph 115A of Appendix A and Paragraph  245ZX
    (d) of the Immigration Rules.  The Secretary of State was not satisfied
    that he had a valid Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies.

 2. The application was determined on the  papers  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Hanes on 12 January 2015 and Judge  Hanes  dismissed  the  appeal
    both under the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

 3. An application for permission to appeal was made on the basis  that  it
    was argued that the judge had not considered whether there would  be  a
    breach in the light of the Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27  criteria.

 4. Application for permission to appeal was granted by P J M  Hollingworth
    as the judge had applied Gulshan v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2013] UKUT 00640 and not considered Razgar.

 5. Before me, Mr Rai argued that the statement of grounds in the notice of
    appeal submitted by the solicitors to the First-tier Tribunal  referred
    to difficulties that the appellant had had with taking an English  test
    and therefore supplying a valid CAS.  There was no assertion  that  the
    appellant could have complied with the Immigration  Rules  and  it  was
    accepted that he could not do so because of  a  failure  to  provide  a
    valid CAS.

 6. Despite reference in the grounds of appeal to  an  email  referring  to
    difficulties with the English test there was no confirmation  that  the
    email referred to was attached to the statement of grounds.  There  was
    no reference to an email within the decision. The statement of grounds,
    accompanying the notice of appeal and before  the  judge,  spelled  out
    that he needed his passport to sit the exams but could not do so as  he
    could not provide the passport.  In essence the appellant accepted that
    he could not provide a valid CAS and thus his application was bound  to
    fail under the Rules.

 7. The appellant, however,  also stated in his notice of appeal:

         "I have spent all the money available to me on my studies.  I  took
         huge amounts of loans from people I knew back in India to enable me
         to complete my education in the UK".

 8. I am not persuaded there is any error of law in this decision.

 9. It is clear that the appellant could not comply  with  the  Immigration
    Rules and it was also clear that he has no family life in  the  UK  and
    the judge so records at paragraph  9.   I  note  the  judge  does  make
    reference to Gulshan v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2013] UKUT 00640 and considered  whether  there  were  any  compelling
    circumstances and ultimately found that there  were  no  arguably  good
    grounds for granting leave to remain outside the Rules but he did go on
    to also consider Nasim and Others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 25 (IAC)  and
    Patel and Others v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2013]
    UKSC 72.  The judge identified that  those  cases  served  to  re-focus
    attention on the nature and purpose of article 8 and to  recognise  its
    limited utility in private life cases that are  far  removed  from  the
    protection of an individual's moral and physical integrity.

10. There was understanding by the judge that the appellant had entered the
    UK on 15 September 2009 at the age of nearly 30 years old.   There  was
    no indication of any family life and as indicated in  Nasim  and  Patel
    and as recorded at paragraph 10 by the judge

         "It was stated  that  the  education  is  not  in  itself  a  right
         protected under Article  8.    A  person's  human  rights  are  not
         enhanced by not committing criminal  offences  or  not  relying  on
         public funds."

11. A further recitation of Patel reads as follows

         "57  It is important to remember that article 8 is  not  a  general
         dispensing power. It is to be distinguished from the  Secretary  of
         State's discretion to allow leave  to  remain  outside  the  rules,
         which may be unrelated to any protected human right. The merits  of
         a decision not to depart from  the  rules  are  not  reviewable  on
         appeal: section 86(6). One may sympathise with Sedley LJ's call  in
         Pankina for "common sense" in  the  application  of  the  rules  to
         graduates who have been studying in the UK for some years (see para
         47 above).  However,  such  considerations  do  not  by  themselves
         provide grounds of appeal under article 8, which is concerned  with
         private or family life, not education as such. The opportunity  for
         a promising student to complete his course in this country, however
         desirable in general terms, is not  in  itself  a  right  protected
         under article 8."

12. At paragraph 62 of Singh v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 74  in the approach  to
    Article 8 it was asserted that

         'But what matters is that there is nothing in Aikens  LJ's  comment
         which casts doubt on Sales J's basic point that there is no need to
         conduct a full separate examination of article 8 outside the  Rules
         where, in the circumstances of a particular case,  all  the  issues
         have been addressed in the consideration under the Rules.

13. In the overall circumstances of this appeal I  am  not  persuaded  that
    there was any information put before the judge save for  that  included
    in the statement of grounds and  no  information  with  regard  to  any
    family life or any further considerations to  take  into  account  save
    that the appellant had expended a great deal of money. In  other  words
    there were no factors which had not been  taken  into  account  by  the
    respondent such that further consideration indicated an  engagement  of
    Article 8. Thus the judge cannot be criticised with respect to his  use
    of Gulshan.  There was no material error of law.

14. Whilst sympathy must be afforded to the appellant if he has  failed  to
    complete his educational studies it was open to him to obtain his  ESOL
    results before his visa expired which he did not and he has not  placed
    any evidence of any persuasive circumstances such that  the  protection
    of his "individual moral and physical integrity" is  affected  in  this
    case.

15. I find no material error of law and the decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

