
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA364052014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 June 2016                                |On 14 June 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                jeU (nigeria)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the claimant's appeal on Article  8
    grounds under the Rules and also outside the Rules against the decision
    of the Secretary of State to remove him as an overstayer under  Section
    10 of the Immigration and Asylum  Act  1999,  his  human  rights  claim
    having been refused.  The First-tier Tribunal has not made an anonymity
    direction. However, as the central focus of this appeal is  the  impact
    on the claimant's children of  removing  them  with  their  parents,  I
    consider that it is appropriate to  make  an  anonymity  direction  for
    these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

The Reasons for Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 9 May 2016 Judge Baker gave his reasons for granting  the  Secretary
    of State permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal:

         3.   The grounds have merit in asserting  that  the  FtTJ  made  an
             arguable material error of law in assessing the best interests
             of the appellant's eldest child born in 2006 in the  UK.   The
             decision does not address any background material submitted to
             support the appellant's assertions  that  the  Downs  Syndrome
             Foundation Nigeria would not be able to assist, referred to in
             paragraph 40 of the decision and reasons.

         4.   As asserted at paragraph 41 the FtTJ relies on statements made
             in oral evidence as to the father in law  engaging  in  ritual
             practices  as  a  cause  for  fear  of  non  integration   and
             difficulties for the child, as set out in paragraph 52.

         5.   Similarly, paragraphs 54  and  55  arguable  contain  material
             errors in the assessment of integration of the younger 4  year
             old child into Nigeria, suffering from autism.  It is arguable
             there were material errors  in  reliance  on  the  appellant's
             unsupported evidence, with reference to,  for  example,  there
             being no guarantee of getting the children into an educational
             system tailored to their respective special needs.

Relevant Background

 3. The relevant  background  is  succinctly  summarised  in  the  skeleton
    argument relied on by Mr Al-Rashid of  Counsel  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The claimant is a national of Nigeria.  He last entered  the
    United Kingdom lawfully as a visitor in November  2005.   His  wife  is
    also a Nigerian national, and  she  last  entered  the  United  Kingdom
    lawfully as a visitor in the same year.  On [ ]  2006,  the  claimant's
    wife gave birth to their first son, DOU.  He was diagnosed  with  Downs
    Syndrome.  As a  consequence  of  this  (Mr  Al-Rashid  submitted)  the
    parents overstayed their respective visas.  On [ ] 2010 the  claimant's
    wife gave birth to a second son, DGU, who has since been diagnosed with
    autism.  Both children were described  as  children  with  "significant
    special  needs"  by  Consultant  Paediatrician,   Dr   Hutchins.    The
    claimant's wife gave birth to a third child on 15 January 2013.

 4. The claimant is first recorded  as  having  sought  to  regularise  his
    immigration status on 6 November 2009, when he  applied  for  leave  to
    remain on Article 8 grounds.  The application was refused on  19  April
    2010.  The claimant made a second application on 9  March  2013,  which
    was refused on 13 June 2013.

 5. David Grand, a non-practising barrister, made  further  representations
    on behalf of the claimant and his family members in May 2014, which led
    to the Secretary of State giving reasons for removing the claimant  and
    his dependants in a  letter  dated  8  September  2014.   Although  the
    claimant was served with an IS.151B notice, giving  him  an  in-country
    right of  appeal,  the  other  family  members  were  not  issued  with
    appealable immigration decisions.  So, as was acknowledged by Mr  Grand
    in subsequent correspondence with the Home  Office,  the  other  family
    members have no independent right of appeal.

 6. In the refusal letter  directed  to  the  claimant,  the  Secretary  of
    State's case was that he could not invoke EX.1 as he did not  meet  the
    required eligibility criteria under Appendix FM as either a partner  or
    parent.  His child DOU had been assessed under  Rule  276ADE.   He  had
    been born in the United Kingdom on 6 May 2006.  He had  not  spent  his
    formative years in the United Kingdom, which were from the age of 7  to
    14 years, in order for leave to remain to be granted  on  private  life
    grounds, and it was not accepted that the removal of  DOU  would  cause
    exceptional disruption to his life.  The second child, DGU, was born in
    the United Kingdom on 1 September 2010.  So he had only  been  resident
    in the United Kingdom for three years, which is  less  than  the  seven
    years required under Rule 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Rules in order  for  LTR
    to be granted on the grounds of private life.

 7. In the representations made in May 2014, it was claimed that it was  in
    the best interests for the children to stay in the  United  Kingdom  as
    unnecessary removal might negatively impact  upon  their  psychological
    and moral integrity.  But the claimant had endeavoured to meet all  the
    needs of his children while he had been living in the UK, and he  would
    continue to be able to do so in Nigeria.   It  is  a  generally  agreed
    principle that children should grow up  within  their  own  family  and
    their own cultural identity, wherever possible.  The children had  only
    spent a few years within the British education  system,  and  therefore
    they were not fully integrated within it.  Furthermore, they  were  not
    at a critical stage  of  their  schooling  and  any  changes  to  their
    education would not have a detrimental  effect  on  their  development.
    The quality of education in Nigeria might not be to the  same  standard
    as what it was in  the  United  Kingdom,  but  that  alone  was  not  a
    sufficient factor to justify allowing them to remain in  this  country.
    The claimant had no legitimate expectation of family life continuing in
    the United Kingdom indefinitely and for his two children to be educated
    here.

 8. Careful consideration had been given to the claim that  DOU  had  Downs
    Syndrome.  The claimant had previously submitted a letter issued on  19
    December 2012 from Ealing Hospital NHS Trust.  This stated  that  Downs
    Syndrome is a permanent condition and  there  is  no  cure.   The  same
    letter stated that DOU had no medical illnesses or needs as a result of
    his Downs Syndrome, and so he would not be at risk medically if he  was
    to live in a different country.

 9. In a further letter dated 4 July 2013,  the  same  hospital  said  they
    suspected that the equipment required for the  child's  Downs  Syndrome
    would not be readily available in Nigeria.  This was not accepted.  The
    Downs Syndrome Foundation [of] Nigeria was a charity which was  set  up
    in 2001 to help people with Downs Syndrome in  Nigeria.   This  charity
    would help the claimant's child with the equipment that he  needed  for
    his Downs Syndrome.

10. Consideration had also been given as to whether there were  exceptional
    circumstances warranting a grant of leave to remain.  The claimant  had
    not held any leave to remain since his visit visa  expired  on  5  July
    2005.  He was in the UK unlawfully, and  had  remained  here  illegally
    while  failing  to  regularise  his  stay  here.   Taking   all   known
    information into consideration, it was not accepted that there would be
    any circumstances beyond the claimant's control that would prevent  him
    and his family from returning to Nigeria.

The Hearing before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

11. The claimant's appeal came before Judge Haria sitting at  Hatton  Cross
    on 27 April 2015.  There was no appearance on behalf of  the  Secretary
    of State.  As previously indicated, Mr Al-Rashid of Counsel appeared on
    behalf of the claimant, instructed by David Grant.

12. In his skeleton argument, Counsel submitted that the assessment in  the
    refusal letter in respect of DOU was  legally  flawed.   There  was  no
    consideration of  his  health  condition  in  the  assessment  of  Rule
    276ADE(1)(iv), and there was a failure to recognised  that  DOU  was  a
    qualifying child under Section 117D of  the  2002  Act.   He  cited  EM
    (Zimbabwe) [2011] UKUT 98 for the proposition that, in the  absence  of
    countervailing factors, residence over seven  years  of  children  well
    integrated into the educational system in the UK was an indicator  that
    the welfare of the child favoured regularisation of the status  of  the
    mother  and  children.   On  the  evidence,  the   claimant   met   the
    requirements of EX.1 and therefore the claimant was entitled to succeed
    under the Rules.

13. As DOU was a qualifying  child  under  Section  117D,  Section  117B(6)
    applied to the claimant, and there was thus no public interest  in  his
    removal.

14. In respect of DOU's private life, reliance was placed upon his  medical
    condition and the decision of the UT in GS & EA  (Article  3  -  health
    cases) [2012] UKUT 00397 and in Akhalu (Health claim:  ECHR Article  8)
    [2013] UKUT 400, where the principle in GS was upheld.

15. In her  subsequent  decision,  Judge  Haria  found  that  the  claimant
    satisfied the requirements of EX.1(a), for  the  reasons  she  gave  in
    paragraphs 37-43.  She went on to consider the private life  claims  of
    the various family members, and found that the claimant  and  his  wife
    would not experience significant obstacles to reintegration  into  life
    in Nigeria.  The claimant seemed to be a very  resourceful  person,  as
    evidenced from the fact that he managed to support his  family  in  the
    UK.  On the other hand, there would be very  significant  obstacles  to
    DOU's integration into Nigeria.  He was unlikely to be able to continue
    his education in a special school for children as he suffers from Downs
    Syndrome.  He would no doubt have the support of his  parents,  and  he
    would be able to see his grandparents.  But  it  seemed  that,  due  to
    their belief in voodoo, he might be subjected to ritual exorcism and it
    was not certain  that  they  and  his  extended  family  members  would
    understand his condition and be supportive.  The same applied  to  DGU,
    who also had complex needs as a result of his autism.

16. The judge went on to consider the case outside the Rules, and gave  her
    reasons for findings that it was in the best interests of DGU  and  DOU
    to remain in the United Kingdom.  With regard to the  charity  referred
    to in the refusal letter, she said that there was no objective evidence
    before her in relation to provision for DOU's educational  needs.   She
    accepted the explanation given by the claimant in his witness statement
    as to why the charity was unlikely to be able to assist DOU.

17. At paragraph 84, the judge reached the  conclusion  that  although  the
    decision was clearly in pursuance of the legitimate aim of  maintaining
    immigration control, it was not in accordance with the law and  it  was
    disproportionate to that lawful and legitimate aim.

18. The judge then moved on to consider proportionality in the  context  of
    the factors set out in Section 117B of the 2002 Act.

19. After setting out the relevant provisions of Section 117B,  she  stated
    at paragraph 88 that having regard to the matters previously discussed,
    the need to maintain effective immigration control did not in this case
    outweigh the children's rights to family and private life.  There would
    obviously be some burden on the tax payer in that the children would be
    entitled to education and to access the NHS.  But the  public  interest
    in the claimant's removal was outweighed by  DOU's  and  perhaps  to  a
    lesser extent DGU's rights to family and private life, and the  removal
    decision was not proportionate, since it was in their best interests to
    remain with their parents.

20. She concluded by saying that Mr Al-Rashid did not pursue an  Article  3
    claim with any vigour, so it was not necessary for  her  to  deal  with
    that issue.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

21. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, there was no appearance by or  on  behalf  of  the  claimant.   Mr
    Whitwell  informed  me  that  the  reason  for  the  absence  of  legal
    representation was limited financial resources. He  had  spoken  to  Mr
    Grand, and he understood from Mr Grand that priority was been given  by
    the claimant to funding an application for naturalisation.  Mr Whitwell
    submitted that the decision should be set aside for the  reasons  given
    in the permission application.

Discussion

22. The Court of Appeal  decision  in  EV  (Philippines)  [2014]  EWCA  874
    illuminates the inter-relationship between the assessment of  the  best
    interests of children affected  by  an  immigration  decision  and  the
    related question of whether it is reasonable to expect a child who  has
    accrued seven years' continuous residence here to return  with  his  or
    her parents to their common country of origin.

23. Clarke LJ said:

         34.  In determining whether or not, in a case such as the  present,
             the need for immigration control outweighs the best  interests
             of the children, it is necessary  to  determine  the  relative
             strength of the factors which make it in their best  interests
             to remain here; and also to take account of any  factors  that
             point the other way.

         35.  A decision as to what is in the  best  interests  of  children
             will depend on a number of factors such as (a) their age;  (b)
             the length of time that they have been here; (c) how long they
             have been in education; (c) what  stage  their  education  has
             reached; (d) to what extent they have  become  distanced  from
             the country to which it is proposed that they return; (e)  how
             renewable their connection with it may be; (f) to what  extent
             they will have linguistic, medical or  other  difficulties  in
             adapting to life in that country; and (g) the extent to  which
             the course proposed will interfere with their family  life  or
             their rights (if they have any) as British citizens.

         36.  In a sense the tribunal is  concerned  with  how  emphatic  an
             answer falls to be given to the question: is it  in  the  best
             interests of the child to remain?  The longer  the  child  has
             been here, the more advanced (or critical) the  stage  of  his
             education, the looser his ties with the country  in  question,
             and the more deleterious the consequences of his  return,  the
             greater the weight that falls into one side of the scales.  If
             it is overwhelmingly in the child's  best  interests  that  he
             should not return, the need to  maintain  immigration  control
             may well not tip the balance.  By contrast if  it  is  in  the
             child's best interests to remain, but only  on  balance  (with
             some factors pointing the other way), the result  may  be  the
             opposite.

         37.  In the balance on the other side there falls to be taken  into
             account the strong weight to be given to the need to  maintain
             immigration control in pursuit of the economic  well-being  of
             the country and the fact that, ex  hypothesi,  the  applicants
             have no entitlement to remain.  The immigration history of the
             parents may also be relevant e.g. if they are overstayers,  or
             have acted deceitfully.

24. Lewison LJ said:

         49.  Second, as Christopher Clarke LJ points out, the evaluation of
             the  best  interests  of  children  in  immigration  cases  is
             problematic.  In the  real  world,  the  appellant  is  almost
             always the parent who has no right to remain in the  UK.   The
             parent thus relies  on  the  best  interests  of  his  or  her
             children in order  to  piggyback  on  their  rights.   In  the
             present case, as  there  is  no  doubt  in  many  others,  the
             Immigration Judge made two findings about the children's  best
             interests:

             (a)  the best interests  of  the  children  are  obviously  to
                  remain with their parents; [29] and

             (b)  it is in the best interests of the  children  that  their
                  education in the UK [is] not to be disrupted [53].

         50.  What, if any, assumptions are to be made about the immigration
             status of the parent?  If one takes the facts as they  are  in
             reality, then the first of the  Immigration  Judge's  findings
             about  the  best  interests  of  the  children  point  towards
             removal.  If, on the other hand, one assumes that  the  parent
             has the right to remain, then one is assuming  the  answer  to
             the very question the Tribunal has to decide.  Or is there  is
             a middle ground, in which one has to assess the best interests
             of the children without regard to the  immigration  status  of
             the parent?

25. The judge went on to analyse in ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2011] UKSC 4 in order to elicit an answer to  this
    question.  He reached the following conclusion:

         58.   In  my  judgment,  therefore,  the  assessment  of  the  best
             interests of the children must be made on the basis the  facts
             are as they are in the real world.  One parent has no right to
             remain, but the other parent  does,  that  is  the  background
             against which the assessment is conducted.  If neither  parent
             has the right to remain, then that is the  background  against
             which the assessment is conducted.  Thus the ultimate question
             will be is it reasonable to expect the  child  to  follow  the
             parent with no right to remain to the country of origin?

    On the facts of ZH it was not reasonable  to  expect  the  children  to
    follow their mother to Tanzania, not least because the family would  be
    separated and the children would be deprived of the right to grow up in
    the country of which they were citizens.  That was a long way from  the
    facts of the case before them.  No-one in  the  family  was  a  British
    citizen.  None had the right to remain in the country.  If  the  mother
    was removed, the father had no independent right to remain.   With  the
    parents removed, then it was entirely reasonable to expect the children
    to go with them:

         60.  Although it is, of course a question of fact for the Tribunal,
             I cannot see that the desirability of being educated at public
             expense in the UK can outweigh the benefit to the children  of
             remaining with their  parents.   Just  as  we  cannot  provide
             medical treatment for the world,  so  we  cannot  educate  the
             world.

    Jackson LJ agreed with both judgments.

The relationship between s117B(6) and the Rules - Treebhawon explained

26. In AM (S117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC) the Tribunal held  that  the
    duty of the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  quite  clear.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal was required  to  have  regard  to  considerations  listed  in
    Section  117B.   It  had  no  discretion  to   leave   any   of   those
    considerations out of account, if  it  was  a  consideration  that  was
    raised on the evidence before it.  The Tribunal continued in  paragraph
    [13]:

         There is also in our judgment no requirement that  the  FtT  should
         pose and answer the same question  more  than  once,  simply  as  a
         matter of form.  Thus since both  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  of  the
         Immigration Rules, and S117B(6), both raise the  same  question  in
         relation to a particular child, of  whether  or  not  it  would  be
         reasonable to expect that child to leave the UK: it is  a  question
         that need only be answered once.

27. At paragraph [23] of Treebhawon & Others (Section 117B (6)) [2015] UKUT
    674 (IAC), a Presidential panel held that  when  a  Tribunal  is  first
    considering  an  appellants'  Article  8  claim  by  reference  to  the
    Immigration Rules, the purpose of the exercise  is  to  decide  whether
    relevant qualifying conditions are satisfied by the  person  concerned,
    and that the exercise is performed without reference to  Part  5A  (and
    hence Section 117B).  The latter is engaged  directly  only  where  the
    decision making process reaches a stage of concluding the  person  does
    not satisfy the requirements of the Rules.

28. Part 5A does not apply to  the  exercise  conducted  under  the  Rules,
    following  Treebhawon.  But  this  is   academic,   as   the   domestic
    jurisprudence requires the decision-maker  to  assess  relevant  public
    interest considerations arising under Article 8(2) - such as the strong
    weight "to be given to the need  to  maintain  immigration  control  in
    pursuit of the economic well-being of the country and the fact that, ex
    hypothesi, the applicants have  no  entitlement  to  remain"  -  before
    reaching a conclusion under Rule 276ADE as to whether it is  reasonable
    to require a child who has accrued seven years' residence to leave  the
    UK.

Ground 1

29. Ground 1 is that the judge misdirected herself in finding that  EX.1(a)
    applied.  The Secretary of State's contention is that the  judge  ought
    to have directed herself that the claimant could not avail  himself  of
    EX.1(a) as E-LTRPR.1.1 required that all the requirements contained  in
    E-LTRPR.2.2 to 2.4 are satisfied  in  order  for  EX.1  to  potentially
    apply.  The claimant did not satisfy E-LTRPT.2.3  which  provides  that
    either -

      a) the applicant must have sole responsibility for the  child  or  the
         child normally lives with the applicant and not their other  parent
         (who is a British citizen or settled in the UK);

      b)  the parent or carer with whom the child normally lives must be -

          i) a British citizen in the UK or settled in the UK;

         ii) (ii) not a partner of the applicant ...; and

        iii) the applicant must not be  eligible  to  apply  for  leave  to
             remain as a partner under this Appendix.

30. Section R-LTRPT sets out the requirements for limited leave  to  remain
    as a parent.  The requirements in sub-paragraph (d) are:

          i)  the  applicant  must  not  fall  for  refusal  under  S-LTRR:
             suitability leave to remain; and

         ii) the applicant meets the requirements of paragraphs E-LTRPT.2.2
             - 2.4 and E-LTRPT.3.1; and (my emphasis)

        iii) paragraph EX.1 applies.

31. Judge Haria set out in her decision at paragraph  33  the  relationship
    requirements in E-LTRPT.2.2 - 3.1 but she did  not  cite  the  relevant
    requirements  of  R-LTRPT.1.1.   As  a  result,  she  appears  to  have
    proceeded on mistaken premise that the claimant only needed to  satisfy
    the requirements of E-LTRPT.2.2 in order to be able to invoke  EX.1(a).
    It is clear from Section R-LTRPT that to qualify for limited  leave  to
    remain as a parent the applicant  must  meet  the  requirements  of  E-
    LTRPT.2.3, 2.4 and 3.1 as well as the requirements of E-LTRPT 2.2.   So
    I find that ground 1 is made out.

32. Mr Whitwell submits that the judge's error with regard  to  EX.1(a)  is
    particularly significant on  the  facts  of  this  case,  as  only  the
    claimant has a right of appeal.  The effect  on  the  claimant  of  not
    being able to invoke EX.1(a) is that the claimant cannot "piggyback" on
    his older child as a child who has accrued over seven years' continuous
    residence in the  UK.   This  means,  Mr  Whitwell  submits,  that  the
    claimant has to surmount the additional hurdle of  showing  that  there
    are compelling circumstances outside the Rules so  as  to  justify  him
    piggybacking successfully on the rights of his older child.

33. There is some force in Mr  Whitwell's  submissions,  but  the  counter-
    balancing consideration is that the rights of the older child come into
    play under Rule 276ADE(1)(iv) in any event, as  is  recognised  in  the
    refusal decision.  In addition, following AM (Malawi), prima facie  the
    answer as to whether the claimant can  successfully  piggyback  on  the
    rights of his older child should be the same whether  the  question  is
    considered in the  context  of  EX.1(a)  or  in  the  context  of  Rule
    276ADE(1)(iv) or under Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

34. However, on the particular facts of this  case,  I  consider  that  the
    judge's error is material to the outcome because it has led to,  or  is
    coincidental with, an unbalanced  assessment  of  the  children's  best
    interests and the associated question of unreasonableness.

35. The  judge  cites  the  relevant  provisions  of  EV  (Philippines)  at
    paragraphs 72 and 73, but by this stage she has already decided that it
    is unreasonable to expect the older child to leave the  United  Kingdom
    in the context of  EX.1(a);  and  the  reasoning  which  underpins  her
    finding on  EX.1(a)  is  heavily  skewed  towards  the  best  interests
    considerations in favour of the  child  remaining  here,  with  factors
    pointing the other way being swept aside or ignored.  In  addition,  no
    apparent account is taken by her in the discussion of  EX.1(a)  of  the
    strong weight to be given to the need to maintain  immigration  control
    in pursuant of the economic well-being of the country and the fact that
    the parents have no entitlement to leave to remain. Moreover, there  is
    no reference at all to the adverse immigration history of  the  parents
    before the conclusion is reached at paragraph 43 that it would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the older child to leave the United Kingdom,  with
    the consequence that his welfare requires  the  regularisation  of  the
    status of the father, the mother and the other children.

36. The flawed approach to EX.1(a) is replicated in the assessment of DOU's
    private life  claim  under  Rule  276ADE(1)(iv),  and  in  the  judge's
    consideration of s117B(6). As to the latter, the judge makes a  further
    error in only considering  s117B  after  she  has  already  decided  at
    paragraph 84 that the removal of the claimant is disproportionate.  The
    factors  arising  under  s117B  are  integral  to  the  assessment   of
    proportionality, and they should not be treated as an add-on.

37. Among other things, the judge did not engage with the ratio of the  two
    cases on health claims cited by Counsel.  Of  particular  note  is  the
    headnote in Akhalu. This states that the consequences  of  removal  for
    the health of a claimant who would not be  able  to  access  equivalent
    health care in their country of nationality is plainly relevant to  the
    question of proportionality:

         But when weighed against the public interest in ensuring  that  the
         limited resources of this country's health service are used to best
         effect for the benefit of those for whom they are  intended,  those
         consequences do not weigh heavily  in  the  claimant's  favour  but
         speak cogently in support of the public interests in removal.

    In GS and EO the UT acknowledged that there were recognised  departures
    from "the high threshold approach" in cases  concerning  children,  and
    that Article 8 cases might require a different approach and would do so
    where health questions arose in the context of obstacles to relocation.
    Nonetheless the burden to the taxpayer of the children  being  educated
    at specialist schools is only acknowledged by the judge at the  end  of
    paragraph 88, after she has already decided that  the  public  interest
    referred to in s117B(1) is outweighed.

Ground 2

38. Central to the judge's reasoning as to why the welfare of the  children
    was imperilled by going to Nigeria with their parents  is  the  finding
    that there is a real risk of DOU and DGU being subjected to  some  form
    of ritual exorcism. This arose from her acceptance  of  the  claimant's
    oral evidence that the majority of the population believe in indigenous
    systems of belief such as voodoo.

39. It does not appear that these claims had been made previously,  and  so
    the Home Office  was  deprived  of  an  opportunity  to  address  them.
    Moreover, the judge did not take into account the viability of internal
    relocation.  The father-in-law lived in Benin, which  is  about  twelve
    hours' drive from Lagos.  There was no evidence before the  judge  that
    the father-in-law could influence what would happen to  the  family  in
    Lagos. There was also no objective evidence  that  the  children  would
    suffer societal stigma or discrimination in Lagos on account  of  their
    respective conditions.  The judge went on at paragraph 47 to find  that
    the claimant was a very resourceful person, who had managed to maintain
    and accommodate his family in the UK without recourse to public  funds.
    Therefore there was no reason to suppose that the family could not lead
    an independent life in Lagos without the support of family  members  in
    Benin.

40. The judge has not given adequate reasons for finding that DOU  and  DGU
    might be subjected to some form of ritual exorcism by  extended  family
    members, or for her implicit finding that they would suffer significant
    societal discrimination wherever the parents chose to live in  Nigeria.
    Accordingly, ground 2 is also made out.

41. For the above reasons, I find that  the  decision  of  Judge  Haria  is
    unsafe and must be set aside.

Appropriate Forum for Remaking

42. On the issue of remaking, the burden rests with the  claimant  to  show
    that there are very significant obstacles to his children's integration
    into life in Nigeria, as  highlighted  by  Judge  Baker  when  granting
    permission to appeal. There is currently a lack of  objective  evidence
    to support some of  the  claims  made  by  the  claimant  in  his  oral
    evidence, such as an inability on the part of the children to access an
    educational system which is tailored to their respective special needs.
     In view of the extent of the judicial finding of fact  which  will  be
    involved in remaking the decision, I consider that  is  an  appropriate
    case for the appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  de
    novo hearing.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier contained an error of  law,  and  accordingly
the decision is set aside.

Directions

This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross for a  de
novo hearing before any judge apart from Judge Haria.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the claimant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 14 June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
