
IAC-FH-CK-V4
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/36184/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 19 November 2014               |On 19 December 2014               |
|Prepared on 19 November 2014      |                                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Mr Yao Cheng
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Vydyadharan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms D Revill, Counsel instructed by Astor Visas


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this determination the Appellant is referred to as the Secretary  of
    State and the Respondent is referred to as the Claimant.

2.   The Claimant, a national of  the  People's  Republic  of  China  (PRC),
    appealed against the Secretary of State's decision dated 15 August 2013
    to refuse a combined application for  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  1
    (Entrepreneur) Migrant under the points-based scheme.  In addition  the
    decision was combined to make removal directions under  Section  47  of
    the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

3.   The appeals against those decisions  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge F Beach, who on 27 August  2014  allowed  his  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules and it is to be inferred would, had she done so, have
    allowed the appeal against removal directions.

4.   On 2 September 2014 the Secretary of State sought permission to  appeal
    the decision and on 14 October 2014 First-tier Tribunal  Judge  P  J  M
    Hollingworth granted permission to appeal.

5.   The Secretary of State's grounds have been  helpfully  crystallised  in
    submissions to essentially a complaint that the  judge  has  failed  to
    give adequate reasons for the decision reached.

6.   It is trite law  that  parties  to  an  appeal  are  both  entitled  to
    adequate and sufficient reasons from the judge so that the decision  on
    its key elements can be properly understood.

7.   Ms Vydyadharan, who did  not  appear  before  Judge  Beach,  argued  by
    reference to  grounds,  which  she  did  not  settle,  that  there  are
    inadequate findings on key elements of the claim.  Ms Revill,  who  did
    appear before the judge, was in a position  to  make  submissions  with
    reference to the documentation to show that of  three  principal  areas
    raised in the reasons  for  refusal  and  essentially  pursued  in  the
    appeal, the judge did enough  or  sufficient  to  show  that  a  proper
    consideration had been given to the merits of the case.

8.   Explanations were given to the judge  concerning  the  operation  of  a
    website which the Claimant had been building; in respect of  which  the
    officer investigating the application had been unable to obtain  access
    to all pages of the particular website.  Secondly that the domain  name
    of the website had not been registered and thirdly that  an  impression
    had been created from the website that there were two persons, creative
    energetic designers, one being the  Claimant,  and  the  other  a  lady
    called Ni, who had been involved in the start-up of the operation.

9.    In  fact,  from  virtually  the  earliest  moment,   unchallenged   in
    interview, it was apparent that it was not a team  application  at  all
    but simply by the Appellant himself and indeed explanation was given to
    the judge confirming that it was not such a team application.

10.  If it had been a team application and  there  had  been  any  doubt  in
    those investigating this  matter  prior  to  issuing  the  Reasons  for
    Refusal Letter then it would have been more openly and fully  addressed
    in interview by the Secretary of State.

11.  It is fair to say that the Reasons for Refusal Letter was drafted by  a
    Miss Spooner,  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  whereas  the
    interview of which part only is disclosed was conducted by a Miss or Mr
    Solanki.  In the circumstances it is apparent to me that  there  needed
    to be very great caution in  addressing  and  relying  upon  particular
    answers in an interview when quite simply the full  interview  has  not
    been provided to the judge and there was no  complete  version  at  the
    hearing before the judge.  Thus only very limited value could really be
    given to the interview as such  when  there  was  apparently  either  a
    cherry-picking selection or omissions which had simply not  been  taken
    into account by the person drafting the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter,
    perhaps unaware of the inadequacies of the presented interview.

12.  In any event the fact of the matter was that the  judge  was  alive  to
    those issues, aware of the general criticisms by the Presenting Officer
    at the hearing concerning the Claimant, the quality of the evidence  he
    gave  and,  perhaps  surprisingly,  also  the  issue  of  the  Claimant
    demeanour; not a  subject  generally  pursued  by  way  of  submissions
    against an Appellant.   The  judge  plainly  took  those  matters  into
    account and although they do not form part of the reasons  for  refusal
    showed the thorough and careful approach taken by an experienced  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal.  She not only considered the issues  raised
    in the Reasons for Refusal Letter but also those arising at or  out  of
    the hearing.

13.  It is clear that the  judge  was  unimpressed  with  criticism  of  the
    Claimant and his intended business.  Rather it appears to  me  that  in
    relation to the issues raised the judge did deal with them.  It has  to
    be accepted by reference to one point over the domain name, dealt  with
    it by inference rather than an express analysis.  It seems to  me  that
    that is at its highest the complaint that the Secretary  of  State  can
    properly make but the domain name is I find a non-point because as  the
    Appellant made clear at this stage none is required.  In reaching  this
    view I take into account the cases of R (Iran) [2005] EWCA Civ 982, E &
    R [2004] QB 1044 CA and VHR [2014] UKUT 367 (IAC) and the  self-evident
    proposition that it is not necessary for a First-tier Tribunal Judge to
    pick up each and every point made by the parties, analyse it and  reach
    conclusions upon them.  The position was made  clear  in  the  case  of
    Karanakaran [2000] EWCA Civ 11 and I see nothing  in  recent  case  law
    that changes that position.  It is similarly as clear as  can  be  that
    there is an obligation on  the  judge  to  give  reasons  and  to  give
    adequate reasons sufficient to understand the decision.

14.  I conclude, having looked at the position, that in this case the  judge
    dealt with the principal concerns of the Secretary of  State,  assessed
    the evidence of the Claimant and was entitled to reach  the  conclusion
    that she did on the evidence before her.  The fact that  I  might  have
    reached a different decision is not a proper basis for interfering with
    the judge's decision.   Indeed  time  and  again  the  High  Court  has
    indicated that within this Tribunal it is not for the Upper Tribunal to
    substitute a different view to that reached  by  the  judge  because  a
    different decision might have been reached.

15.  The Original Tribunal's decision stands and the  Secretary  of  State's
    appeal fails.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made nor was one sought.



Signed        Date 17 December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
