
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/36861/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 1st September 2014                           |On 15th September 2014     |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                            Kagona Albert Minsaki
                         (ANONYMITY order NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Okech of UKIMAS Consultancy Ltd


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a determination of Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Majid promulgated on 21st March 2014.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and I will refer to him as the claimant.

 3. The claimant is a Ugandan citizen born 22nd August 1986 who applied for
    a residence card as confirmation of a right to  reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The application was made on the basis that  the  claimant  is
    the unmarried partner  of  Maria  Therese  Bengtsson  (the  Sponsor)  a
    Swedish national exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom.

 4. The application was refused on 30th August 2013.  It was  not  accepted
    that the Sponsor was a qualified person as defined in regulation  6  of
    The Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006  (the  2006
    Regulations).  In addition, the application  was  refused  because  the
    claimant had failed to prove that he was in a durable relationship with
    the Sponsor and therefore regulation 8(5) of the 2006  Regulations  was
    not satisfied.

 5. The claimant's appeal was heard by Judge Majid on 18th March  2014  who
    found the claimant satisfied the requirements of the  2006  Regulations
    as well as the provisions of the ECHR, although the  claimant  had  not
    relied upon the ECHR either in his Grounds of Appeal or at the hearing.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted to the Secretary of  State  and  at  a
    hearing on 25th June 2014 I found that the judge had  materially  erred
    in law in failing to make findings on material matters and  failing  to
    give adequate reasons.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was set
    aside with no findings preserved.  The reasons for this  are  contained
    in my decision promulgated on 14th July 2014.

Re-making the Decision

Documents

 7. In re-making the decision I have taken into account  the  Secretary  of
    State's bundle of documents with annexes A-D, and the claimant's bundle
    of documents comprising 87 pages.

The Law and Burden of Proof

 8. The burden of proof is on the claimant to establish that  he  satisfies
    the requirements of the 2006 Regulations, and the standard of proof  is
    a balance of probability.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

Preliminary Issues

 9. The hearing was put back as Ms Pal  had  not  received  the  claimant's
    bundle which had been received by the Tribunal on 24th July 2014.   The
    hearing resumed when Ms Pal indicated that she had had sufficient  time
    to consider the bundle and was ready to proceed.

10. Ms Pal indicated that she had made a telephone call  to  the  Sponsor's
    employer, and as a result conceded that the Sponsor is in employment as
    claimed, and therefore is a worker, and therefore  a  qualified  person
    and the requirements of  regulation  6  of  the  2006  Regulations  are
    satisfied.

11. Therefore the only issue to be decided was whether the parties were  in
    a durable relationship.

12. Mr Okech confirmed that  the  claimant  and  Sponsor  would  be  giving
    evidence and that no interpreter was required.

The Claimant's Evidence

13. The claimant adopted his witness statement dated 10th July  2014.   The
    contents of this statement may be summarised as follows.

14. The claimant and Sponsor met in Bonds pub in  May  2007  and  exchanged
    telephone numbers.  Their relationship continued although  the  Sponsor
    went back to Sweden in August 2008 to continue with her  studies.   She
    returned to the United Kingdom  in  2010  and  studied  at  Westminster
    University until January 2011 and she thereafter returned to Sweden  to
    finish her studies, returning to  the  United  Kingdom  in  June  2011,
    living with the claimant in Olney Road, London.  The  couple  moved  to
    their current address in Kember Street in December 2011.

15. The claimant does not  have  employment  and  does  not  have  a  legal
    immigration status in this country and therefore is unable  to  provide
    bank statements or utility bills in his name.  It is  for  this  reason
    that his name does  not  appear  on  the  letting  contract  for  their
    property.

16. The claimant was questioned by both representatives.  I  have  recorded
    all questions and answers in my Record  of  Proceedings  and  will  not
    repeat them  in  full  here.   Where  relevant  I  will  refer  to  the
    claimant's oral evidence in my findings and conclusions.

The Sponsor's Evidence

17. The Sponsor adopted her witness statement dated 18th March  2014  which
    may be summarised as follows.

18. The Sponsor met the claimant while working in Bonds pub in London.  She
    now  works  for  Bodeans  restaurant  as  a  waitress.   The  Sponsor's
    relationship with the claimant started when they met in May 2007.

19. In August 2008 the Sponsor moved back to Sweden to continue her studies
    but their relationship continued and they remained in contact.  In 2010
    the Sponsor returned to the United  Kingdom  to  study  at  Westminster
    University until January 2011.  She then returned to Sweden  to  finish
    her studies.

20. The Sponsor returned to the United Kingdom in June 2011 and lived  with
    the claimant in Olney Road, London until December 2011 when they  moved
    to their current address in Kember Street.

21. The Sponsor indicated that she  wanted  to  start  a  family  with  the
    claimant.

22. In her oral evidence the Sponsor  revealed  that  she  is  two  months'
    pregnant, and explained that she had not advised the  claimant's  legal
    representative of this.  She explained that she had seen  a  nurse  and
    her pregnancy had been confirmed, and she was waiting  for  a  scan  to
    take place.

23. I have recorded all questions asked of the  Sponsor  in  my  Record  of
    Proceedings, and where relevant will refer to them  in  my  conclusions
    and findings.

The Secretary of State's Submissions

24. Ms Pal relied upon the reasons for refusal  letter  dated  30th  August
    2013 in relation to the issue of durable relationship.  It was accepted
    that the evidence  given  by  the  claimant  and  Sponsor  was  largely
    consistent, although Ms Pal indicate that she  was  not  conceding  the
    issue of a durable relationship, and asked that I attach what weight  I
    thought appropriate to the evidence that I had heard.  Ms Pal submitted
    that little weight should be attached to  the  Sponsor's  claim  to  be
    pregnant, in the absence of medical evidence.

The Claimant's Submissions

25. Mr Okech made very brief submissions, pointing  out  that  it  was  not
    contended  that  the  claimant  and  sponsor  had  given   inconsistent
    evidence.  I was asked to find the evidence consistent and to find that
    the couple are in a  durable  relationship  and  therefore  the  appeal
    should be allowed.  Mr Okech confirmed that the claimant did  not  rely
    upon Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention on Human Rights.

26. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

27. In view of the concession made by Ms Pal, and the evidence submitted, I
    find that the Sponsor is a qualified person as defined by regulation  6
    in that she is in employment and therefore is a worker.   I  make  this
    finding  having  considered  the  numerous  payslips  that  have   been
    submitted, together with a P60 End of Year Certificate for the tax year
    to 5th April 2014,  which  confirms  the  Sponsor's  earnings  and  her
    employer.  I have also attached weight to the fact that  the  Sponsor's
    earnings are shown in her bank statements, and there  are  two  letters
    from her  employer  dated  13th  September  2013  and  11th  June  2014
    confirming her employment, and a copy of her contract of employment has
    also been provided.

28. I then turned to regulation 8(5) which is set out below;

         A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if the person is
         the partner of an EEA national (other than a civil partner) and can
         prove to the decision-maker that he is in  a  durable  relationship
         with the EEA national.

29. The Secretary of State contends that generally, in  order  to  prove  a
    durable relationship, an individual would have to prove that  they  had
    been living together with an EEA national  Sponsor  for  at  least  two
    years, and that both intend to live together permanently, and that  any
    previous relationship or marriage has broken down, and the parties  are
    not related by birth.  There may be occasions when these  criteria  are
    not met but it would still be  accepted  that  the  couple  were  in  a
    durable relationship, depending upon the facts.  The claimant does  not
    dispute the Secretary of State's view as to what needs to be proved, in
    order to show that he is in a durable relationship.

30. I found the evidence of the claimant and Sponsor to be  consistent.   I
    take into account that no witnesses  were  called  at  the  hearing  to
    confirm the relationship, and I have attached some limited weight to  a
    letter dated 24th February 2014 from Doreen Nambago who  confirms  that
    she has known the claimant for over seven years and that he  introduced
    the Sponsor as his girlfriend in or around 2010, and from that date the
    Sponsor has joined in family gatherings.

31. I take into account that only four  photographs  of  the  claimant  and
    Sponsor together have been produced, and  that  there  is  very  little
    documentary evidence to prove cohabitation.  However I also accept that
    because of the claimant's lack of legal immigration  status,  he  would
    find  it  difficult  to  obtain  documentary  evidence  such  as   bank
    statements and utility bills.

32. I attach some weight to a letter dated 1st July 2014, from the lettings
    manager of Alpha Estate Agents which confirms  that  the  claimant  and
    Sponsor have lived in their current property since 18th December  2011.



33. I have carefully assessed the credibility of the evidence given by both
    the claimant and Sponsor.  Both have been  consistent  as  to  how  and
    where they met and when their relationship  started.   Both  have  been
    consistent as to when they started living together.   The  evidence  of
    cohabitation is supported to a certain extent by the letter from  Alpha
    Estate Agents.

34. When cross-examined the claimant knew the first names of the  Sponsor's
    parents, and stated that he had only met one member of her family, that
    being her sister who visited the United  Kingdom.   The  name  of  this
    sister and the fact that the claimant had only met one  member  of  her
    family was confirmed independently by the Sponsor  when  she  gave  her
    evidence.

35. Both the claimant and Sponsor were asked a number of  questions  by  Ms
    Pal in relation to their relationship,  those  questions  ranging  from
    when they met, to what they had done in the  weekend  previous  to  the
    hearing.

36. Both confirmed that they did not spend Christmas 2013 together, as both
    confirmed that the Sponsor had returned to Sweden and the claimant  had
    spent that Christmas at a friend's address in Plaistow,  and  both  had
    been at that address at Christmas 2012.

37. Both were able to name each other's favourite foods and what  they  had
    done on birthdays.  The evidence that they gave as  to  what  they  had
    done the previous weekend  was  consistent  and  both  gave  consistent
    evidence as to how they had  travelled  to  the  hearing  centre,  both
    referring to travelling on a number 17 bus, and  thereafter  eating  at
    McDonald's before travelling to the hearing centre.

38. The evidence of both witnesses was thoroughly tested.   There  were  no
    significant discrepancies.

39. I conclude that the claimant and Sponsor did meet in May 2007, and that
    they have lived together at their current address since December  2011.
    They have therefore lived together for at least two years, and I accept
    their evidence that they intend to live together permanently.  I accept
    the Sponsor's evidence that she is pregnant with the claimant's  child.
    I conclude that the requirements  of  regulation  8(5)  are  satisfied.
    Therefore the claimant's appeal is allowed under the 2006 Regulations.

Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and
was set aside.  I substitute a fresh decision.

The claimant's appeal is allowed pursuant to the 2006 Regulations.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There has  been
no request for anonymity and the Upper Tribunal makes no anonymity order.






Signed                              Date 2nd September 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall






FEE AWARD

Because the claimant's appeal is allowed I have considered whether  to  make
a fee award.  I have decided it is not appropriate  as  inadequate  evidence
was placed before the decision-maker.  This appeal has been allowed  because
of further evidence submitted after the appeal was lodged.  There is no  fee
award.






Signed                              Date 2nd September 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
