
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/36656/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 27th November 2014                |On 30th December 2014                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                           DESIGNATED JUDGE MURRAY


                                   Between

                   elewathTHe gedera Wijesinghe dayaratne
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss Cantor, Counsel for Str8t Record Limited,
Portsmouth


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 20th November 1967.  He
    appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated 20th August  2013
    refusing him leave to remain in the United Kingdom as the partner of  a
    British citizen under Appendix  FM   of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    British citizen is Gemma White.  His appeal was heard by Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Miles on 3rd September  2014  and  dismissed  in  a
    determination promulgated on 12th September 2014.

 2. An application for permission to appeal  was  made  and  permission  to
    appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Page.    The
    permission  states  that  there  is  a  paucity  of  reasoning  in  the
    determination to explain why it is considered that  the  Appellant  and
    partner do not fulfil the requirements of  Appendix  FM.   The  grounds
    state that it was perverse of the judge  to  state  that  the  evidence
    before him was that they had only lived together for one year after the
    date of the application as he found as a fact that the couple are in  a
    genuine subsisting relationship akin to marriage and  have  been  since
    2011.  The grounds  also  argue  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider
    material evidence in respect of the Appellant's partner returning  with
    the Appellant to Sri Lanka and failed to consider the practicalities of
    a UK citizen giving up her cultural, financial, emotional and  language
    ties in the UK to live in a country she has no  connection  with  other
    than her  husband.   At  paragraphs  9  and  10  of  the  determination
    reference is made to the Appellant's partner Gemma White working in the
    United Kingdom and having her family here.   The  judge  however  found
    there were no insurmountable obstacles to family life with the  Sponsor
    continuing outside the United Kingdom.  The permission states  that  it
    is arguable that the determination is devoid of  reasoning  to  explain
    why it was concluded that the Appellant's wife could  relocate  to  Sri
    Lanka.  It states that although the judge referred to the  guidance  in
    Gulshan [2013] UKUT 640 he failed to go on to  consider  the  practical
    possibilities of relocation.

 3. At the hearing Counsel for the Appellant submitted that she is  relying
    on the grounds for permission.  She referred to  paragraph  19  of  the
    determination in which the  judge  states  that  he  accepts  that  the
    Appellant has  proved,  on  the  balance  of  probabilities,  that  his
    relationship with the Sponsor is a relationship akin to marriage and is
    genuine and subsisting and that has been the case since 2011.  He  then
    goes on to say that there are arguably no good grounds for  considering
    the claim outside the Rules.  Counsel  submitted  that  the  Article  8
    argument must flow from the judge's findings in paragraph 19.

 4. Counsel submitted that the Appellant's partner has said she will go  to
    Sri Lanka with him but the judge has  failed  to  consider  whether  it
    would be reasonable for her to do so and what obstacles she would face.
     She is a United Kingdom citizen, works in the United Kingdom,  has  no
    ties to Sri Lanka, cannot speak the language and knows no one from  Sri
    Lanka apart from her husband.  She submitted that it would not be right
    to  uproot  her  and  make  her  go  to  Sri  Lanka.   That  would   be
    unreasonable.  She submitted that for the judge to state  at  paragraph
    21 that they should go to Sri Lanka together shows that he has not gone
    into the practicalities of her leaving the United Kingdom where she has
    stayed all her life.

 5. I was referred to the  case  of  VW  (Uganda)  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  5  at
    paragraph  31.   This  states  that  if  removal  is  to  be  held   as
    disproportionate what must be shown is more than  mere  hardship  or  a
    mere difficulty, there is a serious test which requires  the  obstacles
    or difficulties to go beyond matters of choice  or  inconvenience.   At
    paragraphs 42 and 45 of that case it is stated that it would  be  risky
    and unfair to demand that a decision maker should treat what is at best
    an educated guess, as a future  fact.   The  hardship  of  the  dilemma
    itself has to be recognised and evaluated.

 6. Counsel submitted that the judge refers to Gulshan but what  the  judge
    should have looked at was the said case of VW and the  case  of  Beoku-
    Betts.  That is the guidance which should have been followed.

 7. Counsel went on to state that no proper  assessment  was  made  by  the
    judge and there was no proportionality test  weighing  the  Appellant's
    and his partner's rights against public interest.  She  submitted  that
    the judge must have made an error of law when he made his  decision  if
    he believes that the Appellant's relationship with his partner is  akin
    to marriage  and  has  been  since  2011.    He  should  have  assessed
    proportionality.

 8. Counsel submitted that this Appellant has never overstayed, has  worked
    and has paid tax and  that  should  have  weighed  in  the  Appellant's
    favour.  She submitted that if the judge found that the  terms  of  the
    Rules could not be satisfied he should have considered the claim  under
    Article 8 and dealt with proportionality taking into account  the  case
    of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27, but he failed to do that.

 9. The Presenting Officer submitted that she has difficulties in this case
    because of paragraph 19 of the determination in which  the  judge  made
    contradictory findings.  She submitted  that  he  focussed  on  "living
    together" and finds that the appellant and his partner have only  lived
    together for one year after the date of the application, but the  judge
    also finds that  the  Appellant  and  his  partner  are  in  a  genuine
    relationship akin to marriage and have been since 2011.  The Presenting
    Officer submitted that the judge has not carried out a proper Article 8
    assessment.

10. The Presenting Officer submitted that the judge does not appear to have
    considered the fact that the Appellant's partner,  a  British  citizen,
    works here, has family here and cannot speak the language in Sri Lanka.
    She submitted that the judge appears not to  have  considered  all  the
    other  matters   which   weigh   in   the   Appellant's   favour   when
    proportionality is assessed. She submitted that there is also the issue
    that the Sponsor in this case suffers from depression.

11. The Presenting Officer submitted that she is in difficulties because of
    the terms of paragraph 19 but she asked me to find that the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision should stand.

Determination

12. The Presenting Officer is correct to state that the difficulty in  this
    determination lies in paragraph 19.  The judge should not have  focused
    on the fact that the Appellant and his partner have only lived together
    for one  year  since  the  date  of  the  application.   He  has  given
    considerable weight to  this  although  he  has  also  found  that  the
    Appellant and his partner have had a subsisting  relationship  akin  to
    marriage since 2011.

13. The judge has not carried out a proper proportionality assessment.

14. At  paragraph  23  the  judge  refers  to  Gulshan  and  insurmountable
    obstacles and although he refers  to  the  practical  possibilities  of
    relocation for the Appellant's partner, he has not given proper reasons
    for finding that it would not be unreasonable for her to  go  with  the
    Appellant to Sri Lanka.

15. The Appellant's Sponsor is British and works  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Her family is in the United Kingdom.  She has no  connection  with  Sri
    Lanka.  She cannot speak the language and she suffers from  depression.
    For her to uproot herself and go to live in  Sri  Lanka  would  not  be
    reasonable.  When all these matters are considered along with the  fact
    that  the  Appellant  and  his  partner  have  lived  together   in   a
    relationship akin to marriage since 2011 and taking  into  account  the
    contradictory findings made by the judge at paragraph 19, I  find  that
    there is a material error of law in his determination.

16. Based on the evidence before the judge I  find  that  this  appeal  can
    succeed in terms of the Rules  taking  EX1  into  account.   There  are
    insurmountable obstacles to this Appellant's partner going to Sri Lanka
    with the Appellant and settling there.  This is based on the definition
    of "insurmountable obstacles" in VW (Uganda).

Decision

17. Because I find there to be a material  error  of  law  in  the  judge's
    determination, his decision must be set aside.

18.  I direct that the determination promulgated on 12  September  2014  is
    overturned and I allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules.



Signed        Date 29th December 2014

Designated Judge Murray
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
