
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/36135/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 30 April 2014                              |On 5th June 2014             |
|Oral Determination given following the Hearing|                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                             danny abbey adekoya

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr F Singarajah, Counsel instructed by Palis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant was born on 25 December 1962 and is a citizen of Nigeria.
     He claims to have arrived in this country in  or  about  1992  but  he
    first  came  to  the  attention  of  the  United  Kingdom   immigration
    authorities on 9 July 2003 when he made an  application  for  leave  to
    remain on the basis of long residence.  That application took some time
    to be determined and it was not eventually dealt with until  2008  when
    on 19 June that year a decision was made to  refuse  that  application.
    Thereafter, there were various applications brought by or on behalf  of
    the appellant which it is not necessary to set out in  detail  for  the
    purposes of this determination.

 2. On 4 January 2012 the appellant was detained whilst reporting and on 26
    January  2012  he  was  served  with   removal   directions.    Further
    representations were made and a judicial review application was  lodged
    and following the refusal of those representations  with  no  right  of
    appeal yet further representations were made and on 24 January  2012  a
    planned removal which had been due to take place on 26 January 2012 was
    delayed by order of  the  High  Court.   Subsequently,  the  respondent
    agreed to reconsider the subsequent submissions made on 12 January 2012
    together with  other  submissions  made  on  23  January  2012.   These
    submissions were to the effect that the removal of the appellant  would
    be in breach of his Article 8 rights.  Subsequently, in a decision made
    on or about 15 August 2012 (it is not entirely clear  from  the  papers
    when precisely in August 2012 this decision was  made)  the  respondent
    made a decision that the appellant was not entitled to  remain  on  the
    basis of his Article 8  rights.   Thereafter  on  15  August  2013  the
    appellant was notified of the respondent's decision to seek his removal
    from the United Kingdom as an illegal entrant in  accordance  with  the
    provisions of Section  10  of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999
    following the refusal of his application  for  leave  to  remain  under
    human rights grounds which, as I have already stated  was  made  in  or
    about 15 August 2012.

 3. The appellant appealed against this decision and his appeal  was  heard
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Traynor sitting at Hatton Cross on  11
    December 2013.  In a determination promulgated on 27 January 2014 Judge
    Traynor dismissed the appellant's appeal  both  under  the  Immigration
    Rules and also under Article 8 which he considered  as  a  stand  alone
    right outside the provisions of the Immigration Rules.   The  appellant
    has appealed against this decision and he was originally refused  leave
    to appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge Osborne  on  14  February  2014.
    The appellant renewed his application for permission to appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal and was eventually given permission to appeal  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Eshun on 20 March 2014.

 4. The grounds assert that Judge Traynor's determination contained  errors
    of law.  First because he made  significant  errors  regarding  contact
    that the appellant had with his son at his son's  school  and  secondly
    because he applied the wrong legal test when considering in relation to
    that  child  (it  is  submitted)  by  stating  that   there   were   no
    "insurmountable obstacles" to his removal.  It is said in  the  grounds
    that "the issue in relation to EX.1(a) is not whether or not there  are
    such insurmountable obstacles but whether  it  is  "reasonable"  for  a
    child with seven years or more residence in the UK to [leave] the  UK".
    It is also submitted that the judge failed to  take  into  account  the
    respondent's substantial delay in determining his application and it is
    said that "the fact that during this  period  of  delay  the  appellant
    formed substantial family life with his son" is relevant to Article  8,
    relying on the House of Lords' decision in EB (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL  41.



 5. It is also submitted that when considering Article 8 "under the  Razgar
    steps" the judge wrongly found (at paragraph 73 of  his  determination)
    that "there was no family life between the  appellant  and  his  child"
    which was wrong "given that there  is  a  presumption  of  family  life
    between a child and its natural father, provided he continues to have a
    level of contact with the child  even  if  the  relationship  with  the
    mother has ended at date of birth".

The Hearing

 6. I have heard submissions  on  behalf  of  both  parties  which  I  have
    attempted to record contemporaneously.  As these  submissions  are  set
    out within  my  Record  of  Proceedings  I  shall  not  set  out  below
    everything which was said to me during the course of  the  hearing  but
    shall refer only to such of the submissions as are  necessary  for  the
    purposes  of  this  determination.   I  have  however  had  regard   to
    everything which was said to me during the course  of  the  hearing  as
    well as to  all  the  documents  contained  within  the  file.   It  is
    necessary before  dealing  with  these  submissions  to  summarise  the
    findings which were made by Judge Traynor and the submissions that were
    made before him.

 7. It was the appellant's case as set out by the judge at paragraph  3  of
    his determination that  he  had  entered  this  country  unlawfully  in
    September 1992 but had lost his passport.   He  had  been  continuously
    present in this country until in 2003 he sought to regularise his stay.
     The  respondent  did  not  accept  that  there  was  evidence  of  the
    appellant's presence in the United Kingdom prior to 2003 and  for  this
    reason, when the present application was considered, the respondent did
    not accept for the purposes of paragraph 276ADE of the Rules now to  be
    applied since 9 July 2012 that the respondent had been present in  this
    country for twenty years.  The  respondent  did  not  accept  that  the
    appellant had been present from earlier than 2003.  The respondent also
    was not satisfied that the appellant's ties with Nigeria were  severed.



 8. The appellant claims to have a child (the fact that he has a child does
    not appear to be disputed) who was born in 2003 but the respondent  did
    not accept that the appellant had a meaningful  relationship  with  his
    child and for this reason it was not accepted that this was a factor to
    be taken into account when assessing the strength  of  the  appellant's
    private life.  The appellant is now married and his wife gave  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  He was married in July 2011.

 9. The basis of the current application for leave to remain  that  is  now
    before the Tribunal and was before Judge Traynor is twofold.  First, it
    is said that he has a subsisting relationship with his wife  who  is  a
    British citizen such that he should be allowed to remain  and  secondly
    it is said that he ought to be allowed  to  remain  because  he  has  a
    genuine relationship with his child which would be  adversely  affected
    were he to be removed from the United  Kingdom.   With  regard  to  his
    relationship with his wife it is said that she could not go with him to
    live in Nigeria because of her own health problems.  As the judge noted
    in his determination, the application which was  made  and  refused  in
    August 2012 was put on a different  basis  from  previous  applications
    which had been made in which he had not relied  upon  his  relationship
    with his wife or indeed it would seem  on  his  relationship  with  his
    child.  The judge did not accept that  the  appellant  was  a  credible
    witness in a number of regards.   He  noted  at  paragraph  62  of  his
    determination for example that "it is clear that the appellant has used
    every device available to him to delay his removal from this  country".
    He noted also that even despite the unfortunate delay in the respondent
    considering his initial application the evidence  as  to  what  he  was
    doing during the period between  2003  to  2010  was  extremely  vague.
    There was an absence of evidence such as could assist the judge  as  he
    put it in "understanding the strength of  the  appellant's  connections
    with his community over the period of time that he claims to have  been
    here" (at paragraph 62).

10. When dealing with the appellant's claimed  relationship  with  his  son
    Matthew the judge found at paragraph 64:

         "I would agree with Counsel on behalf of the respondent  that  such
         evidence [as to the regular contact that he says occurs between him
         and his son] was easily obtainable and the fact the  appellant  has
         not adduced such evidence means that what he  has  said  concerning
         the frequency of his association with the child is not as  reliable
         as he would wish me to believe".

    The judge also noted that although in his evidence  he  had  "initially
    stated that he has good and regular contact  with  the  child"  in  the
    course of his evidence "when I sought to  clarify  this  with  him,  he
    admitted that the child's mother is hostile to him, claiming that  this
    started in 2010 when  he  was  married".   The  judge  notes  that  the
    appellant then "changed his mind and said in fact that it was 2008 when
    that hostility commenced, when Matthew would be 5 years of age".

11. The judge also noted with regard to the appellant's  evidence  relating
    to his relationship with his son, also at paragraph 64,  that  "he  has
    never explained the basis of the mother's hostility towards him or that
    he played any direct role in the child's life".  I note in this  regard
    that in the course of his  submissions  before  me  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant, Mr Singarajah initially claimed that the appellant had  been
    living with his son up to 2008 or thereabouts but  when  asked  by  the
    Tribunal if he could point to any evidence that was before the Tribunal
    to this effect, he had to accept that he could not do so.

12. At paragraph 66 the judge found as follows:

         "The appellant has been unable to identify  any  reference  in  the
         school reports which he has produced which would suggest that he is
         playing a role in the child's education and welfare.  He has failed
         to adduce any evidence from  the  school  to  say  that  he  enjoys
         regular fortnightly contact or that he  is  permitted  to  see  the
         child for ten minutes, as  the  documents  and  statement  suggest.
         Fundamentally, there is no evidence to show that the  appellant  is
         involved  in  a  relationship  with  the  child.   I  am  therefore
         satisfied that the appellant's removal would not alter the  current
         relationship which I find is almost nonexistent."

    It is said on behalf of the appellant that this finding is at odds with
    the evidence because as noted above the first ground is  that  "the  IJ
    erred at para 66 in stating that there  was  no  evidence  establishing
    that the appellant had contact with his son at school.  The evidence of
    this in fact came from the UKBA itself, which had made  enquiries  with
    the son's school, see bundle P92".

13. This is a reference  to  what  is  set  out  at  paragraph  17  of  the
    respondent's letter  of  15  August  (or  thereabouts)  2012  in  which
    reference is made by the respondent to a  response  received  from  the
    son's school dated 14 March 2012 which apparently stated as follows:

         "Since  December  2011  Danny  has   had   contact   with   Matthew
         approximately thee times to date.  The contact usually lasts around
         ten minutes in total and is supervised by members  of  staff.   The
         contact takes place in the school office.  When dad first requested
         contact with Matthew the  school  contacted  Matthew's  mother  who
         consented that this was allowed as long as Matthew  did  not  leave
         the school premises.  The contact takes place on an ad  hoc  basis,
         with Danny just arriving at the school (we always ask for Danny  to
         wait until lunchtime to see Matthew so  he  does  not  miss  lesson
         time).  They normally just talk about what Matthew has been  doing,
         football etc.   Danny  also  telephones  the  school  to  speak  to
         Matthew.  If Danny phones during lesson time he is  asked  to  call
         back at lunchtime and the school arrange for Matthew  to  speak  to
         his dad on the telephone school office.  Again this  is  supervised
         and the conversation lasts approximately five minutes.   Danny  has
         had telephone contact about six times since September."

14. I will consider below as to whether or not the first ground is made out
    but it is right to note in this regard that the finding  by  the  judge
    would seem to be that the evidence from  the  school  contradicted  the
    evidence given by the appellant that he  enjoyed  "regular  fortnightly
    contact" with his son.  With regard to  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and his wife the judge  dealt  with  this  at  paragraphs  67
    onwards of his determination.  I  set  out  what  the  judge  found  at
    paragraphs 69 and 70 as follows:

         "69. The appellant's wife expressed  a  desire  to  remain  in  the
             United Kingdom because she said she has  heard  stories  about
             medical treatment in Nigeria.  She did not elaborate  on  what
             those stories are but from the tenor of her evidence it seemed
             that they were sufficient to deter her from wanting to  travel
             and live in Nigeria.  I accept that she has lived all  of  her
             life in this country and enjoys the benefit  of  the  National
             Health  Service  in  supporting  her  healthcare.   She   has,
             however, made no  enquiries  whatsoever  as  to  what  medical
             facilities would be available  to  her  in  Nigeria  and  what
             assistance may be given to help her and the appellant conceive
             a child.  I find that neither the appellant nor his wife  have
             adduced   any   evidence   which   would   suggest   that   an
             insurmountable obstacle arises concerning healthcare  so  that
             the  appellant  should  be  entitled  to  remain   under   the
             provisions of Appendix FM.

         70.  I take into account the fact the appellant's wife is currently
             in employment and has expressed a view that she  would  choose
             to live in this country.   However,  in  answer  to  a  direct
             question from me she confirmed that if the only  way  to  save
             her marriage was to travel to Nigeria to live with her husband
             then she would do so but  that  would  obviously  not  be  her
             choice.  In the circumstances, and  notwithstanding  the  fact
             that I accept  that  she  is  in  fulltime  employment,  I  am
             satisfied  that  she  has  presented   no   evidence   of   an
             insurmountable  obstacle  which  would  prevent  her  and  the
             appellant from continuing their  relationship  and  developing
             that relationship in Nigeria."

15. With regard to the judge's references to "insurmountable obstacles"  as
    noted  it  is  argued  in  the  grounds  (albeit  in  relation  to  the
    relationship with the application's child) that this is the wrong  test
    and the right test is whether it would be reasonable for that child  to
    leave the UK.  In argument before me Mr Singarajah submitted that  with
    regard to the appellant's wife this was  the  incorrect  test  as  well
    because (relying on various previous decisions  and  in  particular  EB
    (Kosovo) and VW (Uganda) [2009]  EWCA  Civ  5)  the  correct  test  was
    whether or not this would be reasonable.   However,  as  Judge  Osborne
    noted when refusing permission to appeal originally, the judge  did  go
    on to make findings in the alternative under Article 8 and when  making
    these findings noted at paragraph 72 that in this regard:

          "I accept that  terms  such  as  'insurmountable  obstacles'  were
         inappropriate to my consideration of the  appellant's  freestanding
         Article 8  rights  and  that  I  really  must  assess  whether  the
         respondent's decision  is  reasonable  to  the  proposal  that  the
         appellant now be removed from this country."

16. Before me in addition to the  authorities  to  which  I  have  referred
    above, Mr Singarajah also relied on the decision of Green J in Iftikhar
    AhmedI [2014] EWHC 300 (Admin).  He relied upon the grounds although he
    accepted that with regard to  the  appellant's  relationship  with  his
    child it was not suggested now that the child could or  would  ever  be
    expected to leave with the appellant to  Nigeria.   He  maintained  the
    submission that the balancing exercise necessary for  consideration  of
    the appellant's Article 8 rights had not  been  properly  carried  out,
    relying in particular to observations within VW (Uganda) to the  effect
    that the correct test was whether or not it was reasonable to expect  a
    family member to leave with  the  appellant.   He  also  sustained  the
    argument which was contained within the grounds to the effect that  the
    judge had wrongly considered that there was no relationship between the
    appellant and his son.

17. On behalf of the respondent Mr Deller submitted that if this appeal was
    to succeed either the appellant must  meet  the  requirements  set  out
    within the specific parts of the Immigration Rules or it  must  succeed
    on the basis that his removal  would  be  unduly  harsh  which  is  the
    expression used within the Rules to cover situations where even  though
    an application cannot succeed under specific provisions, nonetheless it
    ought to be allowed otherwise under  Article  8.   The  respondent  had
    considered whether or not the appellant should be allowed to remain  on
    the basis of his claimed relationship with his son but  had  considered
    that effectively there was not such a relationship.  Back in 2012 there
    had been evidence only of very limited and sporadic contact between the
    appellant and his son and there does not seem to have been any evidence
    of any contact after that.  There had been conflicting  oral  testimony
    from  the  appellant  and  his  witnesses  about  the  more  up-to-date
    situation and the First-tier Tribunal Judge had difficult in  accepting
    that the appellant had been a reliable witness.  With regard  therefore
    to the suggestion that there was a  "genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship"  between  the  appellant  and  his  son  the   respondent
    considered that there was not and the judge had agreed that  there  was
    not.  It was a simple requirement of the Rule as it stands  that  there
    has to be a genuine and subsisting parental relationship and there  was
    no question of Matthew leaving the UK in any event.

18. So far as delay is concerned, there is  in  any  event  a  scarcity  of
    evidence as to the suggestion that family life  between  the  appellant
    and his son was strengthened during the delay from 2003 to 2008.   Even
    if there had been such  a  strengthening  (and  the  evidence  did  not
    support this) on the limited evidence which was now available  and  was
    available  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  that  relationship   had
    weakened again.  By the time of the hearing by the First-tier  Tribunal
    the judge had legitimate doubts as to whether Article 8(1) was  engaged
    at all.  Even if it was it is an academic distinction as to whether  or
    not the question of  the  parent/minor  child  relationship  should  be
    considered under question (1), (2) or (5)  of  Razgar  because  in  any
    event in the circumstances of this case  it  should  be  accorded  very
    little weight.

19. In reply Mr Singarajah suggested first that it would not  be  right  to
    say that because the judge had  found  that  the  appellant  could  not
    establish that he had been here twenty years,  that  necessarily  meant
    that he had also found that the appellant lacked credibility.

20. Secondly he submitted that  the  amendments  to  the  Rules  could  not
    entitle the respondent not to have proper  regard  to  the  appellant's
    Article 8 rights because by Section 5  of  the  Human  Rights  Act  the
    respondent was required to give effect to these Convention rights.

Discussion

21. I have tried to set out the arguments advanced in sufficient detail  as
    to enable my decision to be  expressed  succinctly.   The  first  issue
    which I have to consider is whether or not it can properly be said that
    there was a material mistake of fact in Judge  Traynor's  determination
    with regard to whether or not the appellant had had  contact  with  his
    son at school.  In my judgment there is no material error  of  fact  in
    this regard.  What the  judge  found  at  paragraph  66  was  that  the
    appellant had "failed to adduce any evidence from  the  school  to  say
    that he enjoys regular fortnightly contact [my emphasis] or that he  is
    permitted to see the child  for  ten  minutes,  as  the  documents  and
    statements suggest."  It is said that this is inconsistent with what is
    contained within the  response  received  from  the  appellant's  son's
    school to the effect that the appellant did have contact with his  son.
    However what is said in that response by the school is that  they  have
    had contact approximately three times between September 2011 and  March
    2012 which is on average once every two months.  So when the judge says
    that the appellant has failed to adduce evidence from the school to say
    that he enjoys regular  fortnightly  contact,  that  is  correct.   The
    evidence from the school does not say this.

22. In my judgment the judge was entitled to go on to find as he  did  that
    "there is no evidence to show that  the  appellant  is  involved  in  a
    relationship with the child".  He finds that the "current relationship"
    is one which "is almost non-existent".  He does not say that  there  is
    no contact at all but that the contact is so limited as not  to  amount
    to any meaningful relationship.

23. It is not the function of this Tribunal to decide  whether  or  not  it
    would reach the same conclusion on the evidence.   The  Upper  Tribunal
    can only interfere with a finding of fact if it is one  which  was  not
    open to the judge on the evidence  before  him.   In  my  judgment  the
    finding which this judge made with regard to the  relationship  between
    the appellant and his son (or rather effectively the  lack  of  such  a
    relationship) was entirely  open  to  him  on  the  evidence  which  he
    considered and which he has set out in the course of what is a thorough
    and detailed determination.

24. Similarly with regard to the position of the  appellant's  wife  it  is
    clear that the judge considered this very carefully and not just on the
    basis of whether or not there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  her
    leaving  the  country.   As  is  apparent  from  paragraph  72  of  his
    determination the judge considered whether  or  not  "the  respondent's
    decision is reasonable to  the  proposal  that  the  appellant  now  be
    removed from this country".  In other words he did what it is suggested
    in the grounds he should have done which is consider whether or not the
    removal was reasonable weighing up all the factors rather  than  merely
    whether or not there were insurmountable obstacles to  the  appellant's
    wife leaving with him.

25. In my judgment there is no material error of  law  in  Judge  Traynor's
    decision.  Effectively, he considered all the circumstances and all the
    evidence which was put before him and reached  conclusions  which  were
    open to him on  the  evidence.   He  was  entitled  to  find  that  the
    relationship asserted between the appellant and his son  was  extremely
    limited indeed and that the removal  of  this  appellant  in  the  full
    circumstances of this case was proportionate and therefore lawful  with
    regard to his Article 8 rights.  It follows that this  appeal  must  be
    dismissed and I will so find.

Decision

There being no material error of law in the determination of the  First-tier
Tribunal, the appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Signed:                                 Date: 30 May 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Craig


