
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Ia/36422/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 September 2015                 |On 28 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MR JEPTHAT EMMANUAL
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Julie Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Sarah Pinder, Counsel, instructed by Universe
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is not subject to an  anonymity  order  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.  Neither  party
    has invited me to make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI  2008/2698)  and  I
    have not done so.

 2. The appellant (hereafter the Secretary of State)  appeals  against  the
    decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Owens)  allowing   the
    respondent's appeal against a decision  taken  on  29  August  2014  to
    refuse to issue  a  permanent  residence  card  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the Regulations").

Introduction

 3. The respondent is a Nigerian citizen and was previously issued  with  a
    residence card on 1 September 2009 on the basis that his spouse  was  a
    Portuguese citizen exercising treaty rights in the UK. He was  divorced
    in March 2014 and the Secretary of State concedes that the  spouse  was
    exercising treaty rights at the  date  of  divorce  and  therefore  the
    respondent is entitled  to  a  residence  card  because  he  meets  the
    requirements of paragraph 10(5) in respect of  his  retained  right  of
    residence.

 4.  The  Secretary  of  State  accepted  the  respondent's  identity   and
    nationality but concluded that he  was  not  entitled  to  a  permanent
    residence card because he had to show that his spouse was  a  qualified
    person from April 2011 to the date of divorce. There was no evidence of
    the spouse exercising treaty rights between April 2011 and May 2012.

The Appeal

 5. The respondent appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an oral
    hearing at Richmond on 27 March 2015. He was represented by Ms  Pinder.
    The First-tier Tribunal found that the respondent must be issued with a
    residence card and that the decision to refuse  to  issue  a  permanent
    residence card was not in accordance with the Secretary of States'  own
    policy. The relevant policy notice was issued on 4 August 2011  and  is
    entitled "Pragmatic approach in cases where an applicant is  unable  to
    provide required evidence 10/11 (revised)", hereafter "the policy".

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal  had  erred  in  law
    because the policy  only  applied  where  the  relationship  had  ended
    acrimoniously and the applicant had made every  effort  to  obtain  the
    required documentation. There was no finding in the decision  that  the
    respondent had made every effort to obtain the required documentation.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Heynes on
    8 July 2015 on the basis that it was arguable that the judge was  wrong
    to have concluded that the Secretary of State had failed to follow  her
    own policy and in any event the pragmatic approach might still lead  to
    a refusal.

 8. Thus, the appeal came before me

Discussion

 9. Ms Isherwood confirmed that a  residence  card  issued  under  retained
    right of residence would be valid for 5 years  and  conceded  that  the
    respondent was entitled to a residence  card.  However,  there  was  no
    evidence about what the respondent did to obtain the  information.  The
    applicant cannot sit back and do  nothing.  There  is  nothing  in  the
    decision about what the appellant has done and in paragraph 21  of  the
    decision the judge shifts the burden back to the Secretary of State.

10. Ms Pinder conceded that there was  difficulty  in  how  the  judge  had
    adduced the policy. There are no  findings  about  how  the  respondent
    sought to obtain the evidence but that was dealt with in oral evidence.
    Ms Pinder could not submit that the judge had not erred in applying the
    policy because of the absence of such findings. The appeal was  allowed
    under retained right of residence anyway. It  was  open  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal to remake the decision by considering the  evidence  from  the
    First-tier.

11. Ms Isherwood confirmed that she had not seen the record of  proceedings
    but the presenting officer in the First-tier did make a note about  the
    efforts made by the respondent.

12. Paragraph 2 of the policy is clear - applications received on the basis
    that the appellant has a retained right to  reside  should  be  treated
    pragmatically where there has been  a  breakdown  in  the  relationship
    between the applicant and the EEA national sponsor because it  may  not
    be possible for the applicant to provide the required  documentation  -
    including where the applicant's relationship  has  ended  acrimoniously
    but they have provided evidence to  show  that  they  have  made  every
    effort to provide the required documents.

13. In this case, the judge has made no findings about any efforts made  by
    the respondent but has allowed the  appeal  in  respect  of  issuing  a
    permanent residence card on the basis of the policy. That is a material
    error of law. In addition, the  appeal  in  respect  of  the  permanent
    residence card should only have been allowed  to  the  extent  that  no
    lawful decision had yet been made in respect of  the  application.  The
    policy only requires caseworkers to look at each case according to  its
    individual merits.

14. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  allow  the  respondent's
    appeal under the policy involved the making of an error of law and  its
    decision cannot stand. This appeal could have been avoided if the judge
    had made findings of fact on the evidence relevant to the  policy  that
    was before the First-tier Tribunal and avoided falling  into  error  by
    equating any failure to follow the policy with a mandatory  requirement
    to issue a permanent residence card.

15. I indicated to the parties that I would consider remaking the  decision
    on the basis of the record of proceedings. Having done so, I find  that
    the respondent gave uncontested evidence that some  documents  relating
    to the spouse's employment were left in the house and he also got  some
    of them through subsequent  contact  with  the  spouse.  A  cousin  was
    involved but the last telephone contact with the  spouse  was  in  June
    2013. The respondent explained that he needed her help but she was  not
    willing to do anything. He also sent people to see her but she was  not
    interested. I am therefore satisfied that the respondent has made every
    effort to provide the required documents; namely the evidence that  the
    spouse was exercising treaty rights in the UK between  April  2011  and
    May 2012.

Decision

16. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    remake the decision as follows;

          1) The decision of the Secretary of State to refuse  to  issue  a
             permanent residence card is not in accordance with the law and
             the respondent's appeal is  allowed  to  the  extent  that  no
             lawful decision has yet  been  made  in  accordance  with  the
             policy. The Secretary of State should now further consider the
             respondent's application for a  permanent  residence  card  in
             light of my findings of fact.

          2) The respondent is entitled to a residence card in any event.



Signed   [pic]    Date 27 October 2015

Judge Archer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
