
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/36134/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 21 April 2015                              |On 29 April 2015             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                               LORD BANNATYNE
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                           KAYODE SOLOMON OSIBANJO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is the Secretary of State and is hereinafter referred  as
    "the Secretary of State".  The respondent is hereinafter referred to as
    "the applicant".

 2. This is an  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    promulgated on  18  December  2014  which  allowed  an  appeal  by  the
    applicant against a decision of  the  Secretary  of  State  made  on  5
    September 2014 to refuse to vary leave to remain in the United  Kingdom
    as a parent of a United Kingdom citizen and  to  remove  by  directions
    under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

Background

 3. The applicant  is  a  citizen  of  Nigeria.   The  application  to  the
    Secretary of State was refused on the basis  that  insufficient  income
    had been demonstrated and on Article 8 grounds.  The appeal was allowed
    by the First-tier  Tribunal  on  immigration  grounds,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal having held that the applicant could not meet the requirements
    of Appendix FM of  the  Immigration  Rules  went  on  to  consider  the
    exception in  EX.1  namely:  would  it  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    applicant's child to leave the UK?  It held that it would not.

 4. For the purposes of this appeal the following findings in fact  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal are material:

       . The appellant and his partner have lived together for a  period  of
         three years.  They have a daughter born on 22 October 2014.

       . The applicant's partner is a self-employed hairdresser.  She  would
         lose her business if she had to go to Nigeria.

       . "I find that the couple have a committed relationship  as  claimed,
         indeed that was not doubted in the  reasons  for  refusal,  and  is
         evident from the clear oral evidence heard today.  I find that both
         witnesses were truthful as to  their  employment  history,  it  was
         corroborated  for  the  appellant  by  slips  from   his   previous
         employment agency, and for his partner from  her  wage  slips  when
         employed.  From the oral evidence I accept that she  is  now  self-
         employed as claimed.  I also find that the  appellant  works  as  a
         personal trainer  and  sport's  coach,  though  I  have  inadequate
         evidence to quantify the earnings he  receives".   (See:  paragraph
         20).

       . "I find that the child in this case is  a  young  baby,  a  British
         citizen within the UK, who must clearly remain with her  mother,  a
         British citizen, in view of  her  age.   I  accept  from  the  oral
         evidence heard that she also has a close bond with her grandparents
         in the UK who care for her from time to time.  I find  in  addition
         that she has the close bond to be expected for a young child to her
         father, he lives with her and also shares her  care.   There  is  a
         genuine and subsisting relationship between father  and  child.   I
         find that in the absence of any other factors, it  would  be  [sic]
         clearly be in the best interest of the child for her to remain with
         her parents".  (See paragraph 26).

       . "In considering that question (whether it would  be  reasonable  to
         expect the child to leave the UK) I keep in mind that such a  young
         baby must in my judgment remain with her  mother.   Neither  mother
         nor child have ever been  to  Nigeria,  and  to  move  there  would
         separate them from their parents and  grandparents,  together  with
         compelling Miss Grundy to leave her business in the  UK  and  start
         afresh".  (See paragraph 31).

       . "The child and mother in this case are British citizens and matters
         of some gravity are required  to  justify  them  effectively  being
         compelled to leave the UK by going to Nigeria.  I keep in mind  the
         need for the fair  application  of  immigration  control,  and  the
         economic position of the UK.  But I  also  note  that  my  findings
         above are [sic] indicate that though the appellant has not produced
         sufficient financial evidence to show his  actual  income,  I  have
         found that he has worked legally for all of his period in  the  UK,
         and continues to do so.  I do not find that it would be  reasonable
         to expect this child to leave the UK,  she  is  a  British  citizen
         innocent of any wrongdoing, would face separation at  an  important
         point in her life, a point at which  bonds  are  formed,  from  her
         country of birth  and  familiar  family  members.   It  would  also
         require her mother, a British citizen, to  leave  the  UK  since  a
         child of such age cannot be  separated  from  her  mother".   (See:
         paragraph 32).

 5. No adverse credibility and reliability findings were made with  respect
    to the applicant and  his  partner.   The  applicant  had  always  been
    legally present in the UK.

 6. On the basis of the foregoing the First-tier Tribunal held as follows:

         "I find that the appellant does meet the provisions of appendix  FM
         as they apply to a parent seeking limited  leave  to  remain  as  a
         parent".

Submissions of behalf of the Secretary of State

 7. Two arguments were made on behalf of the Secretary of State by Mr Nath.



 8. First, the First-tier Tribunal had failed to consider and apply the law
    as set out in Sabir (Appendix FM - EX.1 not freestanding)  [2014]  UKUT
    00063 (IAC).  It was his position that there was  no  consideration  at
    all of the possibility of the applicant returning to Nigeria  in  order
    to make an entry clearance application as a spouse.

 9. Secondly he contended that the First-tier Tribunal had failed to direct
    itself as to the seriousness test in VW (Uganda) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ
    5.  In elaboration of that submission he argued that  paragraph  32  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal's  determination  listed  nothing  more  than
    matters of choice or inconvenience.  His position was that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal had treated the fact that the  appellant  had  a  British
    citizen child as a trump card, which was impermissible having regard to
    ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4 at paragraph 30.

Reply for the Applicant

10. The applicant on his own behalf directed our  attention  to  paragraphs
    16, 19, 26 and 32 of the First-tier Tribunal's determination  which  he
    said properly assessed the question of whether it  was  reasonable  for
    the child to go to Nigeria.

11. It was his position that his having to go back  to  Nigeria  to  obtain
    entry clearance would result in considerable disruption and stress.  It
    would mean that his partner would have to give up  her  self-employment
    to look after their very young child resulting in her having  to  claim
    state benefits.

Discussion

12. With respect to the first argument advanced on behalf of the  Secretary
    of State we observe that Sabir was not founded upon before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal by the Secretary of State.

13. It appears to us that if the Secretary of State believed  that  in  the
    circumstances of the instant case Sabir was a  relevant  authority  the
    First-tier Tribunal should have had  its  attention  directed  to  that
    case.

14. Turning to look at the substance of the first argument put  forward  by
    Mr Nath we are  not  persuaded  that  the  failure  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to consider Sabir amounts to a material error of law.

15. In Sabir the Secretary of State sought to distinguish Chikwamba  [2008]
    UKHL 40 on this basis:

         "... in Chikwamba it was plain that the claimant in that  case  met
         the requirements of the Rules and it  was  therefore  a  'pointless
         exercise' to require her  to  leave  the  UK  to  apply  for  entry
         clearance which would be granted.  In this case, the  claimant  did
         not meet the financial requirements of the Rules.  The claimant had
         not applied for asylum."

16. When the First-tier Tribunal turned to consider that submission it held
    this:

          "18.    It is plain that the claimant in this case  does  not  and
         cannot meet the Immigration Rules as set out in Appendix FM".

17. The circumstances in the case before us were  not  that  the  applicant
    "does not and cannot meet the Immigration Rules".  Rather the  position
    was nearer the  situation  in  Chikwamba.   In  the  instant  case  the
    appellant and his partner's evidence  was  accepted  in  its  entirety.
    Their problem was  in  failing  to  adequately  vouch  their  earnings.
    Having regard to the whole terms of the determination there is no  real
    reason to believe that if the application  were  made  in  Nigeria  the
    applicant would not satisfy the requirements of the Immigration  Rules.
    In these circumstances the observations of Lord Brown in  Chikwamba  at
    paragraph 46 are relevant:

         "This appellant came to the UK to seek asylum, met  an  old  friend
         from Zimbabwe, married him and had a child. He is now settled  here
         as a refugee and cannot return. No one apparently doubts  that,  in
         the longer term, this family  will  have  to  be  allowed  to  live
         together here. Is it really to be said that  effective  immigration
         control requires that the appellant and her child must first travel
         back (perhaps at the taxpayer's expense) to Zimbabwe, a country  to
         which  the  enforced  return  of  failed  asylum-seekers   remained
         suspended for more than two years after  the  appellant's  marriage
         and where conditions are 'harsh and unpalatable', and remain  there
         for some months obtaining entry clearance, before finally  she  can
         return (at her own expense) to the UK to  resume  her  family  life
         which meantime will have been gravely  disrupted?  Surely  one  has
         only to ask the question to recognise the right answer".

    Applying those observations to the case before us we are satisfied that
    it cannot be said that the applicant who is settled  in  this  country,
    who has a very young child should return to Nigeria, have his life  and
    the life of his partner and child seriously disrupted in order to apply
    for entry in circumstances where almost certainly he  will  be  granted
    entry and allowed to return to live with his family.

18. Beyond  the  guidance  given  in  Chikwamba  further  helpful  guidance
    regarding this matter has recently been given by Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Gill in R (on the application of Chen) v Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department (Appendix FM  -  Chikwamba  -  temporary  separation  -
    proportionality) IJR 2015 UKUT 00189 (IAC).  The judge begins by noting
    that Appendix FM does not include consideration of the question whether
    it would be disproportionate to expect an individual to return  to  his
    home country to make an entry clearance application to  re-join  family
    in the UK.

20. Upper Tribunal Judge Gill held at paragraph  (i)  of  the  headnote  as
    follows:

         "There may be cases in which there are no insurmountable  obstacles
         to family life being enjoyed outside the  UK  but  where  temporary
         separation to enable an individual to make an application for entry
         clearance may be disproportionate".

21. At paragraph 24 of her determination she sets  out  her  reasoning  for
    reaching that conclusion:

         "(ii)    I raised the question whether, if  an  individual  accepts
             that there are no "insurmountable obstacles"  to  family  life
             being enjoyed in his or her  home  country,  it  would  be  in
             breach of Article 8 to require the same individual  to  return
             to his or her home country  temporarily  for  the  purpose  of
             making an application for entry clearance.  Neither Mr  Palmer
             nor Ms Thelen addressed me on this issue but, having reflected
             on it, I am inclined to the view that Mr Mandalia was right to
             suggest in R (Iqbal) that there may well  be  cases  in  which
             there are no insurmountable obstacles to the  continuation  of
             family outside the UK, but the requirement to  return  to  the
             applicant's country of origin to make an application for leave
             to enter the Uk would be a disproportionate interference  with
             their Article 8 rights.  The latter may apply  to  individuals
             affected by the decision being separated  temporarily  because
             circumstances  arise  which  make  such  temporary  separation
             disproportionate but which would not arise  if  they  were  to
             continue their family abroad.  This possibility was  envisaged
             in Hayat, where (at para 18) Elias LJ said:

                  'It may at first blush seem odd that Article 8 rights  may
                  be  infringed  by  an  unjustified  insistence  that   the
                  applicant should return home to make the application  [for
                  entry clearance], even though  a  subsequent  decision  to
                  refuse the application on the merits will not.  The reason
                  is that once there  is  an  interference  with  family  or
                  private  life,  the  decision  maker  must  justify   that
                  interference.  Where what is relied upon is an  insistence
                  on  complying  with  formal   procedures   that   may   be
                  insufficient to justify even  a  temporary  disruption  to
                  family life.  By contrast, a  full  consideration  of  the
                  merits may  readily  identify  features  which  justify  a
                  refusal to grant leave to remain"

    This case we believe is one where the Secretary of State in now seeking
    to rely on Sabir, is insisting on compliance with formal procedure  and
    the absence of the applicant in Nigeria, even temporarily, would result
    in his  partner  becoming  unemployed  and  having  to  rely  at  least
    temporarily  on  state  benefits.   When  weighed  against  the  public
    interest, this we are satisfied, would on its own be  disproportionate.



22. Accordingly it seems to us for the above reasons that  the  failure  to
    consider Sabir does not amount to a material error of law.

23. Turning to the second ground of appeal we observe that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's  decision  in  relation  to  the  proportionality  issue  is
    carefully written and well  reasoned.   In  particular  the  First-tier
    Tribunal has not used the child as a trump card.  It seems to  us  that
    the approach to the child's position is in conformity with the guidance
    given by the Supreme Court at paragraph 10 in Zoumbas  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 74.  The First-tier  Tribunal
    then properly weighs the considerations regarding the child against the
    identified public interest and comes to an adequately reasoned decision
    as to why in the instant case the balance falls  on  the  side  of  the
    applicant.  This is a case in which a differently constituted  Tribunal
    might have reached a different decision.   However,  in  our  view  the
    first-tier Tribunal was entitled to reach its decision and in  reaching
    its decision did not err in law.

24. For these reasons we dismiss the appeal.

25. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 23 April 2015

Lord Bannatyne
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
