
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                Appeal Number:
IA/36761/2013
      IA/36769/2013

                                                 IA/36791/2013

                                                             IA/36795/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |            Decision & Reasons      |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 13 January 2015                       |            On 10 April 2015        |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL GA BLACK

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             S O I + 3 claimants
                          (anonymity direction MADE)


                                                                   Claimants


                      Remaking of DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is a remaking of a decision and reasons following a decision dated
    15th January 2015 that there was a material an  error  of  law  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision in allowing the appeal  on  the  grounds
    that the decision made  was  not  in  accordance  with  the  Law.   The
    Tribunal's decision that Regulation 6  (Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
    2006) ("EEA Regs.") was met was  set  aside.   Directions  were  issues
    following the error of law  hearing  for  written  submissions  on  the
    applicability of Regulation 15A and Article 8 ECHR.

 2. I refer to the Upper Tribunal decision dated 15th January 2015 for  the
    background facts and procedural history.  I have considered the written
    submissions provided by the Claimants representatives.  There  were  no
    written submissions from the Secretary of State.

 3. The Tribunal erred by finding  that  the  relevant  EEA  national,  the
    Claimants step-father, was a "qualified" person under Regulation 6 (EEA
    Regs.), where there was no evidence to support that  claim  as  at  the
    date of hearing (Boodhoo & another (EEA Regs.:relevant evidence  [2013]
    UKUT 00346(IAC)).  This amounted to a material misdirection of law on a
    material matter.  Notwithstanding  that  the  Tribunal  relied  on  the
    evidence of the EEA national's estranged spouse, her evidence as to her
    husband's employment was limited in  time  to  the  date  he  left  the
    matrimonial home in December 2013.

 4. In considering  the  matter  further  I  take  into  account  that  the
    application was originally considered under Regulations  6,  7  and  17
    (EEA Regs.) and that the  Immigration  decision  was  a  refusal  of  a
    residence card (No further basis of stay in the UK).  The Secretary  of
    State gave no consideration to either Article 8 under or outside of the
    Rules or to  where  the  best  interests  of  the  children  lie.   The
    Claimants are either under eighteen years or in some form of education.
     There is no information about the Claimants father.

 5. It appears to have been part of the Claimants case  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal that their mother had established  a  retained  right  of
    residence, however this matter has not been considered  nor  determined
    as she was not a  party  to  the  proceedings.   She  has  a  right  of
    residence until December 2015 which is derived from her former husband.
     In addition submissions are made that the Claimants  have  established
    derived rights of residence under Regulation 15A EEA Regs.  This matter
    has not  been considered by the Secretary of  State  and  there  is  no
    evidence as to the location of the Claimants step  father  who  it  has
    been found is not a "qualified " person.  As there is no immediate risk
    of removal Article 8 does not fall to be considered.   Accordingly  the
    only matter outstanding is the  failure  to  consider  where  the  best
    interests of the children lie.

    Decision

 6.  I remake the decision substituting a decision to allow the  appeal  on
    the grounds that the decision made was not in accordance with the  law,
    to the limited extent that the matter is remitted to the  Secretary  of
    State for reconsideration of the best interests of the children.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Claimants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.   Three  of
the Claimants are under the age of 18 years.


Signed                              Date 1.4.2015


GA Black
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award made.

Signed                              Date 1.4.2015


GA Black
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

