
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/36097/2014
     IA/36108/2014
     IA/36109/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 February 2016                    |On 8 March 2016                      |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                MRS SHOVA SHRESTHA MAHarjan (FIRST APPELLANT)
                    MR RAKESH MAHARJAN (SECOND APPELLANT)
                           [RM] (THIRD APPELLANT)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT Made)

                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr Patel, Hiren Patel Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. In this decision, I shall refer to the respondents  as  the  appellants
    and to the appellant as the respondent (as they  appeared  respectively
    before the First-tier Tribunal).  The appellants are  all  citizens  of
    Nepal.  The third appellant is the daughter of  the  second  and  first
    appellants.  On 28 August 2014, the respondent refused the  application
    of the first appellant for leave to remain in the United Kingdom  as  a
    Tier 4 Student.  The second and third appellants were refused  also  as
    the first appellant's dependants.   The  decision  was  also  taken  to
    remove the appellants from the United Kingdom under Section 10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  (Mr  S  D
    Lloyd) found that the appeal should be allowed as  "not  in  accordance
    with the law."  The Secretary of State now appeals, with permission, to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. At [10] the judge wrote:

         The Tier 4 decision is stated to have no right of appeal due to the
         'earlier' Section 10 decision to remove.  Both decisions carry  the
         same date, the IS151B date of service is stated to be  1  September
         2014.  I therefore do not  accept  that  the  Section  10  decision
         preceded the Tier 4 decision  nor  that  the  right  of  appeal  is
         excluded from it.  No earlier Section 10  decision  is  adduced  as
         being relied on by the respondent in respect of this.

 3. Mr Walker, for  the  Secretary  of  State,  informed  me  that  he  had
    conducted a search of  the  respondent's  records  but  could  find  no
    earlier Section 10  removal  decision.   Mr  Walker  did  not  seek  to
    persuade me that the judge's remarks at [10] were inaccurate  or  wrong
    in law.  He did not pursue the second ground of appeal (failure to give
    adequate reasons for findings on a material matter).   He  agreed  with
    me, however, (as did Mr Patel, for the appellants) that  it  was  clear
    from [20]  that  the  judge  intended  to  return  the  matter  to  the
    respondent in order that she may re-make the decision in the  light  of
    the judge's findings of fact.  I am happy  to  clarify  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision to that extent.

Notice of Decision

The appeals of the Secretary of State are dismissed.   The  applications  of
these appellants are to be returned to the Secretary of State in order  that
she may make decisions in the light of the  First-tier  Tribunal's  findings
of fact.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date 20 February 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

