
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/36661/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |    Decision & Reasons         |
|                                              |Promulgated                    |
|On 21 December 2015                           |    On 20 January 2016         |
|                                              |                               |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                            ms sheena agnes gali
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Walsh, Counsel, instructed by Universe
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Del Fabbro (Judge Del Fabbro),  promulgated  on  20  May
    2015, in which he dismissed her appeal against the Respondent's refusal
    to issue her with a permanent  residence  card  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (the Regulations).

 2. The Appellant has at all material times been a family member of an  EEA
    national, a Polish citizen whom she married on 5 July 2008.   Following
    the marriage a residence card was applied for and then granted  by  the
    Respondent, running from 25 September 2008 until 25 September 2013.  In
    late 2013 the couple separated but  have  not  as  yet  divorced.   The
    application for the permanent residence card was made on 25 July  2013.
    The initial refusal of the application was  subsequently  withdrawn  by
    the Respondent and a fresh decision issued.   The  appeal  came  before
    Judge Del Fabbro on 9 April 2015.

 3. At paragraph 6 of this decision he set out the evidence that was before
    him and at  paragraphs  16  to  18  he  considered  that  evidence  and
    concluded that  there  was  insufficient  information  for  him  to  be
    satisfied that the EEA national had in fact been exercising his  Treaty
    rights in the United Kingdom for a continuous  period  of  five  years.
    Reference was made to various items of documentary evidence before him,
    to the fact that there was no direct evidence  from  the  EEA  national
    himself, to the small amounts of National Insurance contributions  made
    by the EEA national over the course of time,  and  to  the  absence  of
    other evidence showing economic activity.  It is said in  paragraph  18
    that there was no "clear and cogent  evidence"  upon  which  the  judge
    could conclude in the Appellant's favour.  He therefore  dismissed  the
    appeal under the Regulations.  There was no Article 8 issue before him.



 4. The Appellant sought permission to appeal and this was refused  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal but then granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan on
    10 September 2015.  She commented that  in  light  of  the  documentary
    evidence, in particular the SA302 forms from HMRC, it was arguable that
    Judge Del Fabbro had in fact applied too high a standard  of  proof  in
    respect of the evidence before him and in light of  the  issues  to  be
    decided.

The Hearing before me

 5. At the outset of the hearing  Mr  Clarke  confirmed  that  he  was  not
    conceding any issues in this case  and  he  relied  upon  the  Rule  24
    notice.  Mr Walsh submitted that the HMRC documents referred to in  the
    grant of  permission  were  strong  and  cogent  evidence  of  the  EEA
    national's exercise of Treaty rights during the five-year  period  from
    2008 to  2013.   The  Respondent  herself  had  accepted  that  he  was
    exercising such rights in 2008 when the  initial  application  for  the
    residence card was granted.  There  was  effective  and  genuine  self-
    employment by the EEA national.  The judge had failed  to  engage  with
    the SA302 forms adequately.  He  had  misdirected  himself  as  to  the
    amount of National Insurance contributions paid by the EEA national and
    had failed to have any regard to the fact that contributions were based
    upon profit: when the profits did not reach  a  certain  threshold,  no
    contributions were payable.  In addition to the SA302 forms,  Mr  Walsh
    referred me to tax assessment statements  and  to  the  self-employment
    short forms.  He then relied on the decision of the Court of Justice of
    the European Union in the case of Levin [1982] ECR 1035,  and  referred
    me to paragraphs 2 to 4, 13 to 14 and 16 to 17 thereof.  I was referred
    to Appellant's first bundle, which  had  been  before  the  judge.   He
    referred me to the Appellant's witness statement and pages 74,  75,  83
    and 85 of that first bundle.  He also referred me to pages 74 to 77  of
    the Appellant's second bundle.  The evidence contained in these  pages,
    Mr Walsh submitted, was  sufficient  to  have  satisfied  the  relevant
    standard of proof.

 6. In his submissions, Mr Clarke accepted that the judge had made a  minor
    error in suggesting that the relevant five-year period was that leading
    up to the date of application or the date of  decision:  the  five-year
    period could arise at any time provided that  it  was  continuous.   Mr
    Clarke submitted that the judge had in fact referred  to  all  relevant
    evidence, had taken it into account, and had reached  conclusions  that
    were open to him.  There was nothing irrational in  his  approach.   He
    relied on the Court of Appeal decision in Amos [2011] EWCA Civ 552  for
    the point that the Respondent was not under a duty to seek out evidence
    from HMRC.  Mr Clarke submitted that it was to  be  expected  that  the
    Appellant should have provided more evidence about the  EEA  national's
    self-employment at the relevant time.  There were no  audited  accounts
    and very little evidence about the actual economic activity during  the
    relevant period.

 7. In reply, Mr Walsh suggested that the judge should  have  gone  on  and
    considered an alternative basis for a right of residence in respect  of
    the Appellant even if she was not entitled to permanent residence.   Mr
    Clarke responded to that by stating that this point had not been raised
    before the judge, was not in the grounds of appeal and in any event the
    evidence did not show that the EEA national was either a worker  or  in
    self-employment as at the date of hearing before the judge.

Decision on error of law

 8. In my view the judge has made a material error of  law  in  this  case.
    This could be categorised in one of two ways.  First, that despite  his
    self-direction in paragraphs 15 and 16, the Judge Del  Fabbro  did  not
    ultimately apply the correct standard of proof and effectively required
    something specifically more when assessing the  evidence  as  a  whole.
    Alternatively, and in line with a point  raised  in  the  grounds,  the
    conclusions he reached based upon the evidence that was before him  was
    one to which no Tribunal properly directed to the relevant evidence and
    standard of proof could reasonably have come.

 9. The evidence emanating from HMRC consisting of the SA302 forms for  the
    five years 2008 to 2013 were contained in the Respondent's bundle at G1
    to G6.   There  is  no  suggestion  that  these  forms  were  false  or
    unreliable and the judge certainly did not find that the  EEA  national
    had fabricated any evidence submitted to the HMRC.   Whilst  of  course
    the burden of proving her case rested with  the  Appellant,  there  was
    nothing from the Respondent to contradict the HMRC evidence. The  forms
    all  showed  that  profit  was  being  generated,  albeit  not  of  any
    particularly high value.  The fact that little tax  was  due  does  not
    mean that there was no genuine economic activity given that the profits
    were of course net  of  relevant  expenses  and  bearing  in  mind  the
    purposive interpretation that one must apply in respect of the concepts
    of working and self-employment in light of the decision in  Levin.   In
    my view what is said by the judge in  paragraph  17,  namely  that  the
    SA302 forms to which I have referred provided only "little support" for
    the contention that the  EEA  national  was  exercising  Treaty  rights
    indicates either that the relevant  standard  of  proof  has  not  been
    applied or that the judge was simply not entitled to have reached  that
    conclusion (when combined with the evidence as a whole).

10. Further, the SA302s were supported by additional  documentary  evidence
    contained within the Respondent's bundle, evidence that again  emanated
    from the HMRC.  The judge placed weight upon the fact  that  there  was
    minimal National Insurance contributions and that in his view these had
    only been paid for a four-month period. With respect to the judge, this
    ignored the fact that such contributions only  become  payable  once  a
    certain taxable income threshold  is  reached,  a  fact  that  was  not
    challenged by Mr Clarke at the hearing before me.

11. In addition to the HMRC documents there were before Judge Del Fabbro  a
    number of invoices relating to building materials that could only  have
    related to the  EEA  national's  claimed  self-employment.   These  are
    numerous and had not as far as I can see been challenged at any  stage.
    Bank statements for the EEA national also showed relevant  money  being
    paid into his account albeit not on a regular basis. However, as far as
    I can see from the papers it was not the Appellant's case that earnings
    from the EEA national's building work was regularly paid in or that  he
    had an accountant who could have prepared audited accounts.  Indeed  it
    was in fact the Appellant's case before the judge that the EEA national
    was disorganised when it came to his financial affairs.  In my view the
    judge has not looked at the evidence as a whole and in  the  manner  in
    which it was put and has in reality required too much by way  of  proof
    from the Appellant, thus again indicating that  a  higher  standard  of
    proof was in fact applied, or that the ultimate conclusion reached  was
    not one properly open to the judge on the evidence before him.

12. The Appellant herself gave evidence before Judge Del Fabbro, and  there
    are witness statements  in  the  papers  before  me.   She  was  living
    together with the EEA national during  the  relevant  five-year  period
    between 2008 and 2013 and there are  no  adverse  credibility  findings
    from the judge in respect of her evidence. As I read that evidence, she
    was asserting that the EEA national was self-employed in  the  building
    trade.  That evidence was clearly relevant to the issue of  whether  he
    was exercising Treaty rights for the relevant period, and yet the judge
    has not taken this into account or, more likely, has applied  a  higher
    threshold of required proof than was appropriate to the totality of the
    evidence.  In my view Mr Walsh was right to emphasise the fact that the
    Respondent herself had accepted  certain  evidence  when  granting  the
    residence card in 2008, and that that evidence included  the  first  of
    the SA302 documents at G1 of the Respondent's bundle and  an  unaudited
    profit and loss account document (also in the bundle).  Given that this
    evidence was deemed to be satisfactory by the Respondent in 2008 it  is
    then difficult to see why similar evidence covering a period thereafter
    was deemed insufficient by the judge.

13. In my view, given the Appellant's circumstances as set out  before  the
    judge and accepted by him, in particular that she  had  separated  from
    the EEA national in late 2013 (and despite the  fact  that  they  still
    occasionally met up), she had adduced a variety of  items  of  evidence
    relating to his exercising of Treaty rights from a variety of  sources,
    including of course the HMRC.  Given that the  standard  of  proof  was
    only that of the balance of probabilities the decision taken as a whole
    discloses one or other of  the  two  errors  to  which  I  have  eluded
    previously.  I therefore set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.



Disposal

14. Both representatives were agreed that if I  were  to  find  a  material
    error of law I could proceed to re-make the decision  on  the  evidence
    before me.

15. Having regard to all of the evidence referred  to  previously  and  the
    additional evidence submitted for the purposes of the  hearing  in  the
    Upper Tribunal under cover of  a  letter  dated  3  December  2015  (in
    particular pages 16-42 of the bundle), I find that the EEA national was
    in fact  exercising  Treaty  rights  as  a  self-employed  person,  and
    therefore a "qualified person", for the continuous period of five years
    beginning at the latest in July 2008 and at least up until  July  2013.
    In support of this conclusion  I  rely  in  particular  on  the  SA302s
    contained in the Respondent's bundle referred  to  earlier,  the  other
    evidence HMRC contained therein, the invoices relating to the buying of
    building materials, and the evidence of the Appellant herself contained
    in a witness statement the truth of which I have no reason to doubt. In
    respect of the last item, given that her evidence relates to  a  period
    when she was still actually living with the EEA national, I  find  that
    she was and is able to provide direct and reliable evidence in  respect
    of the particular issue with which I am now dealing.

16. It follows that the EEA national had himself acquired a permanent right
    of residence in the United Kingdom at the  latest  by  July  2013.   In
    turn, I find that the  Appellant,  being  the  EEA  national's  "family
    member" at all material times,  also  acquired  a  right  of  permanent
    residence in accordance with Regulation 15(1)(b) of the Regulations  as
    of  July  2013.   There  is  no  evidence  to  suggest  that  she   has
    subsequently lost that right. As such she is entitled to  the  issuance
    of a permanent residence card  under  Regulation  18.   Her  appeal  is
    therefore allowed on this basis.




Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I re-make  the  decision  by  allowing  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
(European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.


No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 17 January 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
because this is a case in which it  cannot  be  said  that  the  Appellant's
original application to the Respondent should clearly have been  successful.
Although a certain amount  of  evidence  was  supplied  at  first  instance,
additional material evidence only became available on appeal.



Signed                                  Date: 17 January 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



