
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/36719/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 26 November 2014                      |On 10 December 2014       |
|                                         |                          |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Mr DANISH AHMAD SHEIKH
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss D Qureshi, Counsel
      (instructed by Bukhari Chambers Solicitors)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellant  (the  Secretary  of  State)  appealed  with  permission
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Colyer on 17 October 2014  against
    the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Wyman  who  had  allowed
    (to the limited extent of returning the decision to  the  Secretary  of
    State to consider granting a period of 60  days  leave  to  enable  the
    original Appellant to be granted a fresh CAS) the  Respondent's  appeal
    against the Secretary of State's decision dated 17  August  2013  in  a
    determination promulgated on 4 September 2014.

2.    The Respondent is a national of Pakistan, who had applied for  further
    leave to remain as a  Tier  4  (General)  Student  Migrant,  which  was
    refused on the grounds that the Appellant had failed to submit a  valid
    CAS with his application.  His sponsor was neither  a  recognised  body
    nor an HEI.  The application was refused under paragraph  245ZX(ha)  of
    the Immigration Rules. The reasons for  refusal  letter  conveying  the
    decision to refuse to vary the Respondent's existing leave incorporated
    a second decision to remove the Respondent by way of  directions  under
    section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

3.    Judge Colyer considered it arguable that Judge Wyman should  not  have
    returned the decision  to  the  Secretary  of  State  as  she  had  not
    explained the basis of the remittal.  Indeed, it was  unclear  why  the
    decision had been remitted.

4.    Standard directions were made by  the  tribunal,  including  that  the
    decision would be remade immediately in the event that a material error
    of law were found.

5.    Mr Bramble for the Appellant relied on the  onwards  grounds  and  the
    grant of permission to appeal.  The judge had not identified the  basis
    on which the Secretary of State's decision was not in  accordance  with
    the law: see [45].   There had been no unfairness by the  Secretary  of
    State,  simply  a  failure  by  the  Respondent  to  comply  with   the
    Immigration Rules because of error or incompetence on the part  of  his
    college.

6.    Miss Quereshi for the  Respondent  submitted  that  the  Secretary  of
    State's discretion should have been invoked as the judge had  proposed.
    The Respondent had paid fees to his college and was now at  PhD  level.
    His legitimate expectations were not met. Miss  Quereshi  handed  up  a
    case note discussing Ukus (discretion: when reviewable) [2012] UKUT 307
    (IAC).  This stated that only where a  decision  maker  has  completely
    failed to make a lawful decision by exercising a discretion  which  was
    required to be exercised that  the  case  should  be  [ordered  to  be]
    reconsidered by the decision maker.  Otherwise the tribunal could  make
    its own decision.  Counsel also referred  to  Kobir  [2011]  EWHC  2515
    (Admin)  where  the  Secretary  of  State's  residual  discretion   was
    emphasised.

7.    At the conclusion of submissions the tribunal indicated that it  found
    that the judge had fallen into material error of law, for  the  reasons
    identified in the  grant  of  permission  to  appeal,  and  as  further
    developed in Mr Bramble's submissions.   These  need  not  be  repeated
    here.  No unfairness  in  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  making
    process was identified.  The fault lay with the Respondent's college or
    choice of college.  His remedy was to make a fresh Tier  4  application
    accompanied by the required documents, including a valid CAS, as indeed
    he had been invited to do at section E of the decision letter.

8.     The  determination  must  be  and  is  accordingly  set  aside.   The
    determination must be remade.  The original Appellant had not  complied
    with paragraph 245ZX of the Immigration Rules. There was no  unfairness
    of any kind by the Secretary of State, in that this was not a situation
    where,  for  example,  a  sponsor  licence  had  been  withdrawn   post
    application without notice to an applicant.  For further discussion  of
    these issues and a review of relevant cases concerning fairness see  EK
    (Ivory Coast) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1517.   There  was  no  discretion
    which required to be exercised because it was a case of non compliance.
     Nor was paragraph 245AA relevant.  As Judge Wyman found (see  [35]  of
    her determination), it was unclear why the original Appellant had  left
    the checking  of  sponsor  validity  or  current  registration  to  the
    college, when it was up to him to ensure that his application  met  the
    Immigration Rules.  The appeal must be dismissed.

9.    It of course remains open to the original Appellant to submit a  fresh
    application, as indicated in section  E  of  the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter, although he may not enjoy a right of appeal to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in the event that his application is refused.

DECISION

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law. The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed.


    The determination is set aside and remade as follows:


    The original Appellant's appeal is DISMISSED


    There can be no fee award as the appeal was dismissed

Signed      Dated 2 December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
