
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/36265/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13th September 2016               |On 14th September 2016               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 ADETOLA [L]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    In person


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. Mrs [L] applied on 6 March 2014 for leave to remain in  the  UK  on
         the basis of her private and family life.  Her  husband  and  three
         children are her dependants. Her application was  refused  and  her
         appeal was heard and  allowed  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  a
         decision promulgated on 23  March  2016.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
         found (such finding not being challenged) that she  does  not  meet
         the Immigration Rules and thus her  appeal  was  to  be  considered
         under the 'wider' Article  8  considerations.  The  SSHD  does  not
         challenge  the  underlying  factual  findings  by  the   First-tier
         Tribunal but rather their application (or non-application)  in  the
         context of the human rights appeal.

      2. The SSHD sought and was granted permission to appeal on the grounds
         that although the First-tier Tribunal judge had  self-directed  her
         approach by reference  to  MK  (India)  [2011]  UKUT  475  and  E-A
         (Nigeria) [2011] UKUT 315 and ZH  (Tanzania)  [2011]  UKSC  4,  the
         assessment of proportionality was flawed. The SSHD relied  upon  EV
         (Philippines) & Ors v SSHD [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874  in  her  grounds
         seeking permission.

      3. Before me Ms Fijiwala relied in addition upon MA (Pakistan)  [2016]
         EWCA Civ 705 which sets out the correct analysis to be  applied  as
         follows:

             "45. However, the approach I favour is inconsistent  with  the
             very recent decision of the Court of  Appeal  in  MM  (Uganda)
             where the court came down firmly in  favour  of  the  approach
             urged upon us by Ms Giovannetti, and I do not  think  that  we
             ought to depart from it. In my judgment, if the  court  should
             have regard to the conduct of  the  applicant  and  any  other
             matters relevant to the  public  interest  when  applying  the
             "unduly harsh" concept under section  117C(5),  so  should  it
             when considering the question of reasonableness under  section
             117B(6). I recognise that the provisions in section  117C  are
             directed towards the particular considerations which  have  to
             be borne in mind in the case of foreign criminals, and  it  is
             true that the court placed  some  weight  on  section  117C(2)
             which states that the more serious the offence, the greater is
             the interest in deportation of the prisoner. But the  critical
             point is that section 117C(5) is in substance a  free-standing
             provision in the same way as section 117B(6), and even so  the
             court  in  MM  (Uganda)  held  that  wider   public   interest
             considerations must be taken into account  when  applying  the
             "unduly harsh" criterion. It seems  to  me  that  it  must  be
             equally so with respect to  the  reasonableness  criterion  in
             section 117B(6).  It would not be appropriate  to  distinguish
             that decision simply because I have reservations whether it is
             correct.  Accordingly, in line with the approach in that case,
             I will analyse the appeals on the basis that the Secretary  of
             State's submission on this point is correct and that the  only
             significance of section 117B(6) is that where the  seven  year
             rule is satisfied, it is a factor of some  weight  leaning  in
             favour of leave to remain being granted.

             Applying the reasonableness test

             46.  Even on the approach of the Secretary of State, the  fact
             that a child has been here  for  seven  years  must  be  given
             significant  weight  when  carrying  out  the  proportionality
             exercise. Indeed, the Secretary of State published guidance in
             August  2015  in   the   form   of   Immigration   Directorate
             Instructions entitled "Family Life (as a  partner  or  parent)
             and Private Life: 10  Year Routes"  in which it  is  expressly
             stated that once the seven  years'  residence  requirement  is
             satisfied, there need to  be  "strong  reasons"  for  refusing
             leave (para. 11.2.4). These instructions  were  not  in  force
             when the cases now subject to appeal were determined,  but  in
             my view they merely confirm what is  implicit  in  adopting  a
             policy of this nature. After such a period of time  the  child
             will have put down roots and developed  social,  cultural  and
             educational links in the UK such  that  it  is  likely  to  be
             highly disruptive if the child is required to  leave  the  UK.
             That may be less so when the children are very  young  because
             the focus of their lives will be on their  families,  but  the
             disruption becomes more serious as they get older.   Moreover,
             in these cases there must be a very  strong  expectation  that
             the child's best interests will be to remain in  the  UK  with
             his parents as part of a family unit, and that must rank as  a
             primary consideration in the proportionality assessment.

             47.  Even if we were applying the narrow  reasonableness  test
             where the focus is on the child alone, it would not in my view
             follow that leave must be granted whenever  the  child's  best
             interests are in favour  of  remaining.  I  reject  Mr  Gill's
             submission that the best  interests  assessment  automatically
             resolves the reasonableness question. If Parliament had wanted
             the child's best interests to dictate the outcome of the leave
             application, it would have  said  so.  The  concept  of  "best
             interests" is after all a well established one. Even where the
             child's best interests are  to  stay,  it  may  still  be  not
             unreasonable to require the child to leave. That  will  depend
             upon a careful analysis of the nature and extent of the  links
             in the UK and in the country where it is  proposed  he  should
             return. What could not be considered, however,  would  be  the
             conduct and immigration history of the parents.

             48.  In  EV  (Phillipines)  Lord  Justice  Christopher  Clarke
             explained how a tribunal should apply the proportionality test
             where wider public interest considerations  are  in  play,  in
             circumstances where the best interests of  the  child  dictate
             that he should remain in the UK (paras. 34-37):

                  "34. In determining whether or not, in a case such as  the
                  present, the need for immigration  control  outweighs  the
                  best  interests  of  the  children,  it  is  necessary  to
                  determine the relative strength of the factors which  make
                  it in their best interests to remain  here;  and  also  to
                  take account of any factors that point the other way.

                  35.  A decision as to what is in  the  best  interests  of
                  children will depend on a number of factors  such  as  (a)
                  their age; (b) the length of  time  that  they  have  been
                  here; (c) how long they have been in education;  (c)  what
                  stage their education has reached; (d) to what extent they
                  have become distanced from the  country  to  which  it  is
                  proposed  that  they  return;  (e)  how  renewable   their
                  connection with it may be; (f) to what  extent  they  will
                  have linguistic, medical or other difficulties in adapting
                  to life in that country; and (g) the extent to  which  the
                  course proposed will interfere with their family  life  or
                  their rights (if they have any) as British citizens.

                  36.  In  a  sense  the  tribunal  is  concerned  with  how
                  emphatic an answer falls to be given to the  question:  is
                  it in the best interests  of  the  child  to  remain?  The
                  longer the child has been  here,  the  more  advanced  (or
                  critical) the stage of his education, the looser his  ties
                  with the country in question, and the more deleterious the
                  consequences of his return, the greater  the  weight  that
                  falls into one side of the scales. If it is overwhelmingly
                  in the child's best interests that he should  not  return,
                  the need to maintain immigration control may well not  tip
                  the balance. By contrast if it  is  in  the  child's  best
                  interests to  remain,  but  only  on  balance  (with  some
                  factors pointing the other way), the  result  may  be  the
                  opposite.

                  37.  In the balance on the other side there  falls  to  be
                  taken into account the strong weight to be  given  to  the
                  need to maintain immigration control  in  pursuit  of  the
                  economic well-being of the country and the fact  that,  ex
                  hypothesi, the applicants have no entitlement  to  remain.
                  The  immigration  history  of  the  parents  may  also  be
                  relevant e.g. if  they  are  overstayers,  or  have  acted
                  deceitfully."

             49.  Although this was not in fact a seven year case,  on  the
             wider construction of section  117B(6),  the  same  principles
             would apply in such a case. However, the fact that  the  child
             has been in the UK for seven years  would  need  to  be  given
             significant weight in the  proportionality  exercise  for  two
             related  reasons:  first,  because   of   its   relevance   to
             determining the  nature  and  strength  of  the  child's  best
             interests; and second, because it establishes  as  a  starting
             point  that leave should be granted unless there are  powerful
             reasons to the contrary."

      4. The First-tier Tribunal took as its starting point the question  of
         what was in the best interests of the children and  found  that  it
         was in their best interests to remain in the UK ([43] of the First-
         tier Tribunal decision). The judge  did  not  thereafter  consider,
         even though it was in the children's best interests  to  remain  in
         the UK, whether in all of the circumstances,  taking  into  account
         s117B  Nationality  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,   it   was
         reasonable for them to remain and thus that  the  decision  of  the
         respondent disproportionate. The First-tier  Tribunal  stopped  its
         analysis at determining the  best  interest  of  the  children  and
         failed to consider the totality of the evidence in its assessment.

      5. The First-tier Tribunal failed to  weigh  in  its  assessment,  for
         example, the public interest, the precarious immigration status  of
         Mrs [L], her husband's  criminal  conviction,  the  utilisation  of
         public funds with regards education, health  and  accommodation  as
         well as the children's length of  residence  and  their  and  their
         parents ties with Nigeria.

      6. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses  material  errors
         of law such that I set the decision aside to be remade.

      7. When I have set  aside  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
         s.12(2) of the TCEA 2007 requires me to remit the case to the First
         tier with directions or remake it for myself. I  conclude  in  this
         case the application of the factual matrix of this appeal  requires
         an assessment by the First-tier Tribunal to be undertaken  applying
         the correct legal framework, a matter which in the context of  this
         appeal should not be undertaken by the Upper Tribunal. I  therefore
         remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision

    I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal


     Date 13th September 2016

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
