

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/36003/2014
                                                               IA/35997/2014
                                                               IA/35993/2014
                                                               IA/36002/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London           |               Decision and Reasons     |
|                                       |Promulgated                             |
|On 27 October 2015                     |               On 2 November 2015       |
|                                       |                                        |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                             Robert Adarkwa (1)
                              grace adarkwa (2)
                                   e v (3)
                                   a V (4)
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Heller, instructed by appellants (direct
access)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are a family group.  The first two  appellants  are  the
    parents of the other two appellants.  The appellants are all  nationals
    of Ghana, born respectively on  14  May  1972,  20  February  1972,  19
    October 2007 and 11 May 2009.  The children were both born in the UK.

 2. The appellants applied on 16 October 2012 for further leave  to  remain
    on  the  basis  of  their  private  life  rights  in  the  UK.    Their
    applications were refused on 21 November 2013 without rights of  appeal
    but a judicial review challenge was settled  by  consent  resulting  in
    fresh appealable decisions being made on 24 August  2014.   These  were
    the appeals determined by First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox in his decision
    and reasons statement that was promulgated on 12 January 2015.

 3. On 18 March 2015 the appellants were granted permission  to  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal against the decision of Judge Fox.  The main  reason
    why permission was granted was that it was arguable that Judge Fox  did
    not have proper regard to the wellbeing of the  child  appellants  when
    making his decision.

 4. After discussing the appeals with Mr Avery and Ms Heller, it was agreed
    that Judge Fox's decision and reasons statement was affected  by  legal
    error that required his decision to be set aside.  There are  two  main
    reasons for my decision.

 5. First, the judge failed to recognise that there were  separate  grounds
    of appeal for each appellant.  This is evident at paragraphs 10  to  12
    of the decision and reasons statement wherein the judge found that  the
    first appellant had conceded that the appellants  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of appendix FM to the immigration rules and that the  only
    provision of paragraph 276ADE that could be met were those in paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi).

 6. The grounds of appeal submitted in respect of the fourth appellant, who
    is the elder of the two children, included the following comment,  "...
    the pertinent date is that of the Judge's decision, by which time there
    is every likelihood that the [third] Appellant will  have  reached  the
    age of seven." This was prescient because by the date  the  appeal  was
    decided the fourth appellant was seven.  This  was  a  material  factor
    that should have  been  considered  either  in  relation  to  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv)  or  when  considering  the  statutory  public   interest
    considerations under s.117B(6)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.

 7. The judge did not have regard to this ground of appeal or the  material
    factor which arose and this undermines his findings regarding the  best
    interests of the children as set out  in  paragraphs,  18,  22  and  23
    because he made no finding as to whether it was  reasonable  to  expect
    the fourth child to leave the UK.

 8. Secondly, during the discussions I had with Mr Avery and  Ms  Heller  a
    further issue arose which was not in the original grounds but which may
    have affected the determination of the appeals.  At paragraphs 8 to  10
    the judge refers to the evidence he had when determining  the  appeals.
    There is some confusion regarding his comment in paragraph 8,  "I  have
    had  particular  regard  to  tall  the  Appellants  submitted  to   the
    Appellant's Officers ...", which I accept is unintelligible.   What  is
    clear from these paragraphs, however, is that the judge had no  further
    evidence from the appellants.

 9. Unfortunately, what is clear from the appeal files  is  that  the  Home
    Office did not supply the documents required by rule 13 of  the  Asylum
    and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005, which applied to these
    appeals given the date of decision.  In fact, after I  made  enquiries,
    Mr Avery discovered that he did not have the relevant documents on  the
    Home Office file and suspected this explained the failure  to  disclose
    the relevant application documents.  He could not advise me as to where
    the relevant documents were but  suspected  there  may  be  other  Home
    Office files relating to the appellants because of the judicial  review
    claims previously made.

10. Mr Avery conceded that it would have been reasonable for the appellants
    to have  assumed  that  the  Home  Office  had  provided  the  relevant
    documents to the Tribunal and that the judge would have had  regard  to
    them when determining the appeals.  The fact the Home  Office  did  not
    comply would not have been known to them and, if they had  known,  they
    would have been able to furnish the missing evidence  to  the  Tribunal
    before the appeals were  allocated.   These  failings  raised  concerns
    about procedural fairness and thereby identified further legal error.

11. The extent of the errors means that it  is  appropriate  to  remit  the
    appeals to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined afresh.   I  do  so
    with the following directions.

Directions for fresh decision

12. The appeals are remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  decided
    without a hearing unless the additional appeal fees are paid.

13. The remitted appeals are not to be  allocated  to  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Fox.

14. The principle issue to be decided will be whether it is  reasonable  to
    expect the fourth appellant to leave the UK and if so  how  that  might
    affect the other appellants.   This  may  be  decided  in  relation  to
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) and/or article 8, bearing in mind s.117B(6)  of
    the 2002 Act.

15. The parties must provide all documents  on  which  they  seek  to  rely
    within 28 calendar days from the date this decision is  promulgated  by
    the Upper Tribunal.

16. In relation to the provision of evidence,  the  appellants  may  assume
    that the Home Office are unable to comply with the provisions  of  rule
    13.



Decision

The  decision  and  reasons  statement  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Fox
contains an error on a point of law and is set aside.

The appeals are remitted to the First-tier Tribunal as  per  the  directions
given above.




                               Signed                     Date


                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
