

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/36119/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 27 April 2015                     |On 12 May 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


                                   Between

                               ABBAS ALTAMIMI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Brocklesy-Weller, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant has been  granted  permission  to  appeal  against  the
       decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Asjad who, by  a  determination
       promulgated on 17 December 2014, dismissed his appeal against refusal
       to issue him with a document recognising that he had acquired a right
       of permanent residence on the basis that he had resided in the United
       Kingdom in accordance with the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006
       ("the EEA Regs") for a continuous period of five years.

    2. The main issue that arises in this appeal is a narrow one.  Does  the
       period of four years during which the appellant was  a  jobseeker  in
       receipt of Job Seeker's Allowance count towards the  period  of  five
       years residence  in  accordance  with  the  EEA  Regs  that  must  be
       demonstrated to meet the requirements of Reg 15 and so  establish  an
       entitlement to recognition of a permanent right of residence?

    3. The appellant, who was born in Iraq on 13  January  1971,  is  now  a
       citizen of the Netherlands. He arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  29
       April 2009 as a job seeker and has resided here since  then.  He  was
       unable to secure any work and so remained a job seeker in receipt  of
       Job Seeker's Allowance until 17 April 2013 when he registered as self-
       employed.

    4. On 26 July 2014 he submitted an application for a document certifying
       a right to permanent residence. That was refused by the respondent by
       a decision made on 4 September 2014. The respondent gave a number  of
       reasons for refusing the application. It was not  accepted  that  the
       evidence  submitted  established  that   the   appellant   had   been
       economically active in the United Kingdom for five years. In  respect
       of the period claimed as a self employed person the respondent said:

          "You have failed to submit any evidence of work carried  out  such
          as invoices, audited accounts, business  bank  statements  clearly
          showing payments received or any advertisements that you may  have
          in order to generate work. It is therefore concluded that you have
          failed to provide sufficient evidence."

       And in respect of the four year period during which the appellant was
       a jobseeker:

          "Regulation 6(2)(b) stipulates that a person who claims  to  be  a
          qualified person in the United Kingdom as a jobseeker must:

          i) have registered as a jobseeker with  the  relevant  employment
             office and have been employed for  one  year  or  more  before
             becoming unemployed

         ii) have been unemployed for no more than six months, or

        iii) provide evidence that they are seeking employment  in  the  UK
             and have a genuine chance of being engaged.

          Your application has been considered and the  following  has  been
          ascertained from the evidence provided:

           . You have not evidenced that you were employed  in  the  United
             Kingdom for one year or more before becoming unemployed.

           . You have been a jobseeker  for  a  period  in  excess  of  six
             months"

       The respondent concluded that as the appellant had been a job  seeker
       for about four  years  he  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
       regulations.

    5. As was the position before  us,  the  appellant  appeared  in  person
       before the First-tier Tribunal and he was not represented. The  judge
       took as his starting point regulation 6(7) of the EEA Regs:

          A person may not  retain  the  status  of  a  worker  pursuant  to
          paragraph (2)(b), or jobseeker pursuant to paragraph  (1)(a),  for
          longer than the relevant period unless he can  provide  compelling
          evidence that he is  continuing  to  seek  employment  and  has  a
          genuine chance of being engaged.

       The judge noted that the "relevant period" for these purposes was 182
       days.

    6. The judge then set out some clear findings of fact:

          "The appellant came to the UK on the 11 April 2009  from  Holland,
          with an intention to look for work.... Since coming to the UK, the
          appellant has never  been  employed  -though  he  did  begin  self
          employment from April 2013, as a Chartered Accountant...

          ... it transpired that  the  appellant  was  already  a  qualified
          accountant when he came to the UK- but he  had  to  re-qualify  to
          work in the same capacity in the UK. The appellant  began  an  on-
          line course with the University of London in 2010  -  this  was  a
          conversion course that enabled the appellant to register with  the
          AAC.

          ...  From  2009  to  2012,   the   appellant   made   unsuccessful
          applications for the following types of roles:

               . 2009 - Job application with Bloomberg

               . 2011 - Arrears Portfolio Officer

               . 2012 - Accounts Receivable / Credit Control

               . 2012 - Credit Controller

               . 2012 - Credit Controller / Customer Service

               . 2012 - Financial Credit Controller

               . 2012 - Credit Controller"

    7.  At  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  appellant
       recognised  that,  on  its  face,  regulation  6(7)   represented   a
       significant obstacle to him because it plainly made reference to both
       workers and to jobseekers:

          A person may not  retain  the  status  of  a  worker  pursuant  to
          paragraph (2)(b), or jobseeker pursuant to paragraph  (1)(a),  for
          longer than the relevant period unless he can  provide  compelling
          evidence that he is  continuing  to  seek  employment  and  has  a
          genuine chance of being engaged.

       The judge recorded the argument advanced by the appellant:

          "It was the appellant's argument that this provision only  applied
          to individuals who were seeking to retain a period of job  seeking
          or worker status and not to someone in his circumstances  who  had
          never worked and was not seeking to retain a  previous  period  of
          unemployment."

    8. That argument, which was rejected by the  judge,  is  not  altogether
       easy to understand but it is unnecessary to examine it  any  further.
       That is because, as we shall see, the outcome of this  appeal  turned
       upon the question of whether  the  appellant  had  demonstrated  that
       there had been a genuine chance of him finding work. At paragraph  16
       of her determination the judge set out some further clear findings of
       fact that are of particular significance:

          "It seemed that despite being so  important  to  his  future  work
          success the course was  done  at  a  seemingly  leisurely  pace  -
          particularly for someone who  already  had  the  qualification  in
          another language. I found that the  attempts  that  the  appellant
          made to look for work supported this fact and that although he was
          a jobseeker - this was merely  a  means  of  providing  an  income
          whilst he kept his options open - picking and choosing jobs as  he
          went along and rejecting other types  of  possible  employment  as
          unsuitable."

       The judge noted that the appellant had ceased to apply  for  jobs  in
       2012 and observed that:

          "The Job Centre did not advise him to stop applying for such roles
          and the appellant accepted that he could have  applied  for  other
          jobs but did not... By restricting the type of roles that  he  was
          looking for, the  appellant  had  lowered  the  chances  of  being
          engaged and therefore in my view did not have "a genuine chance of
          doing so."

       Which led the judge to conclude:

          "For the reasons given  therefore,  I  find  that  the  period  of
          residence that  the  appellant  needs  in  order  to  satisfy  the
          criteria of permanent residence is not  met  because  he  has  not
          shown  compelling  evidence  that  he  was  continuing   to   seek
          employment and had a genuine chance of being engaged."

       The judge found also that as a consequence the only  period  of  job-
       seeking that could be taken into account was 182 days  so  that  when
       added to the period of self employment, which the judge accepted  had
       been established, the period during  which  the  appellant  had  been
       residing in the United Kingdom in accordance with the  EEA  Regs  was
       significantly shorter than the period of five years demanded  by  reg
       15.

    9. In seeking permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  the  appellant
       said that it should have been accepted that reg 6(7) did not apply to
       him because he had provided compelling evidence that he continued  to
       seek employment throughout his period of unemployment and that it was
       not open to the judge to find otherwise. In his submissions to us  he
       pointed out that he had done everything that the Job Centre asked  of
       him and it had never been suggested that  he  had  not  done  so.  He
       produced his "Jobseeker's Agreement", a document  that  set  out  his
       obligations. He said the judge was wrong to hold against him that  he
       had  only  applied  for  a  narrow  category  of  work,  because  the
       Jobseekers Agreement recorded the types of work he was to apply  for,
       those being "Credit Controller, Finance Officer or  Accountant".  The
       appellant then  submitted  that  the  judge  was  in  fact  wrong  to
       determine the appeal with reference to reg 6(7) because that was  not
       in force at the date he submitted his application.

   10. The appellant faces two insurmountable obstacles in his challenge  to
       the outcome of his appeal. First, the finding of the judge  that  the
       appellant had not established that there had been a genuine chance of
       him being engaged in  work  during  his  period  of  unemployment  is
       unassailable and that is a complete answer to his challenge. This was
       a finding of fact for the judge  to  make  and,  as  she  heard  oral
       evidence from the appellant, she was best placed to do so. She  dealt
       with the appellant's submission that there had been no  complaint  by
       the job centre about his efforts to find work  and  gave  sustainable
       and legally sufficient reasons for finding that was not sufficient to
       establish what was required. It was plainly  open  to  the  judge  to
       arrived at that conclusion, given that the appellant had not  worked,
       at all, for four years; that he was  at  the  same  time  "leisurely"
       pursuing a course with the London University; that he restricted  his
       attempts to find work to a narrow category of roles  in  an  area  in
       which he was at the same time seeking to secure  qualifications  that
       were recognised in the United Kingdom and that when he did eventually
       enter into work it was  not  because  he  had  found  employment  but
       because he had secured some work on a self employed basis.

   11. The second obstacle facing the appellant is that whatever version  of
       the regulations one has regard to there would still be a  requirement
       that, in order that he be treated as a  job  seeker,  there  must  be
       shown to have been a genuine  chance  of  him  being  engaged.  Thus,
       although the decision maker has regard to the regulations in force at
       the date if the decision,  even if one accepts that he is correct  to
       say that the judge should not have determined the appeal by reference
       to regulation 6(7), because that was not in  force  at  the  relevant
       time, that error was immaterial because the regulation previously  in
       force  was,  for  these  purposes,  in  identical  form,  that  being
       regulation 6(4):

          For the purpose of paragraph (1)(a), "jobseeker"  means  a  person
          who enters the United Kingdom in order to seek employment and  can
          provide evidence that he is seeking employment and has  a  genuine
          chance of being engaged.

   12. Once it is accepted, as it must be, that it was open to the judge  to
       make the findings of fact that she did, the only rational outcome was
       that the appeal fell to be dismissed. The appellant cannot  count  as
       part of the continuous period of residence in accordance with the EEA
       Regs in the United Kingdom the  four  years  of  unemployment  during
       which, for the reasons given by the judge, there was  not  a  genuine
       chance of him being engaged because he was distracted by his  studies
       and was unnecessarily restricting the scope of his efforts to  secure
       work.

   13. We recognise that the appellant  expresses  disagreement  with  those
       findings of fact and he has repeated before  us  the  arguments  that
       were rejected by the judge. But it is not open to us to disturb those
       findings unless they disclose legal error, which they do not.

Summary of decision:

   14. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made no error  of  law  and  the
       determination shall stand.

   15. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.






                               Signed
                               [pic]


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                               Date: 30 April 2015
