
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/36455/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th February 2016                          |On 23rd March 2016            |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                                 BILAL QADIR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Ahmed, Counsel, instructed by J Stifford Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of  Pakistan,  born  on  20th  February
    1987.  The Appellant first arrived in the UK on 31st March 2014 when he
    was given leave to  enter  as  a  Tier  4  (General)  Student  Migrant.
    However, on 9th  September  2014  the  Respondent  decided  that  false
    representations had been employed to obtain that  leave  and  that  the
    Appellant's leave should be cancelled and that the Appellant should  be
    refused leave to enter.  The Appellant appealed that decision, and  his
    appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Afako (the Judge) sitting
    at Taylor House on 20th May 2015.  He decided to allow the  appeal  for
    the reasons given in his Decision dated 14th June 2014.  The Respondent
    sought leave to appeal that decision, and  on  8th  October  2015  such
    permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Respondent decided to cancel the  Appellant's  leave  to  enter  on
    receipt of information from Educational Testing Services (ETS) that the
    IELTS certificate awarded in the name of  the  Appellant  following  an
    English  Language  test  taken  on  12th  March  2014  had  been  taken
    fraudulently in that a proxy tester had  been  used.   The  Appellant's
    leave to enter was therefore to be cancelled under  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 321A(1) of the Statement of Changes in Immigration  Rules  HC
    395.  The Judge allowed the appeal because he found the evidence of the
    Appellant credible and decided that the Respondent had  not  discharged
    the burden of showing that a deception had been practised.

 4. At the hearing, Mr Clarke argued that the Judge had  erred  in  law  in
    coming to that conclusion.  He referred to the grounds  of  application
    and submitted that the Judge had failed to give  adequate  reasons  for
    his findings.  The  Judge  had  attached  insufficient  weight  to  the
    evidence from Peter Millington, Rebecca Collings, and the ETS Test form
    contained in the Bundle of Documents submitted to the Judge.  There had
    been good reason for ETS to invalidate  the  Appellant's  test  result.
    Instead, the Judge had relied upon the uncorroborated evidence  of  the
    Appellant.  The Appellant had failed  to  show  that  his  case  was  a
    possible "false positive".  The Judge had not  decided  the  appeal  in
    accordance with the decision in R (on the application of Gazi)  v  SSHD
    (ETS - judicial review) IJR [2015] UKUT 00327  (IAC).   The  Judge  had
    placed too great a reliance upon the expert  evidence  of  Dr  Harrison
    given in that case.  He had  treated  that  evidence  as  determinative
    without giving weight to the substance of  the  Respondent's  evidence.
    At paragraph 17 of the  Decision,  the  Judge  had  applied  the  wrong
    standard of proof in  deciding  if  there  was  a  case  for  a  "false
    positive".

 5. In response, Mr Ahmed argued that there was no such error of law in the
    decision of the Judge.  the Judge was correct not to  assume  that  the
    evidence of the Respondent  was  flawless.   The  Respondent's  witness
    Peter Millington did  not  claim  voice  recognition  processes  to  be
    perfect, and the expert evidence of  Dr  Harrison  went  further.   The
    Judge carried  out  a  thorough  analysis  of  all  the  evidence.   He
    considered the evidence of the Appellant at paragraphs 14, 15 and 17 of
    the Decision,  and  also  carefully  considered  the  evidence  of  the
    Respondent contained in the Explanatory Statement.   The  Judge  stated
    the correct burden  and  standard  of  proof  at  paragraph  9  of  the
    Decision, and it was apparent that he had applied it.

 6. I find myself in agreement with the arguments of Mr Ahmed and I  decide
    that the decision of the Judge did not contain an error on a  point  of
    law so that it should be set aside.  In my view, the Judge carried  out
    a careful and thorough analysis of all the relevant evidence and having
    applied the correct burden and standard of proof came to  a  conclusion
    which was open to him on that evidence.  It is a matter for  the  Judge
    to decide what weight to attach to any evidence, and it cannot be  said
    that in this case the decisions made by the Judge were  perverse.   The
    decision of the Judge was not contrary to  any  relevant  jurisprudence
    and in particular the case of Gazi which in any  event  is  a  judicial
    review decision and therefore not necessarily binding upon  the  Judge.
    The Judge dealt with the conflict in the evidence  as  to  whether  the
    Appellant had dishonesty employed a proxy tester, and  dealt  with  the
    issue of a possible "false positive".  The Judge did not  exclude  from
    his consideration any relevant evidence of the Respondent, and  it  was
    open to him to prefer the evidence of the Appellant.  The arguments  of
    the Respondent amount to no more than a disagreement with the  decision
    of the Judge.

Notice of Decision

 7. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set aside that decision.

    The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

 8. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for anonymity.  I was not
    asked to do so, and indeed I find no reason to do so.





Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

