
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/36443/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 03 September 2014                          |On 11 September 2014         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey
                                     and
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Deans

                                   Between

                                 YAYA KONATE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

Appellant:        Mr A Boyd of Temple and Co Solicitors
Respondent:   Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

INTRODUCTION

   1.     This appeal has its origins in a decision made on  behalf  of  the
      Secretary of State for the Home  Department,  the  Respondent  herein,
      dated 10 September 2013, whereby the  Appellant's  application  for  a
      residence card  under  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006  was
      refused.   The  First-tier  Tribunal   (the   "FtT")   dismissed   the
      Appellant's ensuing appeal.

   2.     The core passage in the Respondent's detailed letter  of  decision
      is the following:

         "Regulation 2 states that 'spouse' does not include a  party  to  a
         marriage of convenience.  On the basis of the discrepancies in your
         marriage interview, your application has been refused on [sic]  the
         belief that your marriage is one of convenience .....


         Also during your interview you  admitted  to  using  a  counterfeit
         passport to enter the United Kingdom.  As explained above, you have
         [also] misled your local Council by way of the  amount  of  Council
         Tax you pay and the extension fee, which should  be  paid  to  your
         landlord, you have tried to avoid by not adding yourself  onto  the
         tenancy agreement or informing the Council of your occupancy. .....


         With this in mind, the Home  Office  has  reason  to  question  the
         genuine nature of your relationship and the genuine nature  of  the
         information that has been provided."

      The letter further intimated to the Appellant  that  while  Article  8
      ECHR had been floated on his behalf, a proper application  under  this
      guise had not been presented and informed him of his entitlement to do
      so, at his election.

   3.     At the conclusion of the hearing, judgment was given  ex  tempore.
      It was clear that the decision of the FtT was erroneous in law, in two
      respects.  First, there was a failure to give effect to  the  decision
      of the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Papajorgji  (EEA  spouse  -  marriage  of
      convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 0038 (IAC). There  it  was  held  that
      where it is suggested, in this legislative context, that a marriage is
      one of convenience, an evidential burden rests  on  the  Secretary  of
      State. The discharge of this burden requires the adduction of evidence
      that  could  support  a  conclusion  that  the  marriage  is  one   of
      convenience.  Where this evidential burden  is  not   discharged,  the
      Appellant has no case to answer.   However,  where  the  Secretary  of
      State burden is discharged, there is a shift and it  is  incumbent  on
      the Appellant to show that the marriage is  not  one  of  convenience.
      The  standard  of  proof  is  the  balance  of   probabilities.    The
      determination of the FtT does not  acknowledge these rules of evidence
      and, moreover, the passage  in  [23]  is  suggestive  of  an  approach
      whereby the Secretary of State had no burden of any kind and the  only
      onus was one imposed on the Appellant.

   4.     Second, I consider that the Judge erred in law in [21]-[23] of the
      determination, which contain an assessment of whether the  Appellant's
      sponsor was a "qualified person" within the meaning of  the  statutory
      regime i.e. a person exercising  Treaty rights and a  conclusion  that
      the sponsor was not such a person.  This  was  not  an  issue  in  the
      appeal to the FtT because it did not feature as a reason  for  refusal
      in the impugned decision.  The error  of  law  thereby  committed  was
      twofold.  In the first place, the FtT found against the Appellant on a
      non-existent issue. Secondly, to do so was procedurally unfair,  since
      the Appellant was given no opportunity to meet the case against him on
      this point.

   5.     Ultimately, Mrs O'Brien  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State
      acknowledged the errors of law adumbrated above.

DECISION

   6.     For the reasons elaborated above the decision of the FtT is hereby
      set aside.  Having considered the representations of the  parties  and
      with particular reference to the procedural  unfairness  dimension  of
      the second of the errors of  law  which  I  have  found,  pursuant  to
      section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts  and Enforcement At  2007
      I  remit  the  case  for  rehearing  and  fresh  determination  by   a
      differently constituted FtT.













                                                                       [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                               Dated:      10 September 2014



