
IAC-AH--V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA /36130/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th January 2015                         |On 15th January 2015          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL GA BLACK


                                   Between

                        Miss giulia guelardi teixeira
                        (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr F Singarajah (Counsel instructed by Londonhelp4u)

For the Respondent:    Mr Avery (Senior Home Office Presenting officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the  Appellant  against  a  decision  and  reasons
    promulgated on 18th July 2014 by First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Herlihy),
    in which she dismissed the appeal on all grounds.





Background

 2. The Appellant had  entered  the  UK  as  a  minor  family  visitor  and
    following the expiry of her leave made the application.

 3. The Respondent refused the application  for  further  leave  to  remain
    under the Immigration Rules. The  Respondent  made  removal  directions
    under Section 47 Immigration, Asylum & Nationality Act 2006.

 4.  In a  decision  the  Tribunal  set  out  in  considerable  detail  the
    background and evidence over four pages.  The Tribunal then went on the
    make findings of fact and reach conclusions from  paragraph  5  onwards
    which referred to an entirely different Appellant from Bangladesh.

Grounds of application

 5. In grounds of application (which were out of time) the Appellant argued
    that the Tribunal decision could not stand as a result of the clear and
    considerable errors and discrepancies therein.

Permission to appeal

 6. Permission was granted out of time by First-tier Judge Parkes.

Error of law hearing

 7. This matter came before me for consideration of error  of  law  in  the
    Tribunal decision.  I had regard to a Rule 24 response submitted by the
    Respondent in which the application for permission  was  unopposed  and
    the Respondent agreed that the matter ought to be remitted to the First
    -tier Tribunal for a hearing afresh.

 8. Mr Singharagh submitted that it was clear that there was  a  procedural
    error, probably arising from the Tribunal's "cut and  paste"  approach,
    which amounted to an error of law such that the decision should be  set
    aside. Mr  Avery  agreed  and  indicated  that  the  matter  should  be
    remitted.

Decision

 9.  It was common ground that there was a fundamental procedural error  in
    the decision such that it must be set aside.  The  first  part  of  the
    decision accurately relates to the Appellant and the second  part  from
    paragraph 5 refers to findings and  a  conclusion  in  relation  to  an
    entirely different appellant who is male and from Bangladesh.   I  note
    that the decision has not been signed and there appears  an  annotation
    by the typist on page 8 that should have been deleted.  As Judge Parkes
    observes something has clearly gone wrong. I canvassed with the parties
    the possibility of remitting the matter to the  Tribunal  to  make  the
    findings of fact relevant to this Appellant.  Mr Singharagh argued that
    it would not be fair on the appellant who was no longer a minor,  there
    was now a significant delay since the hearing  in  June  2014  and  the
    relevant law had since changed which would complicate matters.

Notice of Decision

10. I find a material error of law by way of procedural irregularity and  I
    set aside the decision.  As  no  proper  findings  or  conclusion  were
    reached with regard to this appellant's  appeal,  the  matter  must  be
    reheard.

11.  The matter is to be remitted  for  hearing  de  novo  at  Taylor  House
    (excluding Judge Herlihy) on 17th June 2015.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 15.1.2015

Judge GA Black
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award made



Signed        Date 15.1.2015

Judge GA BLACK
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

