
[pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ia/36505/2013
                                                               ia/36522/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at RCJ Belfast                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 November 2015                  |On 24 February 2016                  |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     RT
                                      &
                                     CT
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                  DECISION

      1.  The  appellants  have  an  appeal  outstanding  before  the  Upper
         Tribunal. In a decision promulgated on 12 January 2016 I set  aside
         the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and gave directions for the
         further conduct of the appeal. I directed the appellants to  notify
         the Tribunal as to whether the appeals were to be pursued.

      2. By letter dated 1 February 2016 the first appellant, on  behalf  of
         herself and the second appellant, her son who is  a  minor,  states
         that she wishes to withdraw the appeals, stating that they will  be
         making new applications for residence cards.

      3. Rule 17 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
         provides that a party may give notice of the withdrawal of its case
         or any part of it, subject to the consent of  the  Upper  Tribunal.
         There is no provision for a party to withdraw the appeal before the
         Upper Tribunal. Therefore, the letter from the appellants can serve
         only as a notice of withdrawal  of  their  case  before  the  Upper
         Tribunal, to which the Upper Tribunal now consents.

      4. Accordingly, the  appellants'  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
         dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity in order to protect the identity of the  minor  appellant.
No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly  identify  them.
This direction  applies  both  to  the  appellant  and  to  the  respondent.
Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek  11/02/16
