
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
IA/36104/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |             Decision & Reasons         |
|                                      |Promulgated                             |
|On 17 February 2016                   |             On 29 February 2016        |
|                                      |                                        |

                                   Before


                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And


                                     D S
                        (anonymity has been directed)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Savage Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No Representative


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant in these proceedings is The Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department, but for convenience I shall now refer to  the  parties
    as they were before the First Tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Lithuania born on  2  February  1973.  He
    appealed against the decision of the respondent  dated  2  August  2014
    refusing him admission to the  United  Kingdom  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006, for public  policy  reasons.
    His appeal was heard by Judge of the First Tier Tribunal Chohan  on  14
    July 2015.  The appeal was allowed and a  decision  promulgated  on  29
    July 2015.

 3. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    refused by Judge of the First Tier Tribunal Froom on 6  November  2015.
    An application for permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
    lodged and permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  McGeachy  on
    25 November 2015.  The grounds of appeal assert that the Judge  of  the
    First  Tier  Tribunal  erred  by  applying  a  completely  wrong  legal
    framework when considering the appeal. This was not an  appeal  against
    deportation. No decision to deport has been  made  in  respect  of  the
    Appellant but it was on this basis that the First-tier  Tribunal  judge
    made his decision.

 4. The Appellant did not appear at this error of  law  Hearing  either  in
    person or by representative.

 5. The Presenting Officer made her submissions, submitting that the  First
    Tier Judge misdirected himself as this is not a deportation case but  a
    claim against refusal  of  entry  of  the  Appellant  into  the  United
    Kingdom, under the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006.

 6. She submitted that at paragraphs 1, 11, 15, 17 and 19 of  the  decision
    the Judge refers to a  deportation  order.   There  is  no  deportation
    order.  She submitted that this must be a material error of  law.   She
    submitted that there has been a lack of proper scrutiny  by  the  First
    Tier Judge.

 7. The Presenting Officer then submitted  that  at  paragraph  14  of  the
    decision the First Tier Judge  accepts  that  the  Appellant  has  been
    exercising  Treaty  rights  in  the  United  Kingdom   having   already
    acknowledged that there is no evidence of  this.   She  submitted  that
    this undermines the whole decision.

 8. I was asked to set aside the First Tier Tribunal decision and remit the
    appeal back to the First Tier.

DECISION

 9. It is clear that the decision by the First Tier Judge was made  on  the
    wrong legal  framework.   This  is  not  a  deportation  case  and  yet
    deportation has been mentioned at  five  paragraphs  of  the  decision.
    This appeal is against the refusal  of  the  admission  to  the  United
    Kingdom of the Appellant, under European Community Law.

10. The correct parts of EEA Regulations  are  Regulation  21(5)  and  (6),
    Exclusion & Removal.  Although the Judge dealt with Regulation 21,  his
    reference throughout to deportation is a material error.  In  addition,
    without any evidence to support this, he accepted  that  the  Appellant
    had been exercising his Treaty Rights in the United  Kingdom.  This  is
    also a material error.


Notice of Decision

11. There are material errors of law in the First Tier Tribunal`s  decision
    promulgated on 29 July 2015.  It must be set aside.

12. No findings of the  First  Tier  Tribunal  can  stand.   Under  Section
    12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and Practice Statement 7.2 the  nature  and
    extent of judicial fact finding necessary for the decision to be remade
    is such that it is appropriate to remit the  case  to  the  First  Tier
    Tribunal.   The  member(s)  of  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  chosen   to
    reconsider the case are not to include Judge Chohan.

13. Anonymity has been directed.





Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

























