

                                                 [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/36715/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester             |Determination promulgated|
|On August 21, 2014              |On August 26, 2014       |
|                                |                         |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                               MR SAQIB AKRAM

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Smith, Counsel, instructed by Richard
      Nelson Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety (Home Office Presenting
      Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, born July 10, 1987, is a citizen of Bangladesh. On  July
    23, 2013 he applied to vary his leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

 2. The respondent refused his application to vary his  leave  and  made  a
    decision to remove him under section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006 on August 29, 2013.

 3. On September 6, 2013 the appellant appealed under Section 82(1) of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and he argued removal  was
    not in accordance with the Immigration Rules and was  unlawful  because
    it was incompatible with his human rights.

 4. The matter was listed before Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Brunnen
    (hereinafter referred to as "the FtTJ") on March  26,  2014  and  in  a
    determination promulgated on April 14, 2014  he  dismissed  the  appeal
    finding the appellant had failed to satisfy the Immigration  Rules  and
    there was nothing exceptional about the facts of the  case  that  would
    lead to an unjustifiable harsh result that  justified  him  considering
    the case outside of the Immigration Rules.

 5. The appellant appealed that decision on April 24, 2014.  Permission  to
    appeal was refused by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Williams on  May
    6, 2014. Permission to appeal was renewed to the Upper Tribunal and  on
    June 19, 2014 Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun found it was arguable the FtTJ
    may have erred by failing to consider and give weight to the rights  of
    each family member and failed to make  a  finding  as  to  whether  the
    appellant suffered from  social  anxiety  which  was  relevant  to  the
    proportionality of removal. Permission to appeal  was  granted  on  all
    grounds although the third ground did not persuade her.

 6. The respondent filed a Rule 24 response in which she argued  there  had
    been no material error in law.

 7. The appellant was in attendance at the hearing.

    SUBMISSIONS ON ERROR OF LAW

 8. Miss Smith argued all three grounds. She submitted:-


     a. Ground One. Whilst the FtTJ had considered the  appellant's  rights
        under article 8 he had failed to consider the appellant's  family's
        rights in the event the appellant was removed. Whilst the appellant
        was an adult she submitted that the FtTJ should have considered the
        family life that existed and should have  found  that  this  family
        life went beyond the normal emotional ties for all  of  the  family
        and not merely for the appellant. There  was  evidence  before  the
        FtTJ of how the removal would affect his  mother  from  the  mother
        herself, the appellant and his stepfather. The FtTJ  did  not  have
        regard to this evidence.


     b. Ground Two. The appellant suffered from social anxiety disorder. In
        the Rule 24 response the respondent appeared to accept the FtTJ did
        not make a finding on this and this must amount to an error because
        this was a key part of his  case  as  set  out  in  both  his,  his
        mother's and his sister's statements.

     c. Ground Three. The FtTJ applied an objective  test  when  he  should
        have applied a subjective test  and  in  particular  he  failed  to
        consider how the appellant felt and whether his belief was genuine.



 9. Mr McVeety rejected these grounds of appeal. He argued courts should be
    careful about dissecting each line of a determination. The Tribunal had
    made this clear in the recent decision of VHR  (unmeritorious  grounds)
    Jamaica [2014] UKUT 00367 (IAC). He submitted:-


     a. Ground One. The FtTJ was fully  aware  of  all  the  facts  and  in
        particular he noted:


           i. The appellant was able to return on his own to Bangladesh for
              six weeks to sort out a family feud.
          ii. His sister worked for a very successful accountancy firm  and
              was often away from the appellant for long periods working.
         iii. He came to the United Kingdom as a student and stayed with  a
              friend of his stepfather's-a person he did not know.
          iv. He often  had  to  cope  on  his  own  when  his  mother  and
              stepfather returned to Bangladesh.


        The FtTJ had regard to these factors as well as the fact the family
        had clearly discussed with  him  the  implications  of  his  mother
        marrying his stepfather and relocating to the United  Kingdom.  The
        family did this in the knowledge that the appellant would be unable
        to live permanently in the United Kingdom and this is a factor  the
        FtTJ had regard to in his determination. There was no error on this
        ground.


     b. Ground Two. Whilst the Rule 24 letter accepts the FtTJ did not make
        a finding there was no  concession  this  was  material.  The  FtTJ
        considered all of the evidence between paragraphs [87] to [90]  and
        found the appellant's social anxiety did not  engage  mean  removal
        would be unjustifiably harsh.


     c. Ground Three. His personal problem  had  nothing  to  do  with  his
        immigration status. He would have this problem whether he lived  in
        Bangladesh or the United  Kingdom.  The  fact  he  has  had  family
        support here in the United Kingdom had made no  difference  to  his
        condition. The  FtTJ  accepted  he  had  a  medical  condition  but
        concluded that his location made no difference to  this  condition.
        The FtTJ accepted he  did  not  wish  to  have  intercourse  before
        marriage but those beliefs were being followed  both  here  and  in
        Bangladesh. The FtTJ considered the appellant's condition correctly
        and there was no error.

10. Miss Smith responded to these submissions and argued that the  decision
    in VHR did not concern a case where there had  been  an  error  in  the
    assessment of the key issues. The FtTJ should have made findings on the
    medical evidence and the  effect  of  his  condition  on  other  family
    members.


11. I reserved my decision on the error of law.

    ERROR OF LAW ASSESSMENT


12. The  FtTJ  heard  this  appeal  on  March  26,  2014  and  subsequently
    promulgated a very detailed decision on April 14,  2014.  It  is  clear
    from his careful examination of the facts  and  his  findings  he  gave
    these facts careful consideration.


13. Three grounds of appeal have been argued before  me  and  they  can  be
    summarised as follows:-

     a. Not having regard to the individual family's own interests.
     b. Not making findings on whether he had a social anxiety disorder.
     c.  Not  considering  the  appellant's  medical   problem   from   the
        appellant's prospective.

14. In assessing the appellant's original  appeal  the  FtTJ  recorded  the
    following:


     a. The appellant's immigration history at paragraphs [6],  [10],  [15]
        and [25] of his determination. He subsequently made findings  about
        his immigration status at paragraph [92] of his determination.


     b. The appellant's social anxiety disorder at paragraphs [27] to [29],
        [42],  [46],  [58],  [62]  to  [71]  of   the   determination.   He
        subsequently considered his social difficulties at paragraphs [84],
        [85], [87] to [91] of his determination.

     c. The appellant's medical problem at  paragraphs  [13],  [18],  [31],
        [40], [53] to [56] and [66] of the determination.  He  subsequently
        considered this complaint  at  paragraphs  [85]  and  [86]  of  his
        determination.

15. Miss Smith's submissions concern the FtTJ's approach to these issues.


16. Both representatives made submissions  on  the  decision  of  VHR.  The
    Tribunal in that appeal considered the approach representatives take in
    lodging appeals against First-tier decisions and at  paragraph  [7]  of
    the determination the judges stated-

         "In our judgement, the problem with Mr Chelvan's approach and  this
         appeal is that he has sought to comb through the judgment as if  it
         was a statute and pick bits here and there out  of  context  whilst
         ignoring the overall findings of the Determination and Reasons  and
         the conclusions."

17. The Tribunal in that decision went onto find at paragraphs [8] and [9]-


         "8. ... It is not necessary for judges to record, analyse, rehearse
         and repeat the entire interstices of the evidence. The task of  the
         First-tier Tribunal is to make reasoned findings on the key  issues
         in the case and a clear decision.


         9.  ...  forensic  criticism  which  in  our  judgement  is   quite
         unwarranted and unreal...."

18. Miss Smith has sought to distinguish this case from  that  decision  by
    arguing the FtTJ did not deal with the key issues  of  the  appellant's
    appeal. I reject this submission because the length and detail  of  the
    determination  contradicts  this  submission.  The  FtTJ  clearly   and
    carefully recorded in considerable detail all  the  evidence  including
    the various medical reports and assessments.


19. McCombe LJ in VW (Sri Lanka) [2013] EWCA Civ  522  said,  "Regrettably,
    there is an increasing tendency in immigration cases, when a First-tier
    Tribunal Judge has given a judgment explaining why  he  has  reached  a
    particular decision, of seeking to burrow out  industriously  areas  of
    evidence that have been less fully dealt with than others and  then  to
    use this as a basis for saying the judge's decision is  legally  flawed
    because it did not deal with a particular matter  more  fully.   In  my
    judgement, with respect, that is no basis on which to sustain a  proper
    challenge to a judge's finding of fact".

20. It is  with  these  decisions  in  mind  that  I  have  considered  the
    respective submissions that have been made to me today.

21. Miss Smith's first ground of appeal centred on the FtTJ's  approach  to
    the effect removal would have on the various  parties.  Quite  properly
    the FtTJ considered in some detail the effect removal would have on the
    appellant himself but it would be wrong to argue that this was the only
    effect of removal he considered. It is  clear  from  the  determination
    that the FtTJ considered all the family's evidence and he  noted  their
    respective concerns. In making his findings I am satisfied he took into
    account the whole family's concerns and the effect  it  would  have  on
    them. He properly applied the test set out in Gulshan [2013]  UKUT  640
    (IAC)  and  at  paragraph  [75]  he  noted  the  appellant's   personal
    circumstances  both  here  and  in  Bangladesh.  He  then  accepted  at
    paragraph [80] that the appellant was less independent  of  his  mother
    and sister than other people of a  similar  age  and  he  accepted  the
    appellant had family life with his mother, sister  and  stepfather.  At
    paragraph [87] he found, having considered all of  the  evidence,  that
    the appellant's dependency on his family was not as high as he claimed.
    At paragraph [89] he noted the appellant had demonstrated he  was  able
    to live alone.


22. The FtTJ also had regard to his mother's and stepfather's situation and
    that they clearly were able to leave him  alone  and  significantly  at
    paragraph [92] he commented that the appellant's mother chose  to  come
    to the United Kingdom knowing full well that  the  appellant  would  be
    unable to join them on the same basis hence why she arranged for him to
    come here as a student. The FtTJ was aware of his sister's situation as
    he commented on this at paragraph [68] of his determination.  The  FtTJ
    found nothing in  their  circumstances  that  would  engage  article  8
    outside of the Immigration Rules. Whilst I accept he spent more of  his
    time on the appellant's situation this did not mean he had no regard to
    the appellant's family. He did and the fact he did not go into so  much
    detail does not amount to a material error for the reasons set  out  in
    VHR.


23. I turn now to Miss Smith's second ground of appeal. The  FtTJ  did  not
    specifically make a finding on whether he suffered from social  anxiety
    disorder but what he did was to consider all the evidence submitted and
    he made findings about his personal situation at paragraphs [84], [85],
    [87] to [91] of his determination. The FtTJ clearly had regard  to  his
    complaints  and  all  of  the  reports  submitted  on  his  behalf.  In
    particular, he spent some time discussing Ms  Brown's  and  Dr  Salim's
    report and he also had regard to his level of dependence on his  mother
    and sister from paragraph  [87]  onwards.  The  FtTJ  was  required  to
    consider the effect of his social anxiety disorder and this is what  he
    did. He considered the causes of his disorder and made findings.  These
    findings were open to him and there was no error.

24. The final ground of appeal related to the submission that he applied an
    objective test rather than a subjective  test.  The  FtTJ  clearly  was
    aware of how the appellant felt about his medical condition because  he
    recorded the evidence  in  his  determination.  He  then  examined  the
    problem and that included whether the problem  had  improved  here.  He
    made a number of findings about his condition and why removal  was  not
    unjustifiably harsh. Those findings were open to him and were  made  in
    the knowledge of how the appellant felt.

25. I am satisfied that this was  a  well-prepared  determination  but  the
    grounds of appeal, ably argued by Ms Smith, have no merit.


    DECISION


26. There is no material error of law and I uphold the original decision.

27. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order has been made and no request for an order was submitted to me.


Signed:                           Dated:







Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
TO THE RESPONDENT

I do not make a fee award as the appeal failed.

Signed:                           Dated:







Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
