
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/36019/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                                   |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 13 April 2016                                 |On 14 April 2016           |
|                                                 |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               shengning xing
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No Appearance


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State I  will  refer  to
    the parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant, a citizen of China, appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal
    against a decision of the Secretary of State dated 7 September 2014  to
    cancel his leave to remain in the UK as a student on the  grounds  that
    false representations were made in that the appellant had  fraudulently
    obtained  his  ETS  language  certificate  submitted  as  part  of  his
    application for leave to remain in the UK. The Secretary of State  also
    considered that there  had  been  a  change  of  circumstances  in  the
    appellant's case as his ETS certificate was deemed to be  invalid.  The
    appellant's appeal was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Brookfield
    and the Secretary of State appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

 3. In summary the First-tier Tribunal Judge allowed the appeal because she
    found that the evidence submitted by the Secretary of State in relation
    to the allegation that the appellant had fraudulently obtained  an  ETS
    English language certificate was not specific to the appellant in  this
    case. The Judge found that the Secretary of State  had  not  discharged
    the burden of proof to establish that this appellant had perpetrated  a
    deception. The Judge concluded that the decision of  the  Secretary  of
    State was not in accordance with the law and allowed the appeal.

 4. There was no appearance by or on behalf of the appellant at the hearing
    before  me.  However  in  advance  of  the  hearing   the   appellant's
    representatives advised that the appellant was  unable  to  attend  the
    hearing as he had gone back to China. I considered  the  provisions  of
    the Tribunals Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and I note that the
    appellant's representative has complied with the  requirement  of  rule
    17A (1)(a) of the Rules. I further note that the Secretary of State  is
    the appellant in  the  appeal  before  me  and,  bearing  in  mind  the
    overriding objective, I decided to determine the appeal on the basis of
    the evidence before me. Mr McVeety relied  on  the  grounds  of  appeal
    whilst acknowledging the decision in the recent case of SM and Qadir  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (ETS - Evidence - Burden  of
    Proof) (which has not yet been reported).

 5. In the grounds of appeal the Secretary of State contends that the Judge
    made a material error in that she made a mistake as to a material  fact
    in accepting the appellant's evidence that he sat  the  IELTS  test  in
    2011 rather than the evidence from the Secretary of State that  he  sat
    the test in 2013. However, it is clear from reading paragraph  9(v)  of
    the decision that the Judge decided not to rely  on  the  fax  evidence
    produced in relation  to  the  appellant's  test  results  because  the
    document provides no reasons for the conclusion  that  the  appellant's
    test was invalid and not because of the discrepancy as to the date  the
    test was taken. Further, this was only one of the reasons for  allowing
    the appeal and the Judge only considered this issue having  decided  at
    paragraph 9 (iv) that the Secretary of State  had  not  discharged  the
    burden of proof on her to establish that the appellant had  perpetrated
    a deception. Accordingly the Judge made no material error  in  relation
    to the date on which the appellant sat the test.

 6. The Secretary of State further contends that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge erred in failing to provide adequate reasons for finding that the
    Secretary of State has not discharged the burden of proof upon  her  to
    establish that the appellant used deception. The grounds detail how  it
    is said that the evidence  establishes  deception.  However  the  Judge
    clearly evaluated the evidence at paragraph 9(i), (ii)  and  (iii)  and
    concluded for  the  reasons  given  there  that  the  general  evidence
    submitted  did  not  establish  that  this  appellant  had  perpetrated
    deception. The Judge considered all  of  the  evidence  and  reached  a
    conclusion open to her on the basis  of  this  evidence.  There  is  no
    material error in the Judge's consideration of this evidence.

 7. It is contended in the third ground that the Judge erred in  commenting
    on what the Secretary of State failed to provide rather  than  engaging
    with the evidence actually provided and that  this  revealed  that  the
    Judge applied an elevated standard of proof. However, it is clear  from
    the  determination  that  the  Judge  did  engage  with  the   evidence
    submitted. The Judge highlighted the fact that there  was  insufficient
    evidence  specific  to  this  appellant  to  establish  that   he   had
    perpetrated deception. This was a legitimate concern  and  demonstrates
    why the Judge found that the evidence produced was  not  sufficient  to
    discharge the burden on the Secretary of State.

 8. The grounds of appeal put forward by the Secretary of  State  have  not
    been made out. I conclude that there is no material error of law in the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Conclusion

 9. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of a material error on a point of law.

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

11. I make no anonymity direction.



Signed                                       Date: 13 April 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I maintain the fee award made by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                                       Date: 13April 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

