
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/36736/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent          |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 25th June 2014                               |On 2nd July 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COATES

                                   Between

                               KAMALDEEP SINGH
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                             NOTICE OF DECISION


 1. The Appellant is an Indian national who applied for a residence card as
    the husband of a Slovak national exercising treaty rights  in  the  UK.
    His application was refused on 27th April 2013 on the  basis  that  the
    marriage was one of convenience.  The refusal was upheld  by  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Landes who dismissed an appeal by the Appellant
    against the Respondent's refusal on 24th February 2014.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal's  determination  records  that  there  was  no
    appearance at the appeal hearing by or  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant.
    Judge Landes caused enquiries to be made but there was no response from
    the representatives.  Judge Landes exercised her discretion to  proceed
    with the hearing and heard submissions  from  the  Presenting  Officer.
    The Judge concluded that the marriage was one of convenience  and  that
    the Sponsor was not a qualified person.  On that basis the  appeal  was
    dismissed.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted in the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  30th
    April 2013.  The First-tier Judge who granted permission concluded that
    there was an arguable error of law because it was arguable that if  the
    First-tier Judge had seen a GP's letter the  hearing  might  have  been
    adjourned.  That is the background against which the matter was  listed
    for an  error  of  law  hearing  on  the  date  mentioned  above.   The
    Respondent filed a response on  19th  May  2014  opposing  the  appeal.
    There was no appearance by or on behalf of the Appellant but there  was
    before me a letter from the Appellant's solicitors dated 24th June 2014
    stating that the Appellant  wishes  to  withdraw  his  appeal.   It  is
    accompanied by a signed confirmation by the Appellant to  that  effect.
    No reasons were given.

 4. By virtue of paragraph 7 of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Procedure  Rules  an
    appeal before the  Upper  Tribunal  may  only  be  withdrawn  with  the
    Tribunal's consent.  Mr McVeety indicated that he did  not  oppose  the
    application.  Bearing in mind the  reasons  for  the  refusal  and  the
    reasons given for dismissing the appeal by the  First-tier  Tribunal  I
    could find no reason to refuse the application to withdraw.

 5. This appeal is withdrawn.

.






Signed                              Date 2nd July 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Coates








