
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/37052/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined at Field House            |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 30 October 2015                   |On 6 November 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                          Mr Glove Finnigan Dudney
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


                             NOTICE OF DECISION

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica. He appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State dated 4 September
    2014. This appeal was allowed by FtT Judge Malone in a  decision  of  3
    June 2015, to the extent that the Respondent's decision was found to be
    not in accordance  with  the  law.  The  matter  was  remitted  to  the
    Secretary of State "for her  further  proper  consideration".  The  FtT
    Judge "dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules."

 2. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  thereafter  granted  to
    the appellant by FtT Judge Lever.

 3. By way of a letter dated 22 October 2015  the  appellant  notified  the
    Upper Tribunal that he had been informed by the Respondent that  he  is
    to be granted leave to remain. In such circumstances a request was made
    for permission to withdraw his appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

 4. Consent of the Upper Tribunal is required for a party to  withdraw  its
    case. Having carefully considered the facts of this appeal as a  whole,
    I give such consent to the appellant.

 5. Accordingly with my consent, and pursuant to rule 17(5) of the Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  this  appeal  is  recorded  as
    "Withdrawn with the consent of the Upper Tribunal". This  is  a  Notice
    pursuant to rule 17(5) to inform the parties that the appellant's  case
    is withdrawn.

 6. The effect of the appellant's  case  being  withdrawn  from  the  Upper
    Tribunal is that the proceedings before the Upper Tribunal  are  at  an
    end. There is no appeal before the Upper Tribunal  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision shall stand.




Signed:
M O'Connor
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 30 October 2015
