
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37536/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined On the Papers at Field    |Determination Promulgated            |
|House                                |                                     |
|On 30 April 2015                     |On 6 May 2015                        |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                                Pranab Chitla
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appealed against a decision of Designated  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Woodcraft, who had dismissed her appeal against the
    refusal of an extension of stay as a student.

2.   The appeal came before me, sitting with Collins J,  on  3  March  2015.
    The appeal was adjourned on that  occasion  and,  taking  into  account
    comments made by Mr Justice Collins at the appeal, the respondent wrote
    to the Tribunal stating that she was withdrawing her decision, dated 28
    August 2013 refusing the application and therefore sought  to  withdraw
    her case under  the  provisions  of  Rule  17  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
    Procedure Rules 2008 as amended.

3.   Following that letter directions were  sent  out  stating  that  within
    fourteen days the respondent should state whether or not  she  proposed
    to make a fresh decision which would  carry  a  right  of  appeal,  was
    content that the Upper Tribunal allowed the appellant's appeal  without
    a hearing or wished the appeal to be set down for hearing in accordance
    with the guidance in  SM  (withdrawal  of  appealed  decision:  effect)
    [2014] UKUT 64 (IAC).

4.   Directions were sent out on 26 March 2015.  There has been no  response
    from the respondent.

5.   In these circumstances I, having reviewed the file,  consider  that  it
    is appropriate for me to allow the appellant's appeal without a hearing
    and this I now do.

Decision

This appeal is allowed.



Signed        Date 6 May 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy


