






UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37425/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 21 July 2014                              |On:7 August 2014             |
|Prepared:  2 August 2014                      |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                              Mr Ahmed Suleiman
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr H Kannangara, counsel (instructed by Jade Law
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Ghana, born on  17th  August  1978.  He
      appealed against the decision of the respondent refusal to  grant  him
      leave to remain in the  UK  pursuant  to  paragraph  276  ADE  of  the
      Immigration Rules. In the notice of decision, the respondent contended
      that he had no right of appeal pursuant to s.82  of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as he had no leave to enter or  remain
      at the date that he made his application under the rules.


   2. His  appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  considered  as  a
      preliminary issue as to whether or not there was a valid appeal.


   3. In a determination promulgated on 29th April 2014, First-tier Tribunal
      Judge Kamara found that the appellant entered the  UK  with  leave  to
      enter as a working holiday maker, which leave  was  valid  until  10th
      March 2007. That leave was never varied or extended after that as  the
      appellant had been issued with an EEA Residence card valid  from  17th
      November 2006 until 17th November 2011.


   4. The parties separated and the  appellant  applied  for  the  grant  of
      permanent residence as a non-EEA national who had retained  rights  of
      residence after divorce.


   5. His application of 16th November 2011 was refused by the respondent on
      2nd February 2012 on the basis that he had failed to forward  evidence
      that his ex-wife had exercised  Treaty  rights  in  the  UK.   He  was
      granted a right of appeal. He was "in the appeals  process"  until  he
      was refused permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  on  12th  July
      2013, which he received on 15th July 2013.


   6. The appellant then submitted an application under the  "private  life"
      route of the Immigration Rules. He did not institute  judicial  review
      proceedings.


   7. That application was refused on 25th July 2013.


   8. It was contended that his leave was extended by virtue of s.3C of  the
      Immigration Act 1971 (as  amended).  However,  Judge  Kamara  did  not
      accept that he had leave to enter or remain in the UK  since  as  long
      ago as March 2007. The issue of a residence card to the appellant  did
      not confer leave to remain  under  the  Immigration  Acts.  It  merely
      provided evidence of his pre-existing rights as the family  member  of
      an EEA National exercising Treaty rights in the UK.


   9. Accordingly, she did not accept that the appellant either had leave to
      enter or remain in the UK or that  his  leave  had  been  extended  or
      varied by his applications or appeals under the Immigration  (European
      Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 Regulations").


  10. It was also noted from the refusal notice that the appellant was  told
      that if he failed to leave, enforcement action would be taken  against
      him. Further consideration could be given to his case  at  that  stage
      which could result in his being served with  an  enforcement  decision
      which may generate a right of appeal.


  11. In the event, she found that there was no valid appeal.


  12. On 28th May  2014,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Shimmin  granted  the
      appellant permission  to  appeal.  He  noted  the  argument  that  the
      appellant had extant leave under s.3C and that his application  should
      therefore have been regarded as "in time" and thus attracted  a  right
      of appeal;  further,  he  was  an  EEA  residence  permit  holder  and
      therefore had leave to enter/remain in the UK.


  13. Without any analysis, Judge Shimmin found that the issues raised  'are
      arguable'.


  14. At the hearing before  me  on  21st  July  2014,  Mr  Kannangara,  who
      appeared  before  the  First-tier   Tribunal   Judge,   repeated   his
      submissions made before the First-tier Tribunal.  As  the  appellant's
      application under the  private  life  route  was  made  while  he  had
      existing s.3C leave on 25th July 2013, he was therefore an  "in  time"
      applicant and that should have attracted a right of appeal.


  15. Further, the immigration rules now disregard a gap of a period  of  28
      days between applications and therefore he should have been granted  a
      right of appeal  as  he  had  not  overstayed  by  28  days  prior  to
      submitting his application.


  16. He also submitted that the Judge's finding that he  had  no  leave  to
      enter or remain after 10th March 2007 as  his  leave  had  never  been
      varied or extended owing to the fact that he was issued  with  an  EEA
      residence card valid until 17th November 2011, was misconceived.


  17. He had regard to the Home Office guidance relating to "long  residence
      and private life" (11 November 2013)  explaining  "lawful  residence".
      Such residence is defined in paragraph 276A of the rules as  a  period
      of  continuous  residence  in  which  an  applicant  had  one  of  the
      following:


     a) existing leave to enter or remain;


     b) temporary admission within s.11 of the 1971 Act;


     c) an exemption from immigration control, including where an exemption
        ceases to apply if it is immediately followed by a grant  of  leave
        to enter or remain.


  18. At paragraph 17 of his grounds for permission, Mr Kannangara contended
      that as the appellant travelled and returned  to  the  UK  during  the
      period of his residence as an EEA permit  holder,  the  appellant  had
      valid leave to enter the UK and therefore remained here legally.


  19. On behalf of the respondent, it was submitted that there was no  valid
      appeal  before  the  Judge.  There   was   no   immigration   decision
      specifically attracting a right of appeal.


  20. Mr Duffy referred to s.3C of the Immigration Act 1971.  That  provides
      for the continuation  of  leave  pending  a  variation  decision.  The
      section applies if a person who has limited leave to enter  or  remain
      in the UK applies to the Secretary for variation of the leave and  the
      application for variation is made before the  leave  expires  and  the
      leave expires  without  the  application  for  variation  having  been
      decided. It is in those circumstances that the leave  is  extended  by
      virtue of this section.


  21. He emphasised the applicable jurisdictional facts that had to be  met,
      namely that the person who seeks to benefit  from  this  section  must
      have limited leave to enter or remain in the UK.


  22. Residence under the 2006 Regulations  does  not  constitute  leave  to
      enter or remain.


  23. The appellant therefore did not have  any  leave  for  s.3C  purposes.
      Accordingly, the decision to refuse to grant him leave to  remain  was
      not a refusal to vary leave as he had no leave to remain in the  first
      place.


  24. I have also been referred to Regulation 330 under Schedule  2  of  the
      2006 Regulations.  It is provided with regard to leave under the  1971
      Act that in accordance with s.7 of the Immigration Act 1988, a  person
      who is admitted to or acquires a right to reside in the UK  under  the
      2006 Regulations shall not require leave to remain in the UK under the
      1971 Act during any period in which he has a  right  to  reside  under
      these regulations, but such a person shall  require  leave  to  remain
      under the 1971 Act during any period in which he does not have such  a
      right.


     Assessment


  25. I find that although the appellant had a right to  reside  in  the  UK
      under the 2006 Regulations, that did not constitute leave to remain in
      the UK pursuant to the Immigration Acts or  rules.  He  has  thus  not
      required leave to remain under the 1971 Act or under the rules.


  26. The appellant had appeal  rights  under  Regulation  26  of  the  2006
      Regulations. The provisions made under the Nationality Immigration and
      Asylum Act 2002 have effect for the purpose of such appeal  under  the
      Regulations to the First-tier Tribunal in accordance with Schedule  1.
      However, the fact that the appeal is made with reference to  the  2002
      Act does not thereby provide him with leave to remain in  the  UK.   I
      accordingly agree with the decision of Judge Kamara and find that  the
      appellant did not have a valid appeal.


     Decision


     The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not  involve  the
making of an  error of law and shall accordingly stand.


     The appeal is dismissed.


     No anonymity direction made

                               Signed                          Date:
                                   2/8/2014
                               Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer
