
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37527/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 March 2016                              |On 13 April 2016              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [A W]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr O Jones, Counsel instructed by Cavendish Legal
Group


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal from a decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Kirvan
    promulgated on 5 May 2015. The appeal is brought by  the  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department, with leave of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Lambert granted on 8 July 2015.

2.   As matters have crystallised before me today, three substantive  points
    are raised as alleged errors of law.  The first is whether or not  this
    case fell within the Immigration Rules and  specifically  reference  is
    made to E-ECDR.2.4. and 2.5. The second is whether  in  the  event  the
    case falls outside the Immigration Rules, the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    was correct to consider exceptional  circumstances  and  the  right  to
    family life as articulated in Article 8 of the European  Convention  on
    Human Right.  The  third  point  is  if  having  considered  this  case
    exceptionally under the European Convention then did the judge properly
    apply the public interest balancing exercise under paragraph 117A to  D
    inclusive of the Immigration Act 2014?

3.   The respondent to this appeal is  a  Jamaican  citizen  born  in  1939,
    although she has spent something in the order of half her  life  living
    in the United Kingdom.  She came most recently to  this  country  as  a
    visitor at which stage it was noted that her  health  had  deteriorated
    considerably and these were matters which formed the basis of  evidence
    and submissions before the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.  There  are  no
    challenges  to  the  factual  findings  of  the  judge  and  in   those
    circumstances  it  is  unnecessary  for  me  to  read  them  into  this
    determination.

4.   In relation to  the  provision  under  the  Immigration  Rules,  it  is
    apparent from the determination at paragraph 58 that it was accepted at
    that stage by both representatives that the appellant  would  not  meet
    the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  The  context  of  that
    paragraph suggests that it is Rule 276ADE which is under discussion and
    the reason why its provisions were not  met  related  to  the  extended
    period of continuous residence, which had not been met.

5.   The point raised both in the grounds of appeal  and  in  oral  argument
    was whether paragraphs E-ECDR.2.4.  and  2.5  were  met.  There  is  an
    academic submission that  E-ECDR.2.5  might  have  been  met,  for  the
    purposes of this appeal I need not make a decision one way or the other
    because, following concession rehearsed above, the judge looked at this
    matter outside the Immigration Rules and made a determination based  on
    exceptional circumstances.  She states at paragraph 67: "It seems to me
    that this is a case which is not adequately covered by the  Immigration
    Rules and there are  exceptional  and  compelling  circumstances  which
    would lead me to consider this matter under Article 8."


6.   The judge goes on to summarise the factual matters in this  case  which
    she regards as being both exceptional and compelling. They relate among
    other things to the appellant's age and her period of residence in  the
    United  Kingdom.   They  include  the  fact  that  she  has   both   an
    occupational and a state pension payable in respect of her time in  the
    United Kingdom and that were she to  return  to  Jamaica  her  home  is
    incapable of occupation since it has been broken into and the furniture
    removed and she  lacks  both  the  support  structure  and  the  mental
    capacity to make arrangements for independent  living.  The  judge  was
    also  satisfied  that  there  was  no  reasonable  likelihood  of   the
    respondent being able  to  find  a  place  in  a  care  home  that  was
    sufficient for her particular needs. She  suffers  among  other  things
    from vascular dementia.

7.   There is, as I  have  said  already,  no  challenge  to  those  factual
    findings but the argument is put before me on behalf of  the  Secretary
    of State that either individually or cumulatively, those matters do not
    amount to an exceptional or compelling circumstance.  I  am  unable  to
    accept that submission.  The matter was entirely within the province of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge to decide.  She heard the evidence.   She
    carried out an assessment of the credibility of the four live witnesses
    before her and the documentation that was produced.   It  seems  to  me
    that as a matter of law the  things  she  relied  on  as  amounting  to
    exceptional and compelling circumstance were legitimate  and  that  her
    finding cannot be interfered with.

8.   The next alleged error of law is that  the  judge  failed  properly  to
    take into account the public  interest  factors  when  considering  the
    balancing exercise under ss 117A to  117D.   In  my  assessment,  these
    factors were  addressed  adequately  by  the  judge  in  the  following
    passages:

 i. At paragraph 69 the judge says: "It seems to me therefore that  if  the
    appellant is returned to Jamaica there would be  an  interference  with
    family life.  I have gone on to consider whether  the  interference  is
    necessary and proportionate."


    ii.  At paragraph 71 the judge says:
         "I have weighed in that the authorities in the United  Kingdom  are
         entitled to enforce the system  of  immigration  control  and  that
         enforcement of that control is clearly in the public  interest.   I
         have taken into account paragraphs 117A - D  of  the  2014  Act  as
         applicable",


    iii. At paragraph 73:
         "However, I have to weigh up the  right  to  family  life  of  this
         appellant against the interests of  the  authorities.   Bearing  in
         mind the facts  of  this  case  as  a  whole  I  have  reached  the
         conclusion that in this instance the balance is tipped in favour of
         the appellant."


10.  This is  a  decision  of  an  experienced  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,
    evidently more than familiar with the statutory material within Section
    117 to which reference is made.  I  do  not  consider  it  in  any  way
    derogates from the decision that the text of those  paragraphs  is  not
    set out in the course of the determination.  It  is  quite  clear  both
    from the passages I have cited and from the judgment as  a  whole  that
    these matters were at the forefront of the Judge's mind at the time and
    that he properly carried out the balancing exercise mindful both of the
    exceptional circumstances he had recognised  and  the  public  interest
    articulated in the statute.

11.  In all of those circumstances this appeal must be dismissed.




Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   Mark Hill                               Date     24 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC


