

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: iA/37153/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Promulgated |
|On 29 July 2014                        |On 1 August 2014          |
|                                       |                          |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                              AWAIS MIAN ZAHID
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Iqbal (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  He has  appealed  against
          a decision dated 27 August 2013 to refuse  to  issue  him  an  EEA
          residence card.



Procedural history



       2. In a determination promulgated on 7 May 2014  First-tier  Tribunal
          Judge Napthine dismissed his appeal, having  allowed  the  appeals
          of his mother  and  two  siblings  against  similar  decisions  to
          refuse an EEA family residence card.  The Judge based this on  the
          fact that this appellant was an independent adult over the age  of
          21 (in contrast to his two siblings).



       3. When granting permission to appeal Judge  Page  observed  that  at
          the date of the application the appellant was under the age of  21
          and it was therefore arguably an error of law  for  the  Judge  to
          dismiss the appellant's appeal for the reasons provided.



       4.  The  matter  now  comes  before  me   to   decide   whether   the
          determination contains an error of law, and if so to  re-make  the
          decision.

Error of law

       5. Both parties accepted  and  it  was  not  disputed  that  (i)  the
          appellant was born on 23 September  1992;  (ii)  that  means  that
          when he made his application on 21 November 2012, he had  recently
          turned 20; (iii) at the date of decision on 27  August  2013,  the
          appellant was still 20.

       6. The Judge correctly  considered  the  appellant's  date  of  birth
          (para 2) but in  my  judgment  erred  in  law  in  so  far  as  he
          considered his age as at the date  of  hearing  (para  30)  rather
          than at the date of application.  The Judge may have been  wrongly
          distracted  by  the  decision  letter  in  which  the   respondent
          erroneously stated  that  at  the  time  of  the  application  the
          appellant was 21 years old, when he was clearly still 20.

       7. Mr Whitwell submitted that the Judge was entitled to consider  the
          appellant's age as at the date of hearing.  Mr Iqbal  argued  that
          this was inconsistent with  the  approach  under  the  Immigration
          Rules and there was no  justification  in  distinguishing  between
          the two classes of cases.   Neither  representative  was  able  to
          assist with any authority on the point.

       8. In my judgment the Judge has made an error of law  in  failing  to
          direct  himself  to  the  appellant's  age  at  the  date  of  his
          application.  I have not been provided with any authority,  policy
          or instruction to assist me on this  point.   In  the  absence  of
          this it is helpful to consider the approach  under  domestic  law.
          Mr Whitwell accepted that the appropriate  date  to  consider  the
          age of the child for the purposes of the Immigration Rules is  the
          date of the application.  This is  to  avoid  any  prejudice  that
          might occur by reason of delays in the decision-making and  appeal
          processes.  Similar considerations apply with  equal  force  here.
          Indeed the respondent's decision letter in this  case  appears  to
          accept that the date of the application was the correct  point  at
          which to consider the age of children applicants.

Re-making the decision

       9. It follows that the appellant's  appeal  should  be  remade.   The
          Judge was prepared to accept that the appellant's siblings'  (both
          under 21) appeals should be allowed to the  extent  that  they  be
          granted residence cards.  For the reasons outlined  by  the  Judge
          in  relation  to  those  appellants,  it  must  follow  that  this
          appellant's appeal must also be allowed as he was under 21 at  the
          date of the application.

Decision

      10. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve
          the making of an error on a point of law.




      11. I set aside the decision.



      12. I re-make the decision by allowing the appellant's appeal  to  the
          extent that he be granted a  residence  card,  in  line  with  his
          family members.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
30 July 2014

