
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
IA/37748/2013

                                                    IA/15862/2012



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London        |Determination Promulgated          |
|On 3 December 2014                  |On 5 December 2014                 |
|                                    |                                   |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                            Appellant

                                     and

                              OLAKUNBI AKINDURO

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant: Mr M Shilliday, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent: Mr P Saini, instructed by Wilsons Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    Whilst this is an appeal by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
   Department,  for  convenience  I  will  refer  to  the  parties  in   the
   determination as they appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.

2. The appellant is a national of Nigeria who first came to the UK  in  1973
   and has left and re-entered the UK on a number of  occasions  since  then
   the most entry recent being on 8 October 2011 with leave to  enter  as  a
   multi-entry visitor until 8 April 2012. The background to this matter  is
   as follows:

. On 2 December 2011 the appellant applied for leave to remain in the UK  on
 compassionate grounds under Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human
 Rights;

. The respondent refused that application on 20 June 2012 and  in  the  same
 decision notified the appellant  of  the  decision  to  remove  her  under
 section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 (the  first
 decision);

. The appellant appealed against that decision- that  appeal  was  allocated
 appeal number IA/15862/2012;

. The appellant's appeal against that decision  was  allowed  by  First-tier
 Tribunal Judge Shepherd in a determination  promulgated  on  19  September
 2012 to the limited extent that it was not in accordance with the  law  as
 the section 47 decision was made alongside the refusal of leave to remain.
 First-tier Tribunal Judge Shepherd  did  not  deal  with  the  substantive
 appeal under Article 8;

. The respondent was granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  In
 a determination promulgated on 5 December 2012 Upper Tribunal  Judge  King
 decided that First-tier Tribunal Judge Shepherd erred in failing to  fully
 consider the substantive merits of the appeal and remitted the appeal back
 to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing for  the  merits  of  the
 appeal to be fully and properly considered;

. It appears that instead of the appeal being  remitted  to  the  First-tier
 Tribunal the respondent made a fresh decision on 29 August  2013  refusing
 the application made on 2 December 2011 (the second decision);

. The appellant appealed against that decision (the  current  appeal  number
 IA/37748/2013);

. In a determination promulgated  on  27  August  2014  First-tier  Tribunal
 Judge Oakley found that the second decision made by the respondent was not
 in accordance with the  law  because  it  implicitly  withdrew  the  first
 decision and because the second decision relied on the 'new' Rules despite
 the application having been made prior to July 2012;

. The respondent applied for permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
 against that decision on the grounds that the Judge erred in deciding that
 the new Rules did not apply to this case. Permission was  granted  on  the
 basis that this ground was arguable.

3. At the hearing before me the parties agreed that  it  was  apparent  from
   the above chronology that the appeal had not been remitted to the  First-
   tier Tribunal in accordance with Upper Tribunal Judge King's decision  of
   5 December 2012. They suggested that it should again be remitted  to  the
   First-tier Tribunal.

Error of Law

4.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Oakley set out much of the history  above  and
   was therefore aware of the circumstances in which the appeal came  before
   him [3-4]. However he  did  not  appreciate  that  the  de  novo  hearing
   directed by Upper Tribunal Judge King had not taken place.  Also,  First-
   tier Tribunal Judge Oakley found that the  respondent's  second  decision
   implicitly withdrew the first. I do not accept that this was the  correct
   approach. In my view  the  first  decision  still  stands.  Mr  Shilliday
   submitted that the respondent can always issue a supplementary  decision.
   I accept that the respondent could perhaps  issue  supplementary  reasons
   but the relevant decision under appeal in this case  must  still  be  the
   first decision, it having been issued in response to the application made
   in 2011 and it still awaiting determination by the First-tier Tribunal.

5. In these circumstances I am satisfied that  the  two  appeals  should  be
   linked and the matter should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a
   de novo hearing in accordance with  the decision of Upper Tribunal  Judge
   King.

6. The issue as to whether the Rules introduced in July 2012  apply  to  the
   decision given the date of application will have to be determined by  the
   First-tier Tribunal Judge at the time of the remitted hearing.

Decision

The Judge made an error on a point of  law  and  the  determination  of  the
First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade.

Signed
       Date:  4 December 2014


A Grimes

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge














