
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37472/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 January 2016                   |On 10 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              ms Thuy An Luong
                       (anonymity direction nOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M Mac, Legal Representative, Mac & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Boylan-Kemp promulgated on 27  July  2015  in
    which she allowed Ms Luong's appeal against the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to refuse to issue an EEA residence card as the primary  carer
    of a dependent British national.

 2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to Ms Luong as the  Appellant
    and to the Secretary  of  State  as  the  Respondent  reflecting  their
    positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:

    "2.  The grounds allege failure to make reasoned  findings  as  to  the
         ability of the Appellant children's biological  fathers  to  assume
         care of them.  This is an extremely short decision in  the  context
         of which -  in  particular  paragraph  24  -  renders  the  grounds
         arguable."

 4. At the hearing I heard submissions from both representatives  following
    which I announced that I found that the decision involved the making of
    a material error of law.  I set it aside to be remitted to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  I set out my full reasons below.

Error of law

 5. Paragraph [24] of the decision states:

         "The respondent has submitted  that  there  has  been  no  evidence
         provided to show that the children's  fathers  could  not  look  at
         (sic) the children if the  appellant  was  required  to  return  to
         Vietnam.  On inspection of the two children's birth certificates it
         is apparent that they have different fathers  and  so  I  find  the
         children would need to  be  separated  to  reside  with  their  own
         father, as there is no  indication  that  either  or  both  of  the
         fathers reside with the appellant.  The  appellant  has,  in  fact,
         submitted  phone  bills  addressed  to  her  and  a  Mr  H  Dao  to
         demonstrate that she is living at the same address as the  children
         but from this I can infer that she is also living with a  different
         man to  either  father  of  her  two  children  and  therefore  the
         inference can be drawn that the fathers are  not  involved  in  the
         care of the children to an extent that would usurp the appellant as
         their primary carer."

 6. In the grounds of appeal the Respondent submitted that this  conclusion
    was purely speculative, and seemingly arrived at without any input from
    the Appellant.  As set out in paragraphs [16] to [18] of the  decision,
    the Appellant did not attend the hearing.  At paragraph [16] it records
    "Ms Mac had instructed the appellant not to attend the hearing  on  the
    assumption that the adjournment would be granted".  However, there  was
    no adjournment, so the  judge  did  not  hear  any  evidence  from  the
    Appellant.

 7. At the hearing Ms Mac  submitted  that  it  was  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant which would address the  issue  under  Regulation  15A(4A)(c)
    that the children would be unable to remain in the  United  Kingdom  if
    the Appellant were required to leave.  She therefore accepted  that  no
    evidence of this had been before the First-tier Tribunal given that the
    Appellant had not been present to give oral evidence.  She stated  that
    it was "unfortunate" that the Appellant had not attended the hearing to
    give evidence, but it is clear from the decision, paragraph  [16]  that
    it was Ms Mac who had instructed the Appellant not to attend.

 8. I find that there are insufficient findings to back up the inference at
    paragraph [24] that the children's fathers would not be  able  to  care
    for them, and therefore that the  children  would  have  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom were the Appellant to leave.

 9. In relation to the finding that the Appellant is the primary  carer  of
    the children, again I find that inadequate reasons are given  for  this
    finding.  Ms Mac submitted that the evidence pointed to the  fact  that
    the Appellant was the children's primary carer, and that the  documents
    inferred that this was the case.  The judge finds that the nursery  fee
    requests are addressed to the Appellant,  but  there  was  no  evidence
    before the judge as to any financial  input  which  the  Appellant  may
    receive from the children's fathers.  The inference is also made  that,
    as the Appellant lives with a different man, the children's fathers are
    not involved in their care [24].  I find that this  is  inference  does
    not follow logically.

10. This is a very short decision in which the  findings  are  confined  to
    only two paragraphs, [23]  and  [24].   In  paragraph  [25]  the  judge
    concludes that the children's  fathers  would  not  be  in  a  suitable
    position to become the primary carers for the children, but this is not
    the test set out under regulation 15A(4A).  I was referred to the  case
    of MA and SM (Zambrano: EU children outside EU) Iran [2013]  UKUT  380,
    in particular paragraphs [41(ii)], [41(iv)] and [56].  It was submitted
    by Ms Fijiwala that there had been no evidence before  the  judge  that
    the children could not remain with their fathers.  Given the submission
    by Ms Mac that this  issue  would  have  been  addressed  by  the  oral
    evidence of the Appellant, who did not attend the hearing in the First-
    tier Tribunal, I find that this is the case.  I find that the  decision
    is inadequately reasoned.

11. I do not make an anonymity direction.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law.  I set it aside.  No findings are preserved.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be reheard.


Signed   Date 5 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
