

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37777/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 28th August 2014                           |on 23rd September 2014       |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                               MUHAMMAD ZAMAN
                            FATHINA SIRAIA AMEER
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Singh instructed by Ahmad & Williams Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr Mills - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Sommerville, dated 6th March 2014, in which he dismissed  the
        appeals of this  husband-and-wife  against  the  refusal  of  their
        applications for further leave to remain. The first appellant ('the
        Appellant') applied as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant and his wife
        as his dependent. The decision also includes a direction  of  their
        removal from the United Kingdom made pursuant to section 47 of  the
        2006 Act.


     2. Having analysed the evidence the Judge found that the Appellant had
        not shown that he could satisfy the requirements  of  paragraph  41
        SD(a) Table 4 paragraph 41 (6) and (9) which was found, in  itself,
        to be fatal to the appeal.  The Judge also noted a second  head  of
        refusal in  that  the  Appellant  had  not  submitted  an  original
        declaration as required by the Rules.  It was not  disputed  before
        the Judge that the declaration  did  not  contain  the  Appellant's
        signature and only  contained  that  of  a  Mr  Farooq.  Additional
        evidence was provided indicating that  an  additional  document  to
        correct this discrepancy may have been before the  decision  maker;
        although as a result of the fact the appeal failed  for  the  first
        reason set out by the Judge, it was not accepted that  this  second
        issues was a material element.


     3.  In  paragraph  13  of  the  determination  the  Judge  rejected  a
        submission  that  although  the  documents   did   not   meet   the
        requirements  of  the  Rules  it  was  clear  that  US$200,000  was
        available to  invest  in  the  Appellant's  business.  It  was  not
        accepted by the Judge that this enabled the Appellant to succeed as
        the strict requirements of the Rules  must  be  met.  A  submission
        based upon evidential flexibility was rejected, especially in light
        of the Court of Appeal decision in Rodriguez [2014] EWCA Civ 2, and
        it was found no copy of the guidance referred to by Ms  Norman  who
        represented the  appellants  before  the  First-tier  tribunal  was
        available, other than on her mobile telephone.


     4. The Grounds assert the Judge failed to  consider  the  Home  Office
        policy guidance  for  Tier  1  Entrepreneur  applications,  version
        10/2013.  The Grounds also assert  that  the  bank  letter  of  1st
        January 2014 clearly stated funds are available  to  the  Appellant
        and that the representative before the First-tier  Tribunal  failed
        to present the case properly and failed  to  explain  the  relevant
        Immigration Rules so the Judge was not able to be properly assisted
        by Ms Norman during the hearing, for which the Appellant should not
        be prejudiced.  It is stated a formal complaint in relation to that
        matter has been raised with the Bar Council.


     5. In granting permission to appeal, Designate Judge of the First-tier
        Tribunal Lewis refused permission  on  all  grounds  bar  Ground  1
        asserting the Judge failed to consider the  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)
        Policy Guidance. It  is  stated  this  was  before  the  First-tier
        Tribunal but not reflected in the determination  and  that  it  may
        have a bearing on the decision.  As a result, on this ground alone,
        permission to appeal was granted.



Error of law


     6. Before the Upper Tribunal Mr Virk referred to the  original  appeal
        bundle in  which,  at  pages  33-42,  is  a  copy  of  the  Tier  1
        (Entrepreneur) Policy Guidance version  04/12.   It  was  submitted
        that paragraph 103 of the Guidance, page  38  of  the  bundle,  was
        relevant which  relates  to  additional  evidence  of  third  party
        funding and which states:


              103 Third parties (other contributors of  money)  may  include
   family                       members,  as  well  as  other  investors  or
   corporate bodies. If  you  are                   relying  on  third-party
   funding, you must also supply  each  of  the                    following
   documents:


                  I.   A declaration from every third party that  they  have
   made the                     money available  for  you  to  invest  in  a
   business in the United                    Kingdom.


                       This declaration must be an original document and not
   a copy.                      It must contain:


                      The names of the third party and your name (and  your
        team                    members  name  if  you   have   formed   an
        entrepreneurial team);


                      The date of the declaration;


                      Your signature and the signature of the  third  party
        (where you                 have formed an entrepreneurial team, you
        and your team                       member must both sign);


                      The amount of money available to you from  the  third
        party in               pounds sterling; and


                      The relationship(s) of the third party to you.


                      For a Venture  Capital  firm  only,  confirmation  of
        whether  this                body  is  an  FSA  registered  venture
        capital firm, in the form of  a                document  confirming
        the award and the amount of money, and                including the
        FSA      registration      number       that       the       firm's
        permission to operate as  a  Venture  Capital  firm  is  listed  as
         permitted under, and/or


                      For a UK  entrepreneurial  seed  funding  competition
        only, a                 document  confirming  that  you  have  been
        awarded money and               that the competition is  listed  as
        endorsed on the UK Trade &                    Investments  website,
        together with the amount of the award                 naming you as
        a winner, and/or


                      For a  UK  Government  Department  only,  a  document
             confirming that it has made money available  to  you  for  the
             specific purpose of establishing or expanding a  UK  business,
             and the amount.


        You must be able to have access to and dispose of the money  freely
        in the UK. Where you are part of an  entrepreneurial  team  sharing
        investment funds both entrepreneurs must have equal access to,  and
        be able to dispose of, the money in the UK.


        A template is included at the end of this guidance the  convenience
        of applicants who wish to use it.


     7. The Guidance continues in the same paragraph to  advise  applicants
        that in addition to the above they must also provided the specified
        documents and verification of the validity of  signatures  on  each
        third-party declaration provided. Mr Virk  submitted  that  on  the
        basis of this paragraph of the Guidance  alone  the  Appellant  was
        able to succeed as the basis that the document of 27th July 2014 is
        compliant with the Guidance.


     8. A bank letter dated 26th April 2012 is to be found at  page  26  of
        the bundle which is stated to be compliant and in the supplementary
        bundle, which was only filed on 27th August 2014 and was  therefore
        not before the Judge. It is stated that the  document  provided  in
        the bundle is that submitted with  the  application  to  the  Entry
        Clearance Officer, including the required Board Resolution.


     9. There is within the supplementary  bundle  a  decision  of  another
        First-tier Tribunal Judge which has not produced in accordance with
        the protocol for citing an unreported determination which,  as  the
        First-tier Tribunal is not a Superior Court of Record, is therefore
        inadmissible. It was a case in which the merits of the appeal  were
        conceded by the Presenting Officer on the facts in any event.


    10.  Mr  Mills,  in  response,  noted  that  in  paragraph  12  of  the
        determination the Judge accepted that the  declaration  was  lodged
        with the application and signed although there  appears  to  be  no
        reference to the basis on which such a finding was  made.   It  was
        submitted there are, however, two  points  raised  in  the  refusal
        letter of which this is only one.  The other  point  stood  against
        the Appellant and nothing in the  Guidance  assists  the  Appellant
        with regard to this element of the case, which is not dependent  on
        whether the Judge accepted the Guidance was before him or not.


    11. Mr Mills submitted that the Appellant has failed to  establish  how
        the Grounds on which permission to  appeal  was  granted  make  any
        difference  to  the  point  the  Appellant  failed   on,   as   the
        requirements  of  the  Rules  relating  to  Tier   1   Entrepreneur
        applications are clear and it was found  that  he  failed  to  meet
        those requirements.


    12. The first point of note with regard to the Appellants claim is that
        the grounds on which permission to  appeal  was  granted  are  very
        limited and only to the issue of whether, had the Judge  considered
        the  Guidance  in  the  bundle,  it  could  have  made  a  material
        difference to the outcome.


    13. The Guidance provided is that referred to as  version  04/2012  and
        the Appellant needed  to  establish  that  this  was  the  relevant
        guidance in force at the date of decision, although it has not been
        suggested before me that it was not or that the content  could  not
        be relied upon.  What  the  Guidance  does  not  say  is  that  the
        mandatory  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  relating   to
        applications of this nature can be ignored or that if a  discretion
        existed, that it should have been exercised differently.


    14.  The  requirement  for  the  provision  of  relevant  evidence,  as
        specified in paragraph 41 ST (a), is not  disputed  and  two  cases
        relevant to this issue have supported the need for such requirement
        to be fulfilled, and that this rule is  lawful.  These  are  Fayyaz
        (Entrepreneurs: paragraph 41-SD(a)(i) - "provided to") [2014]  UKUT
        296 (IAC) and  Durrani  (Entrepreneurs:  bank  letters;  evidential
        flexibility) [2014] UKUT 295 (IAC).


    15. Having considered the limited basis on which permission  to  appeal
        was granted, the finding of the  Judge  in  paragraph  9  that  the
        Appellant could not satisfy the requirements of the Rules which has
        not been shown to be adversely impacted upon by the Guidance relied
        upon by the Appellant  in  any  event,  I  find  it  has  not  been
        established that any error has been made by the Judge  material  to
        the decision to dismiss the appeal.  Even if there is  evidence  of
        the bank statement showing funds are available the  requirement  is
        that such funds are demonstrated  by  the  provision  of  specified
        documents complying with the mandatory  requirements.  This  is  to
        enable the decision maker to have confidence in the source  of  the
        evidence and any  statements  made  therein  that  such  funds  are
        available; which can be checked  with  such  authorised  bodies  or
        third parties if required.  There is no near miss principle  or  an
        ability to ignore the provisions of the Rules  established  on  the
        evidence.  There  is  nothing  to  warrant  this   decision   being
        overturned on the basis of the available material.



Decision

    16. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    17. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules
        2005. I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal
        Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 22nd September 2014












