
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37790/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29 May 2014                                |On 26 June 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GIBB

                                   Between

                               Muhammad Taimur
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Grace Brown, Counsel, instructed by Farani Javid
     Taylor Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr Lawrence Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal that was allowed at the  First-tier.   The  appellant
    before the Upper Tribunal is therefore the  Secretary  of  State.   For
    clarity and convenience, however, I will refer to the parties  as  they
    were at the First-tier.

2.   The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan,  was  in  the  UK  as  a  student
    between 2008 and 2011, and then for post-study work (Tier 1)  until  12
    July 2013.  Just before the expiry of this leave he applied  for  leave
    to remain as a Tier 1 Entrepreneur, but this application was refused on
    4 September 2013.

3.   The appeal was allowed, following a hearing at Taylor House,  by  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Devittie, in a determination promulgated  on
    5 March 2014.

4.   The respondent applied for permission to appeal.  The  point  at  issue
    concerned a printout of the appellant's website,  which  was  submitted
    with the application.  The complaint in the grounds was that the  judge
    had failed to identify the evidence which established that the  details
    claimed to exist on the website at the time of the application were, in
    fact, in existence at that time.

5.   Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Landes, who commented as follows:

         "It is right that it appears to have been the appellant's case that
         the information was on the website at the time of  the  application
         but the judge did not make any explicit findings that this was  the
         case.  Although the tenor of his determination would  suggest  that
         he may have made such a finding and therefore that  the  respondent
         may not ultimately succeed I do not consider that I  can  say  that
         the point is unarguable."

The Hearing

6.   The main submission made by Mr Tarlow, for  the  respondent,  was  that
    the judge had erred in law by considering the printout of the  entirety
    of the website provided at the hearing.  In doing so he had  looked  at
    evidence that had not been submitted with the application.  In response
    to submissions as  to  the  relevance  of  evidential  flexibility  his
    submission was that this was not applicable.  It was beyond what should
    be expected of a caseworker to go to the website itself.  The onus  was
    on the applicant to provide everything that was needed.

7.   Ms Brown, for the appellant,  defended  the  determination,  submitting
    that the reasons were adequate.  There was no evidence to show that the
    website had altered.  The printout of the home page of the website,  at
    page 2 of the  appellant's  bundle,  showed  that  there  were  contact
    details available.  Since the website  had  been  submitted,  this  was
    admissible evidence that had been submitted at the date of application.
     In addition paragraph 245AA(b)(iv) was relevant, because the  document
    could be said not to have contained all of the specified information.

Decision and Reasons

8.   I have decided that the judge did err in law, in a manner  material  to
    the outcome.

9.   Although  there  were  other  issues,  it  was  agreed  that  the  sole
    remaining ground of refusal was that the printout  of  the  appellant's
    business website, provided with the application, did  not  include  the
    appellant's name and contact details.  The basis  on  which  the  judge
    allowed the appeal was the following finding  in  paragraph  6  of  the
    determination:

         "The appellant has explained that he omitted to print out  all  the
         pages from the website.  He has now provided these, and in my  view
         they fully address the concerns of the respondent.  I find that the
         printouts of the website are admissible and are  not  post-decision
         evidence, as the details  of  the  website  were  provided  to  the
         respondent at the date of application."

10.  I appreciate that there are different ways of looking  at  this  point,
    but it appears to me that the  appellant  can  only  be  said  to  have
    actually submitted the printout of a single page from his website  with
    the application.  This provided  the  website  address,  but  making  a
    reference to a website does  not  appear  to  me  to  be  the  same  as
    submitting it with the application.  The appeal was concerned with  the
    points-based system, and  more  specifically  with  the  allocation  of
    points.  As a result  the  question  to  be  addressed  was,  strictly,
    whether the evidence was submitted in support  of  the  application  to
    which the immigration decision related (section 85A(4)(a)).  The  legal
    issue as to admissibility was not strictly concerned with  whether  the
    evidence was "post-decision evidence" but rather whether  the  evidence
    adduced at the appeal had been submitted in support of the application.
     It appears to me  that  the  other  pages  of  the  website  were  not
    submitted in support of the application, and the judge therefore  erred
    in law in regarding them as admissible, with the consequence  that  the
    decision to allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules rested  on  an
    error of law.

11.  I therefore set aside the judge's decision allowing  the  appeal  under
    the Immigration Rules.

12.  The parties were invited, at the hearing, to  make  submissions  as  to
    the remaking of the decision.  Mr Tarlow, for the respondent, submitted
    that the decision could be remade without the need for further evidence
    or submissions.  Ms Brown, on the other hand, asked for an  opportunity
    to make further submissions, but not to call further evidence.

13.  In the circumstances, given the narrow point at issue, I  have  decided
    that there is no need for a resumed hearing, and  I  am  proceeding  to
    remake the hearing on the basis of the documentary evidence.

14.  Having  considered  the  submissions  by  both  sides  in  relation  to
    paragraph 245AA of the  Immigration  Rules  I  have  decided  that  the
    decision was not in accordance with the law and the Immigration  Rules,
    in particular paragraph 245AA(b)(iv), and (d)(iii).

15.  Under paragraph 245AA(b)(iv), where a document does not contain all  of
    the specified information, the decision maker has a discretion  to  ask
    for the correct documents to be  submitted  within  seven  days.   This
    would appear to me to be an example of a situation where a document did
    not contain all of the specified  information.   The  printout  of  the
    website contained an indication that contact  details  were  available.
    It was therefore far from speculative to conclude that there were other
    pages to the website.  If the decision maker did not want  to  look  up
    the website itself, then a full printout of all of the pages  from  the
    website could have been requested.  There is no  indication  that  this
    was considered by the decision maker, and no reasons  have  been  given
    for not making such a request.

16.  As an alternative paragraph 245AA(d)(iii) gives the  decision  maker  a
    discretion to grant the application where there is missing  information
    that is verifiable in other ways.   One  of  these  is  listed  as  the
    website of the  organisation  issuing  the  document.   This  suggests,
    contrary to the submission  made  at  the  hearing,  that,  within  the
    Immigration Rules, decision makers are expected, in some circumstances,
    to look at websites.  Once it became clear that this was to  become  an
    important ground of refusal, it does not appear  to  me  to  be  unduly
    onerous to have expected a decision maker to look at the website, where
    the home page printout had been provided, but the contact  details  had
    not.  It would have been a quick and simple matter to go  to  the  home
    page, and then click through to the contact details.

17.  Again there is no  indication  in  the  refusal  that  this  aspect  of
    paragraph 245AA was considered, and no reasons were given for not using
    this discretion.

18.  For these reasons I have decided, in remaking the  decision,  that  the
    appeal falls to be allowed on the basis that the decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law and the Immigration Rules, and the  application
    therefore remains outstanding awaiting a lawful decision.   The  appeal
    cannot be allowed under the  Rules  outright  because  Paragraph  245AA
    involves the exercise of a discretion, and that discretion has not been
    exercised.  I cannot, therefore, say that the  discretion  should  have
    been exercised differently. Although the full printout of  the  website
    is not admissible at an appeal because of section 85A, there is no such
    restriction on the Secretary of State, who is at  liberty  to  consider
    this evidence in reaching a lawful decision.

Decision

19.  The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

20.  The decision allowing the appeal outright under the  Immigration  Rules
    contained a material error of law and is set aside.   The  decision  is
    remade as follows.

21.  The appeal is allowed  to  the  limited  extent  that  the  application
    remains outstanding, awaiting a lawful decision.



Signed                                  Date 25.06.2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Gibb

