
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37326/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 29 July 2016                              |On 08 November 2016            |
|                                             |                               |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

                                 AZEEZ ABDUL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Ahmed, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr K Shoye, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The respondent (hereafter the claimant) is a citizen  of  Nigeria.   He
    is in possession of a residence card granted to him on 22 July 2013  as
    a family member valid until 22 July 20128.  On 23  September  2014  the
    appellant (hereafter the SSHD) made a decision to remove him  from  the
    UK under the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006
    pursuant to regulations 21B(2)and 24(2) on the basis  that  "[y]ou  are
    specifically considered a person who has entered  into  a  marriage  or
    civil partnership of  convenience,  thereby  fraudulently  obtaining  a
    right to reside in the UK".  The claimant appeals against this decision
    came before Judge Haria who, in a decision sent  on  29  December  2015
    allowing the appeal on human rights grounds stated that "the matter  is
    remitted to the SSHD to  reconsider  her  discretion  under  regulation
    21B(2) of the EEA Regulations".  At [39] the judge stated that the case
    stood to be remitted for the SSHD to exercise her discretion under  reg
    22B(2) of the EEA Regulations.

2.   The SSHD's grounds did not seek to challenge the  judge's  decision  to
    remit on EEA grounds, but did  challenge  the  Article  8  finding.  In
    granting permission First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford stated that  it  was
    arguable that Judge Haria did not have jurisdiction to remit the matter
    back to the SSHD (as opposed to simply finding that the SSHD had failed
    to establish  that the partnership was one of convenience).

3.   Despite the SSHD not seeking to challenge the decision to remit,  I  am
    satisfied that that decision was manifestly wrong in law,  since  there
    was no discretion still to be exercised under Regulation  21B(2).  That
    provision states that the SSHD "may" make a decision "on the grounds of
    an abuse of rights ...", but the SSHD had already taken that decision.

4.   There were further errors on the part of the judge, but these are  best
    identified when I go on to remake the decision. My first decision is to
    find that the FtT judge erred in law and her decision is set aside.

5.   In turning to re-make the decision it is immediately apparent  that  my
    decision must be to allow the claimant's appeal on the basis  that  the
    decision to remove him was unlawful. This decision was premised on  the
    claimant having been a party to a  civil  partnership  of  convenience.
    However: (i) the claimant and his partner were man and woman whereas by
    virtue of s.3 of the Civil Partnership Act 2004, only same sex  couples
    can enter into a civil partnership; (ii) the claimant and  his  partner
    were not spouses. They claimed to have entered into a religious Islamic
    marriage and although they did attempt to register  their  marriage  in
    the UK, that attempt failed. Hence the status of the claimant under the
    EEA Regulations  could  only  be  based  on  him  being  in  a  durable
    relationship with an Italian  national,  Miss  Cisse.  The  regulations
    governing expended  family  members  are  entirely  distinct  to  those
    governing spouses and civil partners. The SSHD has not as yet  examined
    the claimant's position as a partner in a  durable  relationship.   The
    decision to remove therefore has no lawful basis.

6.   The above reasoning also sheds light back on why I  consider  that  the
    judge's errors of law in this case were material.

7.   As I explained to the parties, the outcome of this appeal may prove  of
    little assistance to the claimant since it will be open to the SSHD  to
    make a fresh decision. In making that decision she will of course  need
    to have regard to the judge's finding that the SSHD had not  discharged
    the burden on her of proving there was no  substance  to  the  couple's
    relationship.  She may also wish to consider whether to take action  to
    revoke the claimant's residence card on the separate  basis  that  Miss
    Cisse is no longer in the United Kingdom exercising Treaty  rights  and
    therefore the underlying basis for the grant of  a  residence  card  no
    longer exists. But these are matters for the SSHD, not this Tribunal.

8.   I should record that these grounds also raised Article  8  issues,  but
    given that the underlying EEA decision to remove  is  unlawful,  it  is
    unnecessary to address any potential Article 8 flaws in that decision.

9.   For the above reasons:

       - the FtT materially erred in law and is decision is set aside;


       - the decision I re-make is to allow the  claimant's  appeal  on  the
         basis that the EEA decision to remove was unlawful.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        [pic]                          Date: 9 August 2016

Dr H H Storey
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

