

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/37290/2014
      IA/37320/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |    Sent to parties on:      |
|On 17 November 2015                           |    On 22 December 2015      |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L MURRAY

                                   Between

                           SATHYA MURTHY CHILUMULA
                              ARAVIND VEGGALAM
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Reid, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-Tier Tribunal. I find that no
particular issues arise on the facts of this case that give rise to the
need for a direction. For this reason no anonymity direction is made.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Claimants are Indian nationals and were born on 12 October  1987  and
   30 May 1988. Their applications for further leave to  remain  as  Tier  1
   (Entrepreneur) Migrants were refused by the Respondent  on  18  September
   2014. They appealed against that decision and their  appeals  were  heard
   and dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge R L Meates on 25  March  2015.
   They sought permission to appeal against that decision and permission was
   granted by Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Judge Baird  on  5
   August 2015 on the basis that the decision was  lacking  in  detail.  The
   impression given was that the Judge simply accepted what  the  Respondent
   said without considering the applicable Rules himself.  The  reasons  for
   refusal by the Respondent were  not  properly  addressed.  There  was  no
   indication of what the evidence of the clear that the reasons  given  for
   the findings made were based on a proper assessment  of  the  application
   law.

The Grounds

   2. The grounds assert  that  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred  in
      failing to identify the issues and the evidence before him. The First-
      tier  Tribunal  is  said  to  have  failed  to  consider  whether  the
      Appellants met the requirements of  the  relevant  Rules  rather  than
      stating that the decision of the Respondent was correct. The basis for
      the findings that the bank letter and contract  did  not  provide  the
      required information was not set out. The First-tier Tribunal did  not
      properly examine the contract  which  was  based  on  performance  and
      therefore the duration provision at paragraph 41 SD (e) (iv) 1 (d)  of
      Appendix A of the Immigration Rules was met.


The Hearing

   3. Mr Jarvis accepted that the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  was  not
      well written and it was not entirely clear what was  said  and  argued
      and what was accepted. With regard to the requirements of paragraph 41
      SD (e) (iv) (1) the Appellants had provided a  contract  for  services
      between their business and Rolabeth Ltd. That contract,  as  confirmed
      by a letter dated 11 September 2014 at E1 of the  Respondent's  bundle
      was a rolling contract with a 30 day notice period. Mr Jarvis conceded
      that a rolling contract was capable of  meeting  the  requirements  of
      paragraph 41 SD (e) (iv) (1) (d) and that the First-tier Tribunal  had
      erred in failing to consider the contract  and  whether  the  evidence
      that it was a rolling contract was sufficient to meet the requirements
      of the Rule. Mr Jarvis initially argued that this was not  a  material
      error of law as the Appellants had not demonstrated that they met  the
      requirements of paragraph 41 SD (e) (iii). However,  he  reneged  from
      this position as it  transpired  that  the  Appellants  had  submitted
      evidence  in  relation  to  this  requirement  that  was  not  in  the
      Respondent's bundle nor before the First-tier Tribunal at the hearing.
      He conceded that the error of law was therefore material.


   4. The representatives agreed that  in  the  light  of  the  fact-finding
      required the matter should be re-heard in the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision and reasons

   5. I find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  was  inadequately
      reasoned, failed to take into account  relevant  evidence  and  assess
      that evidence against the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rule  in
      issue.   The Appellants had  submitted,  with  their  applications,  a
      contract for services between their business and  Rolabeth  Ltd.  They
      also  submitted  a  letter  dated  11  September  2014   from   Online
      Immigration UK confirming that this was a rolling contract  without  a
      specific end date but terminable on 30  days  notice.  The  First-tier
      Tribunal failed to consider  whether  this  evidence  was  capable  of
      meeting the requirements of paragraph 41 SD (e)  (iv)  (1)  (d)  which
      required the contract to show the duration of the agreement.


   6. Whilst the Respondent set out the requirements of paragraph 41 SD  (e)
      (iii) in the Refusal Letter, she did not contend that  the  Appellants
      did not meet these requirements or that the required evidence had  not
      been submitted. It is also  unclear  from  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
      determination whether this matter was in issue. It is  clear,  in  any
      event, that no findings were made in relation to  that  paragraph.  Mr
      Jarvis established, having examined the  Respondent's  file  that  the
      Appellants had submitted documentation addressing this aspect  of  the
      Rule  that  was  not  before   the   First-tier   Tribunal.   In   the
      circumstances, if the requirements of paragraph 41 SD (e)  (iii)  were
      not in issue, then the failure to make adequate findings  in  relation
      to paragraph 41 SD (e) (iv) was material and if in  issue,  there  was
      relevant available evidence not before the Tribunal.  In  either  case
      therefore the error of law was material.


Conclusions:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

The Practice Directions of the Upper Tribunal indicate that the remaking  of
the decision of the First-tier Tribunal should be undertaken in  the  First-
tier Tribunal in the light of the judicial fact-finding required.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                                             Date



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray


