
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37202/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 23 December 2014                           |On 20 January 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                             Mr MD SARWAR JAHAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Malik,Solicitor MQ Hassan Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss C Johnstone, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen Bangladesh born on 15 October 1978.

2.   The appellant first entered the United Kingdom on 3  March  2009  as  a
    Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant with a visa  expiring  on  8  December
    2011.  On 6 December 2011 he applied for further leave to remain in the
    United Kingdom in that category.  The  application  was  refused  on  2
    April 2012 on the basis that a false bank statement had been   used  in
    the process of the application.

3.    An  appeal  against  the  decision  resulted  in  a   hearing   before
    Immigration Judge Iqbal and a determination dated 28 May 2012.  It  was
    noted that the verification report that had been relied upon  for  that
    refusal had misquoted the account number.  Thus the matter was remitted
    back to the respondent for reconsideration.

4.   On 27 August 2013 the respondent once again refused the application  on
    the basis of a subsequent verification report, which showed the correct
    account and enquiries still revealed that the bank statement was false.

5.   Once again the appellant sought to appeal against that decision,  which
    appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Wiseman  on  10  September
    2014.  The appeal was dismissed.

6.   The matter comes before me in pursuance of a grant of  permission  from
    a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal on 18 November 20134.  Although  the
    grant bears the name of the  appellant  and  the  case  number,  it  is
    entirely clear from reading the  content  of  the  permission  that  it
    relates to an altogether different case.  That refers to  somebody  who
    has been trafficked for sexual exploitation which  is  not  this  case.
    Clearly there has been some administrative error in the compilation  of
    the decision which has not been  picked up earlier?

7.   As both parties are represented before me it is necessary  to  consider
    as a preliminary issue whether permission to appeal in this case should
    have been granted, and if so to deal with the substantive merits of the
    matter.  In that latter context I note the response of  the  respondent
    dated 28 November 2014.  In fairness to the respondent the  mismatching
    of the contents of the permission with the style and title of the  case
    was  highlighted  in  paragraph  4.    Seemingly  the  matter  was  not
    addressed sooner.

8.   In essence the  challenge  made  to  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge is that the judge was  in  error  in  relying  upon  the
    verification report, particularly in the context of the appellant's own
    evidence and that of the letters from the Jamuma  Bank  that  had  been
    provided, including the letter dated  20  August  2014  from  the  bank
    confirming that the account existed.

9.   Further, that  inadequate  consideration  had  been  given  as  to  the
    Article 8 rights of the appellant, particularly given his ties  in  the
    United Kingdom by his marriage to Khalida Subhabritsy on 5 March  2010.
     She has a visa in her own right as a  student  to  be  in  the  United
    Kingdom until 24 February 2015.  A child was born to  the  relationship
    on 12 August 2014.

10.  A number of  documents  are  enclosed  in  the  appellant's  bundle  of
    documents presented for the appeal.  In particular there is a statement
    from the appellant himself dated 26 August 2014.  It confirms that  the
    bank account that is named does exist and that  he  has  money  in  the
    account.  He relies upon the letter from Jamuna Bank Limited  dated  20
    August 2014 confirming the existence of the account and the  amount  of
    money in it.  He says that the letter was collected from  the  bank  by
    his brother.

11.  Those matters were set out by the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in  the
    determination  and it is clear that the appellant attended the  hearing
    and gave oral evidence before the judge.   He was questioned about  the
    latest letter from the bank and why it did not in fact  carry  a  seal.
    It was noted that the original, when produced, showed the  identity  of
    the author of the letter as "AKM Nazim Uddin VP and Manager  Operations
    Jamuna Bank Limited Agrabad Brnah Chittagong."

12.  The appellant repeated that his  brother  had  been  on  a  holiday  in
    August 2014 in Bangladesh and it was he who had  collected  the  letter
    and brought it back.  The brother gave evidence as to that transaction.
     He said that he just waited to collect the letter from the  bank.   He
    did have an appointment and went to reception for it.

13.  The evidence relied upon by the respondent in the  refusal  letter  and
    at the hearing is the verification report set out at  Annex  H  of  the
    respondent's documents.  It bears the correct  statement  number  0005-
    0310025047.  The author of the report contacted the bank on 10  October
    2012 and the bank representative confirmed that  the  account  did  not
    exist.  It was also stated  that  the  information  held  by  the  bank
    differed from what was detailed in the documents that were provided  in
    support of the application form.

14.  The Judge correctly reminded himself of the importance of applying  the
    appropriate standard and burden of proof particularly as set out in the
    decision of RP (Proof of forgery) Nigeria [2006] AIT 00086.

15.  The Judge considered on the one hand the  verification  report,  noting
    that the respondent has  no  vested  interest  in  the  result  of  the
    original application.

16.  The judge noted the evidence of the appellant and of  his  brother  and
    of the  various  letters  from  Jamuna  Bank  Limited.   As  the  judge
    commented, if the first few letters from the bank had been  changed  to
    misstate the nature of the statement then little weight could  be given
    to any subsequent letter obtained by the appellant seeking  to  confirm
    the same event.

17.  Having considered all matters the  judge  determined  that  the  second
    verification check did elicit the correct information to show that  the
    bank account did not exist.

18.   In  doing  so  the  judge  had  recognised  at  paragraph  45  of  the
    determination the practical difficulties which faced the appellant.  If
    it were said that the first letter from the  bank  was  false  then  in
    seeking to describe an account which did not exist it is  difficult  to
    understand how that problem can be cured  by  the  sending  of  further
    documents. It was important that some mechanism could be put  in  place
    by which genuine officials of the bank could be put in contact with the
    ECO in such  circumstance  that  there  could  be  a  proper  and  open
    discussion  to  locate  the  truth  of  the  matter.  It  is  of   some
    significance that even the more recent letter did not seem to bear  the
    seal of the bank.

19.  Although the merits of the matter may be  finely  balanced  as  between
    the appellant and the verification report, nevertheless it was properly
    open to the judge to prefer the report to the evidence of the appellant
    for the reasons that have been advanced.  I do not find there to  be  a
    material error of law in that regard.

20.  In that connection it is perhaps unfortunate that the copy of the  most
    recent letter from the bank had very little detail  as  to  its  author
    such that  that  identity  could  perhaps  have  been  established  and
    clarified at an earlier stage.

21.  As to Article 8, it is to be noted that the  appellant,  his  wife  and
    child are all citizens of Bangladesh and that the wife's leave  in  the
    United Kingdom is of short duration.   Given that the appellant did not
    meet the Immigration Rules because of production of false documents and
    therefore that the deception had been practiced, it  was  proportionate
    to expect the appellant to return to Bangladesh.  Given that  he  fails
    to meet the Immigration  Rules  there  is  nothing  compelling  in  the
    situation and circumstances of himself or his family that would  render
    such return inappropriate  or disproportionate.

22.  I do not find an error of law in the determination in  this  case.   In
    the  circumstances  permission  to  appeal  is  not  granted.  In   the
    alternative the appeal is dismissed in both  respects  both  under  the
    Immigration Rules and in respect of Article 8 of the ECHR.



Signed        Date 16 January 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

