
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/37357/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|on 23 April 2014                              |On 24th April 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                    VALERIE ANNA ISABEL FERNANDEZ DUNCAN
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:       Mr D Duheric, Solicitor
For the Respondent:      Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

No anonymity order requested or made.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) This determination refers to parties  as  they  were  in  the  First-tier
   Tribunal.

2) The appellant is a citizen of Mexico, born on 13 August 1987.   She  came
   to the UK in 2011 (apparently on a visit visa) with her  sister  and  her
   mother.  Her mother is British by descent.  After 6 months, the appellant
   and her sister returned to Mexico.  Her sister and her father applied  to
   enter the UK on settlement visas.  The appellant returned to the UK on 15
   February 2012 on a Tier 4 General visa.  The applications by  her  sister
   and father were granted in September 2012, and they joined the  appellant
   and her mother in the UK.

3) By application dated 29 January 2013 the appellant sought to remain  with
   her family under paragraph 276ADE of the Rules, based  upon  her  private
   life (page 9 of  her  application)  but  relying  also  upon  her  family
   circumstances (page 18).

4) The respondent refused the application for reasons explained in a  letter
   dated 28 August 2013.  She could not meet the requirements of Rule 276ADE
   (iii), (iv), (v) and (vi).  In terms of sub-paragraph (vi), she had spent
   24 years in her home country and  had  not  lost  her  ties  there.   The
   respondent did not find exceptional circumstances in relation to  Article
   8.  While  it  was  acknowledged  that  family  life  existed  among  the
   appellant, her parents  and  younger  sister,  the  respondent  was  "not
   satisfied that the relationship between parents and  adult  children  and
   between adult siblings is strong enough to engage Article 8."

5) I observe that the reference to a relationship between adult siblings  is
   incorrect.  The appellant's sister will not attain majority until 20  May
   2015.

6) The appellant's first ground of appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
   that she had no ties with her home country, but (no  doubt  wisely)  that
   does not appear to have been  pursued.   In  an  additional  ground,  the
   appellant said that the interference with her family and private life  in
   the UK would be disproportionate.

7) First-tier Tribunal Judge  Agnew  allowed  the  appeal  by  determination
   promulgated on 21 January 2014.  At paragraph  10  the  judge  said  that
   there were "extremely compelling circumstances" in relation to Article 8.
    She referred to Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 and to Huang [2007] UKHL  11,  and
   went on:

       12. The appellant is extremely close to her [younger] sister ...  as
           well as her parents.  The family decided to leave Mexico because
           of the dangers they felt to exist there,  particularly  for  the
           sisters.  They also wanted to join the extensive family  network
           they have in Scotland.  The  appellant's  sister  is  at  school
           studying for her highers.  I accept her evidence that  it  would
           have a devastating effect on her if she were separated from  her
           sister, but more so at this critical stage in her  life.   There
           are various family members in Scotland and some  of  these  have
           written letters of support ... The family  do  not  have  family
           members  in  Mexico  with  whom  they  have  any  contact.   The
           appellant would therefore be returning on her own without family
           support.  She is 26 years  old  and  probably  could  manage  an
           existence in Mexico where  she  has  spent  most  of  her  life.
           However, I accept the evidence of her parents that they will not
           return to Mexico and therefore a serious  family  rupture  would
           take place if the appellant were forced to  return  ...  I  must
           bear in mind not only the serious detrimental effect this forced
           separation would have on the appellant,  but  also  on  all  the
           family members.


       13. Whilst bearing in mind it is the respondent's duty to maintain a
           firm and fair immigration system ... I find the consequences  of
           the respondent's decision, given the history  and  circumstances
           of this particular  appellant's  case  and  her  family,  wholly
           disproportionate and a breach of the  appellant's  rights  under
           Article 8 of the ECHR.

8) These are the SSHD's grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal:

    Failing to give reasons or adequate reasons for  findings  on  material
    matters


              1. ... the Tribunal has erred in law in its  approach  to  the
                 Article 8 assessment in this case.


              2.  MF  Nigeria  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192  confirms  that   the
                 Immigration Rules  are  a  complete  code  that  forms  the
                 starting point  for  the  decision-maker.   Any  Article  8
                 assessment should only be made  after  consideration  under
                 these Rules.  That was  not  done  in  this  case  ...  the
                 Tribunal erred in law by not having regard to the Rules and
                 ...   the   subsequent   proportionality   assessment    is
                 unsustainable because of this omission.

              3. Furthermore, it was made clear in Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640
                 (IAC) that the Article 8 assessment shall only  be  carried
                 out when there are compelling circumstances not  recognised
                 by these Rules.  In this case the Tribunal did not identify
                 such  compelling  circumstances  and   its   findings   are
                 therefore unsustainable.

              4. Gulshan also makes clear  that  at  this  stage  an  appeal
                 should  only  be  allowed  where  there   are   exceptional
                 circumstances.  Nagre [2013] EWHC 720  Admin  endorsed  the
                 Secretary of State's guidance on the meaning of exceptional
                 circumstances, namely ones where refusal would lead  to  an
                 unjustifiably harsh outcome.  In this case the Tribunal has
                 not followed this approach and thereby has erred.

              5. ... the Tribunal has failed to provide adequate reasons for
                 their  findings  at  paragraph  12  that  the   appellant's
                 circumstances are extremely compelling to make her  removal
                 disproportionate ... the appellant is  not  dependent  upon
                 her family here beyond normal emotional ties and she  would
                 be able to remain in contact with them via  modern  methods
                 of communication and via visits ... the appellant is  fully
                 capable of living an independent life in Mexico  where  she
                 has spent the majority of her life.

              6. ... had the Tribunal taken these issues into  consideration
                 they would have  found  that  the  decision  to  remove  is
                 proportionate.


9) Mr Mullen submitted that the only reason given  was  that  the  appellant
   was very close to her sister, and that did not  amount  to  a  compelling
   case outside the Rules.  The appellant is aged 26  and  in  good  health.
   The judge accepted that she could manage in Mexico, where she  has  spent
   24 of her 26 years.  There was no evidence  that  her  absence  would  be
   significantly to the detriment of her  younger  sister,  for  example  by
   affecting her academic performance.  The judge  did  not  deal  with  the
   point in the refusal decision that there were here no  more  than  normal
   emotional ties, a reference to the test in Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ which
   the judge should have applied.  No doubt the family members would all  be
   upset  by  the  separation  which  would  come  about,  but  absent  some
   extraordinary feature the separation of a 26 year old adult from a family
   unit including a minor sibling did not merit  consideration  outside  the
   rules.  The determination should be reversed.



10) Mr Duheric said that the respondent had  not  been  represented  in  the
   First-tier Tribunal, and so the arguments now put had not been developed.
    This was an attempt to re-open the first hearing, rather  than  to  show
   error of law.  The point about "no more than normal emotional  ties"  was
   made in the refusal letter but not reflected in the grant  of  permission
   to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The SSHD's grounds submitted  that  the
   appellant was "fully capable of living an independent life in Mexico" but
   that did not reflect the terms of the judge's finding, which was that she
   "probably could manage an existence".   Those  were  two  very  different
   levels.  The judge had taken an appropriate route to her conclusion.  She
   said at paragraph 10 that she reached her conclusion on all the evidence,
   which meant  that  she  had  considered  all  of  the  64  pages  of  the
   appellant's bundle.   Her conclusion at paragraph 13 was  reached  "given
   the history and circumstances".  She did not have to specifically mention
   all the favourable features of the appellant's case, which  included  her
   having a grandfather who chose to fight for the  United  Kingdom  in  the
   Second World War.  The reasons given, directly and  indirectly,  entitled
   the judge to allow the appeal under Article 8.  The determination  should
   stand.

11) Mr Mullen said in reply that the absence of a Presenting Officer in  the
   First-tier Tribunal was of no relevance, and that the judge had taken the
   wrong starting point.  She had not started from  the  undoubted  position
   that the appellant's case fell well short of what the Rules require.  All
   she pointed to as a matter of fact was a  separation  of  an  adult  from
   parents and a minor sibling, which was not in any way an  unusual  effect
   of the Rules.  She used  the  expressions  "devastating"  and  "extremely
   compelling circumstances" but that was no substitute for reasons.

12) I permitted Mr Duheric a further reply.  He said that the  circumstances
   were clearly compassionate, and while one judge might differ from another
   on how strong they were, it was within the judge's scope to find  as  she
   did, and the respondent's case now amounted only to disagreement.

13) I reserved my determination.

14) Nagre was a judicial review.  The report indicates that  only  if  there
   may be arguably good grounds for granting leave  to  remain  outside  the
   Rules is it necessary to go on to consider whether there  are  compelling
   circumstances not sufficiently recognised under them.

15) As well as the cases referred to by the respondent,  I  have  considered
   MS [2013] CSIH 52 (also a judicial review, not  an  appeal).   The  Court
   agreed with Nagre, saying at paragraph 26:

    It seems to us that the new Rules are likely to  deal  adequately  with
    the great majority of cases where the Article 8  right  to  private  or
    family life is put in issue.  In that event, there is no need to go  on
    to consider Article 8 separately, using the type of analysis set out in
    Razgar.


16) The Court did not approve the test of  exceptionality  for  cases  which
   might  need  to  be  considered  outwith  the  Rules.    Expressing   its
   conclusions at paragraph 30, the Court said:

    Before it is  necessary  to  embark  on  that  second  stage  exercise,
    however, the application for leave to enter or remain must  demonstrate
    a good arguable case that leave should be granted  outside  the  Rules:
    that a  distinct  assessment  of  proportionality  should  be  made  to
    determine whether removal would  infringe  the  applicant's  Article  8
    rights.  If that is not  demonstrated,  it  can  be  assumed  that  the
    applicant's Article 8 rights will be adequately dealt with by  applying
    the new Rules.  Finally, the test of exceptionality should not be  used
    any longer; instead, decision makers should focus on  the  question  of
    whether the applicant has shown a good arguable case that  his  or  her
    application should be dealt with outside the Rules.


17) In Gulshan the Upper Tribunal digested the position  derived  from  case
   law to date to the following effect.  A judge should firstly address  the
   Article 8 aspects of a case through the Rules, and  only  if  there  were
   arguably good grounds for granting leave to remain outside the Rules  was
   it necessary for Article 8 purposes to go on to  consider  whether  there
   were compelling  circumstances  not  sufficiently  recognised  under  the
   Rules.

18) The absence of a Presenting Officer in the First-tier  Tribunal  has  no
   bearing on whether the determination errs in law.

19) I think the judge did err by failing  to  consider  whether  there  were
   more than normal emotional ties, so as to  constitute  family  life,  and
   that the point is clearly raised by the grounds on  which  permission  to
   appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted.  However, I do not think it  is
   necessarily one which rebounds in favour of the SSHD.  It seems  implicit
   in the determination that the judge thought that the state  of  relations
   amounted to family rather than private life.  Although the appellant is 8
   years into adulthood, she is single and  childless  and  has  essentially
   remained with her family of  birth.   Whether  to  judge  this  state  of
   affairs to amount to her family rather than her private life  is  in  the
   end a question of fact.  In my opinion, a judge might well find  this  to
   be family life.  The choice of expression makes little if any  difference
   if the case reaches a final balancing exercise, because the facts  remain
   the same.

20) On the question whether the judge  gave  adequate  reasons  for  finding
   arguably good reasons to go outside the rules, and for finding compelling
   circumstances not sufficiently recognised under the rules, I  prefer  the
   submissions for the respondent.   The  judge  has  used  the  expressions
   derived from the case law for going outside the rules, but  she  has  not
   explained why they apply to the facts.  The separation of a single  adult
   from her closest relatives may be unfortunate for them all, but  such  an
   outcome is routinely inherent in the scheme  established  by  the  Rules.
   There is no overriding right under Article 8  for  adults  not  otherwise
   entitled to be in the UK to  live  with  their  closest  relatives.   The
   appellant's sister will be  upset,  but  the  expression  "a  devastating
   effect" is not justified by  the  evidence  and  is  overstated.   It  is
   commonplace to have an adult sibling living outside the family home, even
   in another continent.

21) In my opinion,  there  is  nothing  in  the  determination  (or  in  the
   evidence) to justify a finding that there was a  good  arguable  case  to
   consider outside the Rules; and even if the case were to pass that stage,
   there is nothing to justify a finding  of  compelling  circumstances  not
   recognised under the Rules.

22) The  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.   The
   appellant's appeal, as brought to the First-tier Tribunal, is  dismissed.







                               [pic]
                                24 April 2014
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
