
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37284/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 August 2015                    |On 20 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                             NOUMAN MEHMOOD KHAN
                            (No anonymity order)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Puri, VKM Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Before considering the substantive issues, I record  my  thanks  to  Mr
    Puri who attended the hearing despite not being in funds.  His courtesy
    to the Tribunal in so doing was  obvious  and  his  commitment  to  his
    client admirable; his presence was much appreciated.

 2. Mr Puri indicated that he sought  an  adjournment  as  his  client  was
    unable to attend the hearing having been admitted on  9  June  2015  to
    hospital with acute psychosis and only having  been  discharged  on  14
    August 2015 to "controlled temporary accommodation" where he  is  under
    the supervision of an intervention team.  Mr  Puri  did  not  have  his
    client's medical records.  In fact, Mr Puri had lost contact  with  his
    client and it was only  very  recently  he  had  been  able  to  resume
    instructions.

 3. Mr Puri had applied for an adjournment in writing on 13 August 2015 but
    had yet to receive a reply from Field  House.   I  indicated  that  the
    application had not reached  the  appeal  file  and  was  probably  "in
    transit".  I indicated that I would consider  the  adjournment  request
    but before doing so I wanted  to  hear  from  Mr  Mills  regarding  the
    substance of the grounds.  As will become clear, there was in  fact  no
    need to adjourn.

 4. The issue at the heart of the grounds of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    was whether First-tier Tribunal Judge V A Osborne acted fairly when she
    decided at paragraph 50 of her decision and reasons statement:

         "50. I find that if the Appellant was truly devoted to his children
         as claimed, he could have  produced  evidence  of  practical  steps
         which he had taken towards securing contact with them which he  has
         failed to do so."

 5.  The  appellant  argues   that   this   requirement   for   documentary
    corroboration of his oral evidence was wrong in that his oral  evidence
    on other issues relating to his relationship to his children  had  been
    accepted.  The grounds also identify that  the  appellant  was  without
    legal representation at the hearing and  that  he  had  not  sought  or
    obtained legal advice about his immigration  matters  until  after  the
    hearing.

 6. Mr Mills was unable to concede the appeal but acknowledged  that  there
    were concerns as to the basis on which Judge Osborne had concluded that
    the  appellant  could  have  produced  the   evidence   she   expected,
    particularly in light of the recent developments in his  mental  health
    condition  which  Mr  Puri  had  indicated  might  be  related  to  the
    appellant's previous drug and alcohol abuse.  Mr Mills  submitted  that
    any error was not material because the  burden  of  proof  lay  on  the
    appellant.

 7. I did not need to hear further from Mr Puri.  Although I do not make  a
    finding that the appellant presented with any mental  health  condition
    before Judge Osborne, I find that her decision in paragraph  50  to  be
    unsound.  Judge Osborne had accepted a number of key elements about the
    appellant's relationship to his  children  which  were  only  evidenced
    through his oral testimony.  To then require corroboration was to raise
    the evidential bar above the  civil  standard  of  proof;  and  without
    further explanation and reasoning to do so must be wrong in law.

 8. As I indicated at the hearing, the overriding objective in  rule  2  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014 requires that that Tribunal must  deal  with  cases
    fairly  and  justly.   That  includes  ensuring  a  party  is  able  to
    participate fully  in  the  proceedings  and  to  bear  in  mind  their
    abilities.

 9. The appellant had no legal assistance in preparing  or  presenting  his
    case.  He had put in writing the fact he  had  applied  to  the  County
    Court for access.  Many people do not expect their word to  be  doubted
    and think that it is enough to give oral or written  evidence  about  a
    matter.  In  this  case,  Judge  Osborne  accepted  much  of  what  the
    appellant said and therefore that expectation was sustained.  It  would
    appear that Judge Osborne wanted documentary evidence on one particular
    issue but did not give the appellant an opportunity  of  obtaining  it.
    In the circumstances of this case,  this  was  a  further  legal  error
    because it undermined the principle of fairness.

10. Mr Mills indicated that if I were to find a material legal  error  then
    the appropriate course would be to remit the appeal to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh hearing.  Mr Puri agreed and so do I.

Decision

The decision and reasons statement of  Judge  V  A  Osborne  contains  legal
errors which require me to set it aside and to remit it  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal.

Directions

The remitted hearing can be  heard  by  any  judge  other  than  Judge  V  A
Osborne.

The remitted hearing can be heard at the Stoke  Hearing  Centre  subject  to
any listing directions of the First-tier Tribunal.

Standard directions regarding further evidence  etc  apply  subject  to  any
additional directions the First-tier Tribunal might wish to issue.


Signed   Date

John McCarthy
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
