
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/37927/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 16 December 2015                  |On 7 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               HARVINDER SINGH
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr Taj Shah (Taj Solicitors)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appeal of Harvinder Singh,  a  citizen  of  India  born  26
    August 1978 against the Respondent's decision of 10 September  2014  to
    refuse his application for leave to enter. His wife IV and daughter  TB
    (born 25 December 2006) are not Appellants but inevitably their private
    and family life are closely connected to the Appellant's own interests.



 2. The immigration history supplied by the Respondent sets out that he and
    his wife first entered the United Kingdom as a working holidaymaker  on
    31 October 2006; he overstayed  following  that  visa's  expiry  on  28
    October 2008. He applied unsuccessfully to regularise his  position  on
    24 March 2009 and 17 December 2013, the  decisions  against  him  being
    notified on 27 June 2009 and 24 January 2014.

 3. The family's applications were refused because  there  was  no  settled
    Sponsor to  support  an  application  under  the  partner  route  under
    Appendix FM and as an extant  family  unit  no  application  under  the
    parent route was feasible.  It  was  reasonable  to  presume  that  the
    Appellant would retain  an  extended  network  of  family  and  friends
    resident in India where he had spent most of  his  life  including  his
    formative years; the same went for his wife. As to TB, whilst  she  had
    resided here for the eight years since her birth, she was  nevertheless
    at an age where she could be reasonably expected to adapt to conditions
    in India, where there was a developed education system.

 4. In his witness  statement  the  Appellant  explained  that  whilst  his
    parents and siblings remained in India,  his  family  had  opposed  his
    marriage and subsequently severed all ties with  him:  following  their
    marriage in 2004 they had disowned him and he had lost all contact with
    them; indeed his daughter had never met them. A letter from Barley Lane
    Primary School of November 2013 stated TB was presently attending class
    and had been enrolled since 2010; she was performing well and was above
    average in reading and writing.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal generally accepted the facts that were advanced
    before it, and dismissed the appeal. Directing  itself  that  the  best
    interests of the daughter were the central issue in the case, which  it
    addressed  first,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  noted  that  her  lengthy
    residence included a period of schooling though she would not yet  have
    started studying for any specific qualifications. Finding that she  had
    more familiarity with the Punjabi  language  than  had  been  suggested
    given that the parents admitted speaking to each other entirely in  the
    language at home, had no health problems and was  progressing  well  in
    school, there was no reason to think she would have any difficulty with
    adapting to life in general and schooling in particular in  India,  her
    country of nationality, with the support of her parents who could  seek
    lawful employment using their skills and experience.

 6. Her best interests clearly pointed towards being raised by her  parents
    in the same country in which they  would  in  future  reside.  Her  own
    private life was relatively undeveloped and her focus was inevitably on
    her own family unit. Whilst all things being equal her  best  interests
    marginally  pointed  towards  her  remaining  in  this  country,   once
    considerations of immigration control were factored into the  equation,
    the balance shifted such that it would be reasonable to expect  her  to
    depart with them to their country of nationality.

 7. As to the private life of the parents, it could be presumed  that  they
    had some connections here given their length of residence but there was
    no evidence of study or lawful work since 2008,  nor  of  any  specific
    ties here. Given the statutory enjoinder that little weight be afforded
    to the private life of adults present  with  a  precarious  immigration
    status, the public interest inevitably outweighed their limited private
    life here.

 8. Grounds of appeal argued that the First-tier  Tribunal's  finding  that
    the Appellant's daughter's best interests pointed towards her remaining
    here was inconsistent with the disposition of the appeal  adversely  to
    the family, having regard to the reasonableness test under the Rules in
    Rule 276ADE and outside them via section 117B(6) and to section  55  of
    the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009. Permission to appeal
    was granted on all those grounds.

Findings and reasons

 9. The relevant parts of the Immigration Rules are

         "Requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain on  the
         grounds of private life

         276ADE

         (1)      The requirements to be met by an applicant  for  leave  to
         remain on the grounds of private life in the UK  are  that  at  the
         date of application ...

             (iii)     has lived continuously in the UK  for  at  least  20
             years (discounting any period of imprisonment); or

             (iv)       is  under  the  age  of  18  years  and  has  lived
             continuously in the UK for at least 7 years  (discounting  any
             period of imprisonment) and it  would  not  be  reasonable  to
             expect the applicant to leave the UK; or ...

             (vi)      subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged  18  years  or
             above, has lived continuously in the UK for less than 20 years
             (discounting any period of imprisonment) but  there  would  be
             very significant obstacles to the applicant's integration into
             the country to which he would have to go if required to  leave
             the UK."

10. Within the Rules, the daughter's  length  of  residence  enlivens  Rule
    276ADE(iv); the Appellant's case arises wholly under  Rule  276ADE(vi).
    Nevertheless, the considerations  within  and  outwith  the  Rules  are
    essentially aligned because consideration of the right to  private  and
    family life outside the Immigration Rules must give  central  attention
    to the statutory considerations identified in 117B of  the  Nationality
    Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  addressing  the  public   interest
    considerations applicable in all such cases, which sets out:

         "(6)     In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
         the public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child (has lived in the  United
             Kingdom for a continuous period of seven years or more), and

             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom."

11. Christopher Clarke LJ stated in EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874:

         "34.     In determining whether or not,  in  a  case  such  as  the
         present, the  need  for  immigration  control  outweighs  the  best
         interests of  the  children,  it  is  necessary  to  determine  the
         relative strength of the  factors  which  make  it  in  their  best
         interests to remain here; and also to take account of  any  factors
         that point the other way.

         35.      A decision as to what is in the best interests of children
         will depend on a number of factors such as (a) their age;  (b)  the
         length of time that they have been here; (c)  how  long  they  have
         been in education; (c) what stage their education has reached;  (d)
         to what extent they have become distanced from the country to which
         it is proposed that they return; (e) how renewable their connection
         with it may be; (f) to  what  extent  they  will  have  linguistic,
         medical or other difficulties in adapting to life in that  country;
         and (g) the extent to which the course proposed will interfere with
         their family life or their rights (if they  have  any)  as  British
         citizens.

         36.      In a sense the tribunal is concerned with how emphatic  an
         answer falls to be given  to  the  question:  is  it  in  the  best
         interests of the child to remain? The longer  the  child  has  been
         here, the more advanced (or critical) the stage of  his  education,
         the looser his ties with the country  in  question,  and  the  more
         deleterious the consequences of his return, the greater the  weight
         that falls into one side of the scales. If it is overwhelmingly  in
         the child's best interests that he should not return, the  need  to
         maintain immigration control may  well  not  tip  the  balance.  By
         contrast if it is in the child's best interests to remain, but only
         on balance (with some factors pointing the other way),  the  result
         may be the opposite.

         37.      In the balance on the other side there falls to  be  taken
         into account the strong weight to be given to the need to  maintain
         immigration control in pursuit of the economic  well-being  of  the
         country and the fact that, ex hypothesi,  the  applicants  have  no
         entitlement to remain. The immigration history of the  parents  may
         also be relevant e.g.  if  they  are  overstayers,  or  have  acted
         deceitfully."

12. Alongside him Lewison LJ stated at [60] that

         "... none of the family is a British citizen. None has the right to
         remain in this country. If the mother is removed, the father has no
         independent right to remain. If the parents are removed, then it is
         entirely reasonable to expect the children to go with them. As  the
         immigration judge found it is obviously in their best interests  to
         remain with their parents. Although it is, of course a question  of
         fact for the tribunal, I cannot see that the desirability of  being
         educated at public expense in the UK can outweigh  the  benefit  to
         the children of remaining with their parents.  Just  as  we  cannot
         provide medical treatment for the world, so we cannot  educate  the
         world."

13. Overall the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  an  impressively
    detailed one, and the thought processes that led it to its  conclusions
    are  set  out  extensively.  There  is  nothing  within  it   that   is
    inconsistent with the guidance just cited.  It  can  certainly  not  be
    criticised for any inadequacy of reasons or failure  to  take  relevant
    considerations into account. The aspect of its decision upon which  the
    Appellant's advocate concentrated at the  hearing  before  me  was  the
    identification of the child's best interests as counting in  favour  of
    her remaining in this country en route to a conclusion  that  this  did
    not make relocation abroad unreasonable.

14. However, as can be seen from EV (Philippines), it is only  where  "best
    interests" emphatically point in favour of  remaining  here  that  this
    counts strongly against other factors such as immigration control.  But
    here  the  Tribunal  expressly  found  that  her  best  interests  only
    marginally counted in favour of her  remaining  here.  There  was  very
    little evidence as to the daughter's  connections  outside  the  family
    home.

15. In those circumstances it was perfectly reasonable for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to find that her parents, who speak Punjabi around her in  the
    family  home,  would  be  well  placed  to  ameliorate  any   temporary
    disadvantage she would suffer from the interruption in her studies that
    would inevitably result whilst she adjusted to education in  a  culture
    where the teaching might not be wholly in English. Additionally one can
    hardly ignore the fact that English is widely spoken in India and  that
    there must be many schools where some if not all classes are taught  in
    English,  if  her  parents  wished  to  avail  themselves  of  such  an
    opportunity. Once her parents' poor immigration  history  was  factored
    into the equation the result of the appeal was unsurprising. Whilst  it
    might not have been irrational for the First-tier Tribunal to have come
    to the contrary conclusion to the one it preferred, it was certainly in
    no way perverse for it to find against the case  put  on  the  family's
    behalf.

16. Given the foregoing, there is no material error of law in the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal and the appeal is dismissed.

    Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  contain  a  material
    error of law.

    The appeal is dismissed

[pic]
Signed:     Date: 15 December 2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes
