
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37937/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 31 March 2014                              |On 11 April 2014             |
|Determination given orally on 31 March 2014   |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG



                                   Between

                           MATHEW OKEDGHENE AKPANI

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Ojukotola from S L A Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Jack, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. This is an appeal brought by the appellant against a decision  made  by
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Reed,  promulgated  on  24  January   2014
    following  a consideration on the papers made at Bradford on 21 January
    2014.  Although the appellant had submitted a skeleton argument  and  a
    large bundle, an oral hearing had not been  requested  and  nor  had  a
    representative within the UK been nominated. It is not suggested before
    me that there was any error in the judge's decision  to  consider  this
    application on the papers and indeed in the circumstances  there  could
    not be such.

 2. The appellant is a national of Nigeria who was born on  6  April  1975.
    In the papers before me it was not clear what his  immigration  history
    had been but I  was  told  by  his  representative,  Mr  Ojukotola,  on
    instructions, that the  appellant  claims  to  have   arrived  in  this
    country as a visitor in 2008.  It is accepted that whether  or  not  he
    had permission to enter at that time as he claims,  he  overstayed  and
    has been present in this country ever since without leave.  It does not
    appear that this was a factor to which any weight was attached in Judge
    Reed's determination.

 3. The appellant applied under Regulation 7 of the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 for a residence card,  claiming  to  be
    the husband of one Aminata Camara, a French national exercising  treaty
    rights in this country. This application was refused by the  respondent
    on 26 June 2013 and the refusal letter is dated the same date.  In that
    letter the respondent does not accept either that the appellant and  Ms
    Camara are married as claimed or  even  that  Ms  Camara  was  in  fact
    exercising treaty rights in this country.  The basis  of  the  marriage
    claimed is that in March 2011 the appellant and his alleged spouse  had
    contracted a valid proxy marriage in Nigeria.  It should  be  noted  at
    this stage that the application was on the basis of Regulation 7  only.
    There was not an alternative application  made  under  Regulation  8(5)
    coupled with Regulation 17 pursuant to  which the  Secretary  of  State
    may issue a residence card to someone who is in the words of Regulation
    8(5) "the partner of an EEA national (other than a civil  partner)  and
    can prove to the decision maker that he is in  a  durable  relationship
    with the EEA national".

 4. The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision and as already
    noted above, following consideration of the appeal on the papers  in  a
    determination promulgated on 24 January 2014 his appeal was  dismissed.
    Although neither in the application itself nor in the skeleton argument
    submitted on behalf of the appellant, was  an  alternative  claim  made
    under Regulation 8, the judge considered this also but  concluded  that
    the evidence put forward on the appellant's behalf "is insufficient  to
    demonstrate that there is a durable relationship between them or indeed
    that they are in any sort of relationship akin to a marriage".

 5. The judge considered in the absence of a marriage certificate or  other
    evidence supporting his claim to be married that he had not established
    that he was married as required under Regulation  7  and  that  in  the
    absence of sufficient evidence to establish that he and Ms Camara  were
    in a durable relationship his claim must fail under Regulation 8 also.

 6. The appellant has  appealed  against  this  decision  and  was  granted
    permission to appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane on 24  February
    2014. Although when granting permission Judge Keane  did  not  consider
    that there was any error of law in the judge's finding that  there  had
    not been  a valid marriage, he did consider that it was  arguable  that
    the judge made an error of law "in not according  more  weight  to  the
    documentary evidence which suggested quite lengthy cohabitation between
    the appellant and his EEA national sponsor before  the  date  when  the
    appeal was determined" when considering whether or not he had  a  valid
    claim that  he  should  have  been   allowed  a  residence  card  under
    Regulation 8.

 7. Before me on  behalf  of  the  appellant  it  was  acknowledged  by  Mr
    Ojukotola that the appellant could not  realistically  argue  that  the
    rejection of his appeal under Regulation 7 contained a  material  error
    of  law.   Although  it  was  said  that  a  marriage  certificate  had
    previously been submitted to the respondent, at an earlier time when  a
    previous  application  had  been   made,  it  was  accepted  that  that
    certificate had not been put before this judge and so he could  not  be
    faulted for not taking such document into consideration.  It  was  also
    accepted that following the decision of this Tribunal in Kareem  (Proxy
    marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 00024 in order for a Tribunal  to  find
    that such a proxy marriage was valid, "the starting point  will  be  to
    decide whether a marriage was contracted between the appellant and  the
    qualified person according to the national law of the  EEA  country  of
    the qualified person's nationality" which in this case was France.

 8. Although Mr Ojukotola informed the  Tribunal  that  that  decision  was
    under appeal, he accepted that it was binding on me and  that  in  this
    case there had been  no evidence placed before the judge  to  establish
    that the proxy marriage which the appellant claimed to have  contracted
    was valid in France. It was accordingly not argued before me  that  the
    decision insofar as it applied to the appeal  under  Regulation  7  was
    wrong in law but was open to the judge.  However, Mr Ojukotola did seek
    to argue that insofar as the judge found that the appellant had  failed
    to establish that he was in a durable relationship with his partner  as
    required under Regulation 8, that  decision  was  so  contrary  to  the
    evidence before him as to amount to an error of law.

 9. The appellant's case was that the evidence effectively was overwhelming
    such that the judge should have given more weight to it and found  that
    the requirement under Regulation 8(5) was satisfied, that is  that  the
    appellant satisfied the condition in  that  paragraph  because  he  had
    established that he was a partner of an EEA national  and  could  prove
    that he was in a durable relationship with her.

10. I should add at this point that although the appellant lost his  appeal
    before Judge Reed, he did find that Ms  Camara  was  indeed  exercising
    treaty rights in  this  country  so  the  only  issue  with  regard  to
    Regulation 8 was whether or not the appellant and Ms Camara were indeed
    in a durable relationship and were "partners".   If they were, then  it
    is argued that he should have  found  that  the  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law and should have remitted the matter back to the
    Secretary of State to exercise her discretion under Regulation 17 as to
    whether or not to  issue a residence card.

11. On behalf of the respondent Mr Jack submitted first that  the  decision
    with regard to Regulation 7 was clearly correct as there  had  been  no
    evidence  produced  capable  of  establishing  that  the  parties   had
    undergone a valid ceremony of marriage.  So far  as  Regulation  8  was
    concerned, the respondent asked the Tribunal to note first, that  there
    had been no application made under Regulation 8.  Secondly, that in the
    skeleton argument submitted Regulation 8 had not even  been  mentioned,
    and thirdly, in any event, the judge had been  entitled on the basis of
    the evidence which had been before him, to conclude that the  appellant
    had not established that the requirements  of  Regulation  8  had  been
    satisfied, and that was even before  any  consideration  was  given  to
    whether or not  discretion  should  be  exercised  in  the  appellant's
    favour.

Discussion

12. I have summarised  the  issues  above  and,  as  acknowledged  by  both
    parties, the only substantive issue before this Tribunal now is whether
    or not the judge had been   entitled  to  find  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence which had been put before him,  that  the  appellant  had  not
    proven (on the balance of probabilities)  that  he  was  in  a  durable
    relationship with Ms Camara and that she was his "partner".

13. So far as the  appeal  against  the  decision  under  Regulation  7  is
    concerned, it is quite clear both from the fact that the judge did  not
    have before him a marriage certificate but  also  from  the  fact  that
    there was no evidence that such  a  marriage  would  anyway  have  been
    treated as valid according to French law  (following  the  decision  of
    this Tribunal in Kareem  that  it  cannot  be  said  that  the  judge's
    decision in this regard contained any error of law.

14. With regard to the subsidiary argument which was advanced on behalf  of
    the appellant to the effect that the  judge  should  anyway  just  have
    remitted this case back to the Secretary of State for a decision  under
    Regulation 8, this could  only be said to be even arguably  appropriate
    if he had found first that there was such a durable  relationship.   In
    the absence of such  a finding there was no decision left  to  make  as
    the discretion could  only be exercised in any event if there was first
    established such a durable relationship.

15. The judge's findings with regard to the argument under Regulation 8  is
    set out at paragraph 19 of his determination as follows:

         "19.  I confirm that I have considered in the  alternative  whether
             or not the appellant  could   be  considered  as  an  extended
             family member of the EEA national sponsor on account of  being
             in a durable relationship with her. Both the appellant and the
             EEA national  sponsor  have  made  statements,  but  in  these
             statements say nothing about their  relationship  together  or
             indeed even that they are cohabiting together in any  sort  of
             relationship. I have been left to assume this from  the  claim
             they are married and  from  some  documents  which  show  them
             sharing an address and having a joint  life  assurance  policy
             taken out on 19 September 2011 for  a  25  year  period.  This
             evidence in itself is insufficient to demonstrate there  is  a
             durable relationship  between them or indeed that they are  in
             any sort of  relationship  akin  to  marriage.   There  is  no
             evidence  [from]  any  friends  or  neighbours   about   their
             relationship, no photographs of them together and  nothing  to
             show that they are enjoying any sort of family  life  together
             as each other's partners. Whilst there is a joint life policy,
             this may be something akin to a commercial arrangement between
             them. I therefore find that on the evidence  submitted  to  me
             the appellant has failed to  show  that  he  is  the  extended
             family member of an EEA national sponsor."

16. As already  noted  above,  the  judge  did  find  that  Ms  Camara  was
    exercising treaty rights so the challenge to the  application  on  that
    basis obviously falls by the wayside.

17. With regard to the judge's findings, Mr Jack referred to paragraphs  53
    and 54 of Kareem to the effect that in order to establish a valid proxy
    marriage it would be necessary in any event to establish that there had
    been the payment of a dowry and also that there  was  evidence  of  the
    parties' consent and that they had the capacity to marry and that there
    had been a formal giving away of the bride  which  was  in  effect  the
    parental  consent  to  the  marriage.   It  was  in  this  context,  he
    submitted, that the judge was entitled to take note of the  absence  of
    any evidence other than the evidence referred to in paragraph 19.

18. On behalf of the appellant Mr Ojukotola submitted that there  was  such
    an abundance of evidence that the parties  were  living  together  that
    this, coupled  with  their  claim  to  be  married,  should  have  been
    sufficient to persuade the judge that they were indeed cohabiting, that
    they were  effectively  partners  and  that  they  were  in  a  durable
    relationship.   Mr Ojukotola accepted,  however, that there  should  be
    more  in  terms  of  documentary  evidence,  but  in   concluding   his
    submissions he asked the Tribunal to find  that  there  was  sufficient
    documentary evidence before the judge to find that they were cohabiting
    and in a durable relationship, although this was a matter "entirely  in
    your hands".

19. With respect to Mr Ojukotola and the persuasive manner in which he  put
    his arguments before this Tribunal, the test  is  not  whether  or  not
    there was sufficient evidence before the judge to enable  him  to  find
    that the parties were cohabiting and in a  durable  relationship.   The
    test that I have to apply is whether or not the judge was  entitled  to
    find on the evidence before him that there was not.   In  my  judgement
    the judge was so entitled to find.  It is clear from what is set out at
    paragraph 19 that he considered all the evidence in this case. Not only
    did he consider the lack of evidence which might be  expected  such  as
    evidence from neighbours or  friends  to  show  that  the  couple  were
    enjoying any sort of family life together as each other's partners, and
    noting also the absence of evidence which might have been expected even
    in Ms Camara's statement regarding their relationship together, but  he
    also took into account the evidence  which  was  contained  within  the
    papers.

20. The judge's finding that this did not in effect  amount  to  more  than
    showing that they  were  sharing  an  address  and  had  a  joint  life
    assurance policy was in my judgement open to  him.   It  is  true  that
    there was evidence that they had phone bills in joint names  but  again
    this does not show what the relationship was between them.

21. It would have been open to the parties had they chosen  to  do  so,  to
    have elected to have an  oral  hearing  in  which  Ms  Camara  and  the
    appellant could have given evidence which could  have  been  tested  in
    cross-examination.  They chose not to do so.  In  those  circumstances,
    on the basis of the evidence before the judge, the judge  was  entitled
    to give such weight to that evidence as he considered  appropriate.   I
    do not consider be made any error of law in so doing.

22. I would add this. Although it is not  necessary  for  me  to  make  any
    finding as to whether or not I would have reached the same decision  on
    the basis of the evidence before the Tribunal, in this case I am  in  a
    better position than the judge because I also know that the  background
    to this application is that this appellant has been in this country for
    some years unlawfully, and even on his own  case  for  getting  on  for
    three years before he claims to have married Ms Camara. Were  I  to  be
    remaking the decision myself which I will not have to do because I find
    there was no error of law in Judge  Reed's  determination,  that  is  a
    factor which I would have been  entitled to and would have  taken  into
    account when considering whether or not it had been   established  that
    there was a real durable relationship between two partners  or  whether
    this was, as the judge concluded was a possibility, "something akin  to
    a commercial arrangement between them".

23. On the basis of the evidence which has been  put before the Tribunal  I
    would have found it difficult to  conclude  that  this  was  a  genuine
    durable relationship.  I note also that  despite  the  clear  direction
    which was made by this Tribunal that the parties should prepare for the
    hearing on the basis that if the determination was to be set aside, any
    further evidence would be considered at this hearing, Ms Camara did not
    attend. I have been told by Mr Ojukotola on instructions that this  was
    because his instructing solicitors wrongly informed the appellant  that
    she did not need to attend and that if the  Tribunal  was  to  find  an
    error of law it should adjourn the hearing in  order  to  give  her  an
    opportunity to be present.

24. In the event, as I do not find an  error  of  law  I  do  not  need  to
    consider whether or not it was appropriate to  adjourn.   I  also  note
    that, as Mr Jack remarked in his submissions, it would be open  to  the
    appellant to make a further application if  there  is  genuinely  fresh
    evidence which is available but whether or not the respondent would  be
    obliged to conclude that this was a fresh claim would be a matter  that
    she would  then  have  to  consider.   So  far  as  today's  appeal  is
    concerned, it is sufficient that I record my finding that Judge  Reed's
    determination does not contain any error of law and  that  this  appeal
    must accordingly be dismissed.







Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  containing  no  material  error  of
law, this appeal is dismissed on all grounds.




Signed:                                 Date: 8 April 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig


