
[pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Ia/37489/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 1 March 2016                          |On 16 March 2016                  |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                                     GD
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not represented
For the Respondent:    Mr. G. Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Place, promulgated on  16  January  2015,  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse to grant leave to remain on human rights grounds and  to  remove
    him from the United Kingdom.
 2. Given the involvement of children  in  this  appeal,  I  have  made  an
    anonymity direction.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted as it was arguable  that  the  judge's
    failure to take into account section 117B(6) was a  material  error  of
    law.


 4. The Appellant attended the hearing together with his  partner  and  his
    sister.  He was not legally represented, although he had received legal
    advice  prior  to  the   hearing,   and   he   still   retained   legal
    representatives.  He stated that, since the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal, his partner had been granted leave to remain, and  their  son
    had obtained  British  citizenship.   His  daughter's  application  for
    British citizenship was pending.


 5. Mr. Harrison submitted that that the decision  was  short  on  findings
    relating to family life.  There was no full and careful  assessment  of
    section 117B, and given the ages of the children, section  117B(6)  was
    relevant.  Given the inadequacies of the decision he accepted  that  it
    needed to be remade.


 6. At the hearing I announced that I found that the decision involved  the
    making of a material error of law.  I set the  decision  aside  in  its
    entirety and remitted it to the First-tier Tribunal to be re-heard.  My
    reasons are set out below.


Error of law


 7. The judge deals with Article  8  outside  the  immigration  rules  from
    paragraph [24] onwards.  He states in paragraph [27]:


    "I find that the Appellant has not satisfied the  burden  upon  him  of
    showing that he has established family life in the  UK  with  [SK].   I
    accept that he has family life here with his 2 children but he has  not
    shown that his family life is strong or enjoyed on  a  daily,  or  even
    regular, basis."


 8. Given that he has found that family life exists between  the  Appellant
    and his children, a full assessment of this family life and the  impact
    of the decision on those children is necessary.  However, there  is  no
    such assessment.  In paragraph [30]  the  judge  states  that  "at  its
    highest, those children live with both their parents".  However, he has
    earlier found that the documents do not show that the  Appellant  lives
    with his children, nor that he enjoys family life on a "daily, or  even
    regular, basis".  It is not clear what his findings are.


 9. The judge refers to some of the matters which are contained in  section
    117B in paragraph [29], but  he  does  not  refer  at  all  to  section
    117B(6).  Given that he states in paragraph [9] that the  eldest  child
    has applied for British citizenship, he must be aware that  this  child
    has been in the UK for seven years and is therefore a qualifying  child
    for the purposes of section 117B(6), yet  despite  this,  there  is  no
    consideration of this subsection.


10. In paragraph [30] the judge states that he is  required  to  take  into
    account the best interests of  the  children,  but  his  assessment  is
    inadequate, consisting only of this paragraph.  He considers that it is
    "possible" for them to  relocate  to  Zimbabwe,  and  that  it  is  not
    unreasonable to remove them.  However there is no assessment of what is
    in their best interests, and without  such  an  assessment,  inadequate
    reasons  are  given  for  the  finding  that  their  removal   is   not
    unreasonable.  The lack of an analysis of what is in the best interests
    of the Appellant's children is a material error of law.


11. Paragraph  7.2  of  the  Practice  Statement  dated  10  February  2010
    contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
    where the effect of the error has been to deprive a  party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing  or  other  opportunity  for  the
    party's case to be put to and considered by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Given the nature and extent of the  fact-finding  necessary  to  enable
    this appeal to be remade, having regard to  the  overriding  objective,
    and noting that the position of the Appellant's partner and eldest  son
    has changed since the last hearing, I find that it  is  appropriate  to
    remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal.


Notice of Decision

The decision involves the making of a material error  of  law.   I  set  the
decision aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date 4 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

