
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/37309/2013
                                                               IA/37140/2013
                                                               IA/38777/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On May 18, 2015                      |On May 19, 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

              MRS MARIYAMOTCHALAKINI MARKUPILLAI EPOUSE VARATHA
                        MISS SUBAMAGISHA VARATHARASA
                        MISS SUBATHARSHA VARATHARASA
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:
    For the Appellant: Ms Iqbal, Counsel, instructed by March & Partner
    Solicitors
    For the Respondent:     Mr Avery (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of Sri Lanka albeit they have been  granted
    refugee status in France in 2010. The  appellants  entered  the  United
    Kingdom on May 8, 2013 and on August 11, 2013 they applied for leave to
    remain. The respondent refused their applications on  August  23,  2013
    and at the same time decisions were taken to remove them under  section
    47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal under Section  82(1)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  on  September  11,
    2013.

 3.  On  September  16,  2014  Judge  of  the  First  Tier  Tribunal   Adio
    (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ")  heard  their  appeals  and  in
    determination promulgated  on  September  30,  2014  he  refused  their
    appeals under both the Immigration Rules and article 8 ECHR.

 4. The appellant lodged grounds of  appeal  on  October  9,  2014  and  on
    October 29, 2014  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Davies  refused
    permission to appeal finding  there  was  no  arguable  error  in  law.
    Grounds of appeal were renewed to the Upper Tribunal  on  November  19,
    2014 and expanded upon and Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Bruce  found
    there  was  an  arguable  error  in  law  on  the  basis   the   FtTJ's
    determination did not deal with the legality of the section 47 decision
    and there were contradictory findings on compelling  circumstances  and
    proportionality.

 5. The matter came before me on the above date and the appellants were  in
    attendance and the parties were represented as set out above.

 6. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 and I see no reason to alter that order.

PRELIMINARY ISSUE

 7. Ms Iqbal raised a point  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  suggested  the
    removal was to Sri Lanka whereas her  colleague's  submissions  to  the
    FtTJ had been on the basis of removal to France. She submitted that the
    respondent would need the  permission  of  the  French  authorities  to
    return them to France because this was, in her opinion, a  "Dublin  III
    Convention" case. Mr Avery disagreed and  whilst  I  was  of  the  same
    opinion as Mr Avery I allowed Ms Iqbal time  to  review  her  position.
    After a short adjournment she indicated she did not  intend  to  pursue
    that point but would still be arguing that there was an arguable  error
    in law in the FtTJ's approach to article 8 ECHR.

SUBMISSIONS

 8. Mr Iqbal submitted the FttJ found there were  compelling  circumstances
    that enabled him to consider the appeal  outsider  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and having done so she  went  on  to  find  although  there  were
    compelling circumstances removal  was  still  proportionate.  Ms  Iqbal
    submitted this was contradictory and amounted to an error in law.

 9. Mr Avery relied on the Rule 24 letter dated March 4, 2015. He submitted
    the FtTJ accepted there were  compelling  factors  that  justified  him
    considering the appeal outside of the Rules but having done so he found
    the public policy of removal having regard to the matters summarised in
    paragraph [29] of his determination justified removal as proportionate.
    This was a mere disagreement with the FtTJ's decision.

10. I reserved my decision.

FINDINGS

11. This was an application to vary the appellant's  leave  to  enable  the
    appellants (mother and two daughters) to remain in the United  Kingdom.
    The FtTJ found there  were  compelling  factors  that  enabled  him  to
    consider the facts outside of the Rules and then from paragraph [27] of
    his determination he examined the facts against the tests  set  out  in
    Razgar [2004] UKHL 00027.

12. Ms Iqbal has submitted that by finding there were  compellable  reasons
    not to  remove  them  the  FtTJ  then  erred  by  finding  removal  was
    proportionate.  Mr Avery has submitted the FtTJ assessed  the  evidence
    as he was obligated to do and then made findings open to him.

13. The FtTJ accepted in paragraph [27] there was family life on the  basis
    there was a financial dependency between the first-named appellant  and
    sponsor who are mother and son. The FtTJ extended this family  life  to
    include the two other appellants  who  at  the  time  of  the  original
    hearing were 19 and 15 years old. He further found that  removal  would
    interfere with their family life. At paragraph [28] the  FtTJ  accepted
    removal would be in accordance with the law namely the  maintenance  of
    effective  immigration  control.  Whilst  accepting   the   first-named
    appellant spoke no English  and  the  other  appellants  spoke  limited
    English he accepted the appellants would be maintained by  the  Sponsor
    he had regard to the fact that by being  unable  to  speak  English  it
    would be harder to integrate into UK society and when they arrived they
    had no legitimate expectation that they would be allowed to  remain  as
    they had arrived as visitors on six month visas. He also had regard  to
    the fact the children would be educated at public expense if allowed to
    remain and the problem with  the  first-named  appellant's  husband  no
    longer existed because he had died.

14. I am satisfied the FtTJ had regard to all of the  "compelling  factors"
    advanced on the appellants' behalf but in carrying out the final  stage
    in Razgar he had regard to  proportionality.  This  balancing  act  was
    undertaken in paragraph [31] and the conclusions  made  were  not  only
    open to the FtTJ but were well reasoned.

15. I am satisfied there is no conflict. Although the FtTJ  accepted  there
    were factors that merited  consideration  they  did  not  outweigh  the
    countervailing circumstances and the FtTJ was entitled to dismiss their
    claims.

DECISION

16. There was no material error. I uphold the original decision.



Signed:     Dated:

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal failed and I therefore make no fee award.



Signed:     Dated:

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
