
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37950/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 12th August 2014                             |On 20th August 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR



                                   Between

                             SAIDA RIFFAT MUNIR
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Mohammed of Oakes Solicitors, Huddersfield
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeetie, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision of  Judge  Grimshaw
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 27th January 2014.

Background

 2. The Appellant, born on 20th June 1929, is a national of the  USA.   She
    made an application, on 22nd  August  2012,  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain in the UK on humanitarian grounds outside the Immigration Rules.

 3. Her application was refused on 13th September 2013.  The  Secretary  of
    State considered the facts of the Appellant's case.  If she had  wished
    to be considered as a dependent relative of  her  son,  Dr  Malik,  she
    would need to make an application outside the UK for entry clearance as
    a dependent relative under paragraph 317 of the Immigration Rules.

 4. The Appellant did not qualify for leave under paragraph  276ADE,  which
    deals with private life, and neither does she  have  any  basis  for  a
    grant of leave on family life grounds. Her case was also considered  on
    an exceptional basis outside the  Immigration  Rules  but  as  she  had
    failed to raise  sufficient  compelling  or  compassionate  issues  the
    Secretary of State was not  prepared  to  exercise  discretion  in  her
    favour.

 5. The judge, in a careful determination, considered all of  the  relevant
    evidence including new evidence, not before the Secretary of State that
    the Sponsor had been diagnosed with prostate cancer.   However,  taking
    into account all of the evidence, including the fact that the Appellant
    would be well supported by other adult children in the  USA,  and  that
    the outlook for the Sponsor in terms  of  his  health  and  ability  to
    continue to  work  appeared  relatively  optimistic,  she  declined  to
    consider that the Appellant's removal would be a breach of Article 8 of
    the ECHR and she dismissed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds argue that the evidence relating to the  Sponsor's  illness
    was not before the Secretary of State when  the  refusal  decision  was
    made, and accordingly it was not open to the  judge  to  consider  that
    evidence for herself.  The correct approach would have  been  to  remit
    the matter back to the Secretary of State so that  she  could  consider
    the evidence since in cases of executive discretion outside the  Rules,
    the judge cannot make a decision on  behalf  of  or  in  place  of  the
    Secretary of State herself.

 7.  Second,  the  judge  erred  insofar  as  she  purported  to  apply  an
    exceptionality test.   The Tribunal was  required  to  make  a  careful
    assessment of all of the factors including the  interests  of  everyone
    involved and not simply the Appellant.

 8. Permission to appeal was initially refused  but  upon  renewal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein  on  9th  June
    2014.

 9. On 2nd July 2014 the Respondent served a reply defending the  decision.







Submissions

10. Mr Mohamed relied on his grounds and submitted that  the  judge  should
    have refrained from making findings in order to avoid  prejudicing  the
    Secretary of State who had an unfettered discretion in  an  application
    outside the Immigration Rules.  He relied on AG and Others  (Polices  -
    executive discretion - Tribunal powers) Kosovo [2007] UKAIT  00082  and
    argued that the Tribunal had no power to exercise  a  discretion  which
    had not previously been exercised and no power to  substitute  its  own
    decision for that of the decision maker.

11. Mr McVeetie submitted that the judge was duty bound to consider all  of
    the evidence put before her and if the Appellant had  not  wished  that
    evidence to be  taken  into  account,  and  considered  in  a  separate
    application, she could have withdrawn the appeal.

Findings and Conclusions

12. The Appellant made an  in  time  application  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules, on humanitarian grounds, for indefinite leave to remain.  As the
    Secretary  of  State  explained  in  the  refusal  letter,  in  country
    applications for leave as a dependent relative are no longer  permitted
    under the Rules.

13. Since 9th July  2012  the  Immigration  Rules  were  amended  to  unify
    consideration under the Immigration Rules and Article 8  of  the  ECHR.
    The Appellant plainly does not meet the requirements of the Rules  with
    respect to Article 8, and it does not appear to have been argued at the
    hearing that she did.

14. It was argued that her removal  would  breach  Article  8  outside  the
    Immigration Rules, and  the  Secretary  of  State  accepts  that  where
    consideration of the new Rules does not fully dispose of a claim  based
    on Article 8, she will be obliged to consider granting leave to  remain
    outside the Rules.

15. In Nagre (R on the application of) v  SSHD  [2013]  EWHC  720  Sales  J
    stated that :

         "If after the process of applying the new Rules  and  finding  that
         the claim for leave  to  remain  under  them  fails,  the  relevant
         official  or  Tribunal  Judge  considers  it  is  clear  that   the
         consideration under the Rules has fully addressed any  family  life
         or private life  issues  arising  under  Article  8,  it  would  be
         sufficient simply to say that; they would not have  to  go  on,  in
         addition to consider the case separately from the Rules.  If  there
         is no arguable case that there may be  good  grounds  for  granting
         leave to remain outside the Rules by reference to Article 8,  there
         would be no point in introducing  full  separate  consideration  of
         Article 8 again after having reached a decision on the  application
         of the Rules."

16. In this  case  the  judge  did  clearly  consider  that  there  may  be
    compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised  under  the  Rules
    and embarked on a consideration of the  facts  in  order  to  establish
    whether refusal would result in unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  for
    the individual and their family.

17. The Appellant put before the judge evidence relating to  the  Sponsor's
    illness.  If she had not wanted that  evidence  to  be  considered  she
    should not have done so. The judge was obliged to consider all  of  the
    evidence adduced.

18. There is absolutely nothing in the Article 8 case law  to  support  the
    Appellant's present submission that the judge was obliged not  to  make
    her own decision upon the evidence, but to remit the matter back to the
    Secretary of State for further consideration, thereby causing a further
    procedural delay.   She  relied  on  evidence  which  she  hoped  would
    establish her case and cannot  now  complain  when  the  judge,  having
    considered  it,  finds  that  it  does  not.  The  Appellant  had   the
    alternative option of  withdrawing  this  appeal  and  making  a  fresh
    application based on  the  fresh  evidence,  which  she  chose  not  to
    exercise.

19. The cases relied upon in the grounds relate to decisions  made  by  the
    Secretary of State in reliance to her guidance and policies and not  to
    cases where the Appellant argues that  her  removal  would  breach  her
    Article 8 rights.

20. As the judge who refused permission in the First-tier stated, this is a
    very careful and detailed  determination  where  the  judge  has  given
    cogent and sustainable reasons which were fully  open  to  her  on  the
    evidence.

Decision

21. The judge's decision stands.  The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.




Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


