
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/37968/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 December 2014                           |On 7 January 2014             |
|Prepared on 5 December 2014                  |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY

                                   Between

                               mr Tariq Kamal
                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Blundell, Counsel instructed by Rashid & Rashid
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, a national of Pakistan, date of  birth  2  August  1986,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision, dated 29  August  2013,  to
    make removal  directions,  a  form  IS151A  having  been  served  on  2
    September 2013.

 2. The Appellant appealed against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Verity who dismissed the Appellant's appeal on or about  10  June
    2014.  Permission to appeal was given by First-tier Tribunal Judge J  M
    Holmes on 26 June 2014.  In a determination promulgated on 2  September
    2014, I found that there had been an error of law, for reasons  therein
    given, so that the original Tribunal decision could not stand  and  the
    decision would have to be remade.

 3. The issue in remaking related solely to the question of whether or  not
    the Appellant's claim could succeed under Article 8 of the ECHR.

 4. At the resumed hearing I heard evidence from the Appellant, his brother
    Mohammad Mohsin Kamal, his elder sister Aneesa  Ali,  Mumtaz  Ali,  his
    brother-in-law and husband of Aneesa, as well as a  letter  of  support
    from Muqadas Bibi Ali and her husband  and  a  witness  statement  from
    Muqadas Bibi Ali,  which  I  took  into  account.   Mr  Avery  had  the
    opportunity  to  cross-examine  the  live  witnesses  who   essentially
    confirmed what they had stated in writing  and  confirmed  the  general
    picture that the Appellant and his brother visited other  relatives  in
    the United Kingdom on a regular basis, even if more  regularly  by  the
    Appellant, and saw their families.  It was claimed that those visits go
    beyond birthdays and holidays.

 5. Ms Aneesa Ali confirmed the role that she largely played in the life of
    the Appellant and other family  members  following  the  death  of  her
    mother and father. The fact is unchallenged that the Appellant  is  the
    sole close family member who is not living in the United  Kingdom  with
    status to do  so.   It  is  also  unchallenged  that  in  Pakistan  the
    accommodation which the  Appellant  had  lived  in  with  other  family
    members had been state accommodation  associated  with  their  father's
    employment in the police. Eventually they had been required to move out
    upon the death of the Appellant's mother and that the Appellant had for
    a time shared accommodation with friends.

 6. The evidence also confirmed that the other family members, that  is  in
    the United Kingdom, did not return to  Pakistan  partly  by  reason  of
    security and cost but also because they had no cause for family reasons
    to do so.  It was also clear that the Appellant had been  a  bona  fide
    student in the United Kingdom until his right to remain had come to  an
    end and that he has as a fact had a private life in the United  Kingdom
    and, although he is an adult, his elder sister still has a  significant
    'maternal' role to play in his life.  Nevertheless, it seemed to me the
    family life he enjoys with his sisters and their families is also  part
    of his private life in the United Kingdom.

 7. The Appellant said that he has no family home or job to  return  to  in
    Pakistan and he would not be able to  survive  in  the  United  Kingdom
    without his family's emotional, moral and financial support.

 8. The cross-examination of the witnesses did not essentially  attack  the
    claimed family life relationship or the part the  Appellant  played  in
    their lives or they in his.

 9. It is of note of course that the adverse immigration decision for  this
    Appellant on 29 August 2013 was effectively the same decision  provided
    to the Appellant's brother, Mohammad Mohsin Kamal,(MMK)  of  28  August
    2013.

10. I have taken into account the issues  of  fact  raised  and  the  other
    points  made  upon  the  MMK's  case  for,  with  one  minor   material
    difference, their personal circumstances, their family life issues  and
    private life issues were identical.  The  only  material  difference  I
    find is that the Appellant had been for a brief period in employment on
    an occasional basis but he was still reliant upon  the  sponsorship  of
    his sister, Ms Aneesa Ali as she  later  became.   I  do  not  find  it
    necessary to repeat the reasoning of Judge Gillespie of  February  2014
    as to why he found MMK  did  not  meet  the  relevant  requirements  of
    paragraph 317 of  the  Immigration  Rules  in  force  at  the  date  of
    application.  It seems to me that for similar  reasons  this  Appellant
    could not bring himself within paragraph 317(i)(f) of  the  immigration
    rules because the evidence did not show  that  the  Appellant  met  the
    requirements of being alone in the most exceptional circumstances prior
    to arrival in the United Kingdom.

11. Similarly I agree, and it was not effectively argued to  the  contrary,
    the Appellant could not meet the requirements of paragraph  276ADE  nor
    had that position changed.

12. To a degree the position in relation to consideration of the case under
    Article 8 outside of the Immigration Rules, which are  not  a  complete
    code in any event, was not argued that there was any error  of  law  by
    the Secretary of State in  failing  to  consider  those  matters.   The
    Secretary of State did not consider the matter outside of the Rules but
    no issue is taken as to the legal consequences of that omission so much
    as the submissions made to me were made on the basis that the Appellant
    did or did not fall to benefit from an Article 8 claim.

13. I note the circumstances of the evidence given by the Sponsor, Mrs Ali,
    the support that they have given MMK as much as the support  they  give
    to this Appellant.

14. It also appears to be the case that the Appellant has strong ties  with
    his sister, her family, and her husband in particular,  and  his  other
    sister Ms Muqadas Bibi Ali.  I also have received a statement  of   MMK
    which sets out how it came to pass that he did not give evidence before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Verity when  she  heard  the  appeal  of  the
    Appellant on 14 May 2014.  There was no substantive  challenge  to  the
    explanation given or the  contact  they  respectively  had  with  other
    family members and the support they continued to receive.

15. I note that Judge Verity  recorded  the  evidence  of  the  Appellant's
    sisters.  The judge's  findings  did  not  reject  the  credibility  or
    reliability of the Appellant or his sisters in the United  Kingdom  and
    there was no challenge to the genuineness of the evidence  from  fellow
    family members.  My  own  impression  of  the  witnesses  I  heard  was
    similarly that they were reliable and credible as to  the  family  life
    they all share together and the extent to which the Appellant  and  MMK
    remain supported by their Sponsors and their respective spouses.

16. Judge Gillespie found the family relationships close and for that clear
    reason went on to conclude that the appeal should succeed under Article
    8 ECHR grounds in respect of MMK.

17. For my part I  find  there  is  no  material  differences  between  the
    situation of MMK and the Appellant other than his age and that that  is
    not material in the way the family described  their  relationship  with
    the Appellant.  I readily accept that  the  Appellant  is  three  years
    older than MMK but the age  of  MMK  was  taken  into  account  in  the
    circumstances of his appeal and in this case  I  do  not  see  the  age
    difference makes a material difference to the point.

18. In the determination I gave on the error of law issues, which I do  not
    need to recite, it is well recognised  as  shown  by  the  case  of  AA
    (Somalia) [2008] Imm AR 1.  that  there  needs  to  be  consistency  of
    treatment between cases but that there must be a  material  overlap  of
    evidence other than a mere overlap of evidence.  In the  considerations
    of those matters it is plainly relevant  as  to  the  situation  as  to
    whether there is the same factual matrix, such as the same relationship
    or the same events or series of events.

19. It does not necessarily follow that a favourable decision in one appeal
    with a different claimant inevitably means the same decision should  be
    made in another appeal by a different claimant.  Rather it seems to  me
    that there is a material overlap in the circumstances of  MMK  and  the
    Appellant and that had these matters been linked for  a  joint  hearing
    the likelihood is that before Judge Gillespie a similar decision  would
    have been reached for this Appellant.  I find  this  is  likely  simply
    because the facts are so closely intertwined and  amount  to  the  same
    issue.

20. Before Immigration Judge Verity she evidently took the  view  that  the
    family life was "at best  tenuous".   How  she  reached  that  view  is
    difficult to tell, bearing in mind the evidence that had been  provided
    and the findings that she had made on the  evidence  received  and  the
    standing of the witnesses.

21. The other factor was the absence of MMK  giving  evidence.    Thus  the
    judge  was  unable,  as  she  put  it,  to  ascertain  how  close   the
    relationship between  the  brothers  was,  whether  they  shared  joint
    activities and pastimes etc. for she said

         "It is therefore clear that the one person with whom the  Appellant
         lives on a semi permanent  basis  did  not  give  evidence  in  his
         support whilst his two sisters whom he visits each month did so.  I
         have already indicated that I regard family life in this case to be
         at best tenuous."

22. It seems to me that, through no fault of the judge, there  was  through
    the omission of MMK's presence and evidence  now provided  demonstrates
    the material overlap between their factual situations.

23. In the circumstances I find that, first, there is as I  have  indicated
    not just overlapping evidence but essentially the same  factual  matrix
    in relation to the family relationship and the  events.   Secondly,  it
    seems to me that there has  been  nothing  to  indicate  any  basis  to
    revisit the decision of Judge Gillespie  to  raise  doubts  as  to  the
    analysis made.

24. In reaching the decision that I do, I take into account and  apply  the
    cases of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 and Huang [2007] 2 AC 167.  It seems  to
    me that the Appellant plainly has a private  and  family  life  in  the
    United Kingdom with his siblings and their families, as  well  as  with
    his brother MMK.  It is an unusually close family, perhaps born of  the
    circumstances of the death of their parents and the  migration  of  all
    other family members  to the United Kingdom.

25. I am satisfied in the sense contemplated by Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31
    that was expressed in Huang paragraph [18]:

         "The reported  cases  are  of  value  in  showing  where,  in  many
         different factual situations, the Strasbourg Court, as the ultimate
         guardian of Convention rights, has drawn  the  line,  thus  guiding
         national authorities in making their own decisions.  But  the  main
         importance of the case law is in illuminating the core value  which
         Article 8 exists  to  protect.   This  is  not,  perhaps,  hard  to
         recognise.  Human  beings  are  social  animals.   They  depend  on
         others.  Their family, or extended family, is the  group  on  which
         many people most heavily depend, socially,  emotionally  and  often
         financially.  There comes a point at which, for some, prolonged and
         unavoidable separation from this  group  seriously  inhibits  their
         ability to live full and fulfilling lives.   Matters  such  as  the
         age, health and vulnerability of the applicant, the  closeness  and
         previous history of the family, the applicant's dependence  on  the
         financial and emotional  support  of  the  family,  the  prevailing
         cultural tradition and conditions in the country of origin and many
         other factors may all be relevant."

26. In this case I find there is private and family life of  the  Appellant
    with his siblings and their families.  I  find  there  is  family  life
    together, bearing in mind the longstanding and  present  reliance  upon
    those family members.  I find that the effect of interference, or  lack
    of respect, is of sufficient seriousness to engage with  the  operation
    of Article 8 (1) ECHR.  I am satisfied that the  Respondent's  decision
    is lawful and properly serves Article 8(2) objectives.

27. I therefore have to make a judgment on whether or not the  interference
    is proportionate to the legitimate aims to  be  achieved.   That  is  a
    matter of judgment and in reaching a decision  on  that  issue  I  have
    fully taken into account the provisions  of  Sections  117A  and  B  in
    relation to the public interest considerations under Article 8.   Those
    provisions are as amendments to the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002.  The Appellant  plainly  speaks  English  and  gave  evidence
    without using an Urdu interpreter.  The Appellant, with family support,
    as has been now longstanding, is not a burden upon the taxpayer  and  I
    can find no reason why he could not properly integrate into society  in
    the United Kingdom.

28. The Appellant has, on the submissions made to me, been lawfully in  the
    United Kingdom and his immigration status has not been  precarious.   I
    take account of the public interest and the weight to be  given  to  it
    and the delay in making a decision upon the application.  There is  not
    and never has been any explanation of the Respondent's delay but  I  do
    not regard the delay in this case as  being  particularly  significant,
    bearing in mind it is not claimed that the family relationship  is  one
    that has been created simply through presence in the United Kingdom.

29. In these circumstances I am satisfied that  the  Respondent's  decision
    was disproportionate.  I have attached significant weight to the public
    interest and would have reached a similar decision irrespective of  the
    outcome of MMK's appeal.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal on immigration grounds is dismissed.

The appeal under the Immigration Rules is dismissed.

The appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds is allowed.

No anonymity order is required or necessary.





Signed                                       Date5 January 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was paid and therefore there can be no fee award.





Signed                                       Date 5 January 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


