
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37330/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |                   Decision and Reasons  |
|                                      |Promulgated                              |
|On 15 October 2015                    |                   On 16 October 2015    |
|                                      |                                         |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                Parves Uddin
                         [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                    Claimant

Representation:

For the claimant: Mr A Barrett, instructed by Novells Legal Practice
For the respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Afako promulgated 20.5.15, allowing, on human
    rights grounds, the claimant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to refuse to issue a derivative right  of  residence
    card as confirmation of a right of residence in the UK as the  extended
    family member of an EEA national, pursuant  to  the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2006. The Judge heard the appeal on 16.4.15.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Simpson  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    30.7.15.

 3. Thus the matter came before me on 15.10.15 as an appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.



Error of Law

 4. For the reasons set out herein, I find there were such clear errors  of
    law in the making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  that  the
    decision of Judge Afako should be set aside and  remade  by  dismissing
    the appeal.

 5. Judge Afako found that the appeal failed, as the  appellant  could  not
    meet the requirements of regulation 15A(4A).  There  is  no  appeal  or
    cross appeal against that part of the decision and it must stand.

 6. However, the judge went on to consider  the  appellant's  circumstances
    outside the regulations under article 8 ECHR. For the reasons explained
    herein, the judge was in error in doing so, as there  is  no  right  of
    appeal on human rights grounds in an EEA  regulations  appeal,  as  has
    been held in a number of cases, including Patel & others v SSHD [2014],
    and most recently the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Amirteymour and
    others (EEA appeals; human  rights)  [2015]  UKUT  00466  (IAC),  which
    latter decision was promulgated after the appeal hearing  before  Judge
    Afako.

 7. In short, an application for an EEA residence card  is  an  application
    for recognition of an existing right under EEA law and is different  to
    and distinct from an application for leave to enter or leave to  remain
    under the Immigration Rules and in consequence the  grounds  of  appeal
    are limited. The decision refusing to issue such a  document  does  not
    change the appellant's status and unless it is accompanied by a section
    120 notice or a removal decision does not give rise to an appeal on the
    basis of human rights.

 8. Unless and until the Secretary of State makes a removal decision in the
    appellant's case, his right to remain in the UK on human rights grounds
    does not arise, even though he may have no legal  status  or  leave  to
    remain in the UK, and he is not entitled to raise such in  any  grounds
    of appeal against the refusal  to  issue  the  EEA  residence  card  he
    sought. He may only pursue  grounds  of  appeal  which  relate  to  the
    underlying  decision  under  challenge  and  may  not  use  the  appeal
    procedure to in effect make an entirely different  application  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal the merits of which have not  been  considered,  or
    decision made in respect of such, by  the  Secretary  of  State.  Until
    there is a removal decision the raising of  human  rights  is  entirely
    premature. However, it was and remains open to the appellant  to  apply
    for leave to remain on the basis of his private and/or family life, but
    as the Court of Appeal made clear in Weiss [2010] EWCA  Civ  803,  that
    would require the submission of a valid application  pursuant  to  Rule
    34, on the correct form and paying the correct application fee.

 9. It follows that the scope of any appeal against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State is limited to  that  of  his  original  application.
    There is no valid right of appeal on human rights grounds and thus  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge to allow the appeal  on  that
    basis was in error and cannot stand.

10. Given that there has  been  no  appeal  or  cross  appeal  against  the
    decision to dismiss the appeal under the EEA Regulations, there  is  no
    outstanding issue capable of being a valid ground of appeal. The appeal
    should have been dismissed in its entirety in the First-tier Tribunal.

Conclusions:

11. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     I set aside set aside the decision.

                    I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it on
                    all grounds.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did  not  make  an  order.  Given  the  circumstances,  I  make  no
anonymity order.

Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a fee award.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: the appeal has been dismissed and thus there can be no fee award.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
