
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: IA/37628/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               |                   Decision given orally on  |
|On: 21 January 2016                |21 January 2016                              |
|                                   |Promulgated On: 29 February 2016             |


                                   Before

                THE PRESIDENT, THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         Mr Andru Kishore Debbarman
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Bellara, of Counsel, instructed by Immigration
                    & Work Permit Ltd


                                  DECISION

 1. This is an appeal by Andru Kishore Debbarman, a citizen  of  Bangladesh
    aged 29 years, against a decision of the  Secretary  of  State.   There
    were three decisions altogether, all of them made on 6 September  2014.
    One of these decisions refused the Appellant's  application  under  the
    Immigration Rules and Article 8 of  the  Human  Rights  Convention  for
    leave to remain on family life grounds.  The second  of  the  decisions
    purported to curtail the Appellant's leave  to  remain  and  the  third
    decision, which  was  appealable  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  a
    decision to remove the Appellant from the United Kingdom.

 2. We are all agreed that the correct analysis is that  while  the  First-
    tier Tribunal was seized of an appeal against  the  appealable  removal
    decision the curtailment decision was a component of the decision under
    appeal.  As a result the basis on which the  curtailment  decision  was
    made properly developed into a key issue before the First-tier Tribunal
    and was examined and determined accordingly.

 3. The curtailment decision contains the following statement:

         "An administrative review process by  Educational  Testing  Service
         has identified that the test score submitted by your  client  in  a
         previous application was obtained by deception."

     It is clear from the text of this letter that the author was responding
    to the Appellant's solicitors' letter of 3 July 2014  accompanying  the
    Appellant's application for leave to remain as the spouse of a  settled
    person.  It is this paragraph of  the  shorter  of  the  letters  of  6
    September 2014 which explains and illuminates the context in which  the
    First-tier Tribunal embarked upon the enquiries which it  duly  carried
    out.

 4. In paragraph 21 the judge correctly noted that there  was  no  evidence
    whatsoever of the certificate  which  formed  the  cornerstone  of  the
    curtailment of leave decision.  The judge decided to deal with this  in
    a particular way.  At the conclusion of the hearing an opportunity  was
    given to the Secretary of State to provide this key  evidential  proof.
    It was not, however, forthcoming.

 5. Read fairly and as a whole,  I  considered  it  clear  that  the  judge
    adopted the following approach.  On the issue of alleged fraud  on  the
    part of the Appellant the burden lay on the  Respondent.   Furthermore,
    this is an onerous burden.  All of that is very  well  settled  by  the
    decided cases and accordingly there is no trace of an error of  law  on
    the judge's part in that respect. Having embarked upon the  inquiry  of
    whether the Respondent had discharged its burden the judge then studied
    with some care the  nature  and  quality  of  the  evidence  which  the
    Respondent had  adduced  in  its  quest  to  discharge  the  burden  in
    question.  I consider it abundantly clear firstly from his  description
    of the approach which he was applying, secondly from  considering   the
    evidence that was adduced in its totality and  finally  the  conclusion
    reached in paragraph 44 of the determination that the key decision made
    by the First-tier Tribunal was that the Secretary of State  had  failed
    to discharge this onerous burden of proof.

 6. One important context of this  exercise  was  that  the  Appellant  was
    making the case that he had never submitted a certificate of this  kind
    [i.e. a TOEIC certificate] and secondly he was making the case  through
    the medium of his evidence, and I refer particularly in this context to
    his witness statement, that he has been for some time a person  skilled
    and well-qualified and competent in the English language.

 7. I agree with Mr Wilding that the determination is unsustainable in  one
    respect, namely insofar as the judge concluded that the decision making
    process was  procedurally  unfair.   On  the  facts  of  the  case  the
    Appellant had ample opportunity to put his case  to  the  Secretary  of
    State and, in any event, as I pointed out in the leading  ETS  decision
    of this Tribunal, Gazi, complaints  of  procedural  unfairness  can  be
    accommodated in the appeal process.

 8. However, I am quite satisfied that the correct analysis  is  that  that
    was not a material error in the circumstances. The  fundamental  reason
    for that is quite simple.  Having conducted the exercise which  I  have
    outlined in a little detail a conclusion that the curtailment  decision
    was unsustainable in law was, given the judge's impeccable finding that
    the evidence adduced was insufficient to  discharge  the  Secretary  of
    State's burden, inevitable.  There is undoubtedly some confusion in the
    determination about curtailment versus cancellation and there is also a
    misdescription of the appealable decision. But the outcome  is  crystal
    clear.  The judge allowed the appeal.

 9. The parties are agreed, correctly in my view, that the effect  of  this
    is that the removal decision of the Secretary  of  State  is  unlawful,
    thereby triggering an obligation on the part of the Secretary of  State
    to reconsider the family life application made under Appendix FM and, I
    am assuming, Article 8 outwith the Rules and to decide same afresh.

10. To recapitulate. The judge's examination of the evidence purporting  to
    support the decision  that  the  Appellant  had  engaged  in  fraud  is
    unimpeachable,  the  judge's  approach  to  the  burden  of  proof   is
    unimpeachable and the judge's conclusion that the burden of  proof  had
    not been discharged by the Secretary of State  is  also  unimpeachable.
    The decision itself, namely to allow the appeal,  was  also  a  correct
    decision in law.

11. In these circumstances I concur with the brief assessment of the  first
    permission judge, namely Designated Judge McClure, in  paragraph  3  of
    the decision dated 15 May 2015, refusing permission  to  appeal.   That
    decision pointed out, inter  alia,  a  rather  grievous  error  in  the
    grounds  of  appeal  regarding  the  burden  of  proof.    I   conclude
    accordingly that none of the grounds of appeal has been made out.  Thus
    I dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal and I affirm the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

                                                                       [pic]

                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                      Date: 24 February 2016



TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed Mr Debbarman's appeal and because a fee has been  paid  or
is payable, I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a
fee award of any fee  which  has  been  paid  or  may  be  payable  for  the
following reason. The Secretary of State for the Home Department  failed  to
produce any sufficient evidence required to overcome the onerous  burden  of
proving fraud.



                                                                       [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                      Date: 24 February 2016
