
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/37986/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 24 February 2016                      |    On 30 March 2016                    |
|                                         |                                        |

                                   Before

                          THE HONOURABLE LORD BURNS
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                            AMIR KHURSHID KHAWAJA
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Tariq, West London Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal of the Secretary of State (the  respondent)  against
    a determination of the First-tier Tribunal  promulgated  on  13  August
    2015.  Mr Khawaja (the appellant) is a citizen of Pakistan born  on  20
    September 1984.  He appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State (the respondent) dated 11  September
    2014 in which she refused to vary leave to remain.

2.   The appellant entered the United Kingdom  as  a  student  in  September
    2003 and was granted leave until 31 October 2006.  He was then given  a
    number of extensions, the last of which expired on 20 August 2014.   He
    made an application for indefinite leave to remain on the basis of  ten
    years  continuous  lawful  residence  under  paragraph  276B   of   the
    Immigration Rules.  That application was  refused  by  decision  of  11
    September 2014.  The refusal letter contained the following statement:

         "Following your leave expiring on 30 September 2007,  you  did  not
         seek to regularise your position in the United Kingdom with a valid
         application until  14  November  2007.   Although  your  leave  was
         granted on 3 March 2008 until 28 February 2009 it must  be  pointed
         out that any times spent following the submission of an out of time
         application waiting for consideration of  the  application  is  not
         considered lawful even if the application is subsequently granted".




    On that basis the respondent decided that ten years  continuous  lawful
    residence had not been demonstrated and the appellant could not satisfy
    the requirements of paragraph 276B(i)(a) of the Rules.

3.   At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal it was  argued  that  the
    application, which was said by the respondent to have been received  on
    14 November 2007, had in fact been submitted on  time.   The  appellant
    gave evidence and stated that on 29 September 2007 he had completed the
    application and the documentation but the application itself  had  been
    submitted by his educational establishment.  Reference was made to  the
    fourth  page  of  the  application  form  which  bears  to  contain  an
    administrator's signature and the date of 29 September 2007.   Further,
    a covering letter was also produced to the First-tier Tribunal from the
    educational establishment which was also dated 29 September 2007  which
    was said to be the letter which accompanied the completed  application.
    It was pointed out therein  that  the  appellant's  visa  "will  expire
    shortly" (it was due to expire the next day, 30 September 2007) and  it
    was hoped that the respondent "would be able to renew it  accordingly".
    It was submitted that the respondent had erroneously  dealt  with  this
    application as if  the  date  upon  which  a  fee  was  paid  into  the
    respondent's account (15 November 2007) was to be taken as the date  on
    which the application was received by the  respondent.   Reference  was
    made to the policy guidance "Specified Application Forms and Procedures
    Version 13.0".  That policy stated

         "If there is also accompanying correspondence with the  application
         that matches the likely date of posting, and that date  is  earlier
         than postage date calculated using the above method, you must  take
         this earlier date as the application date.  If you are unsure,  you
         must accept the date most favourable to the applicant".

4.   No representative of the respondent was present at the hearing  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and accordingly the judge required to proceed  with
    no contradictor  to  the  appellant's  contentions.   What  he  did  at
    paragraph 13 was to look  at  the  application  form  which  shows  the
    administrator's signature and the date of 29 September 2007  which  was
    supported by the covering letter  of  the  same  date.   From  that  he
    inferred that the application was made in time.  Having regard  to  the
    policy quoted to him he considered that the appellant should  be  given
    the benefit of the doubt.  That was particularly so in view of the fact
    that  there  had  been  nothing  to  suggest  that  the  appellant  had
    previously been in breach of any Immigration Rules or  had  overstayed.
    The decision of the respondent had been based solely upon the date upon
    which the fees had arrived.  That did not  mean  that  the  appellant's
    application was made on that date.

5.   In presenting this appeal Mr Duffy drew our attention to the  terms  of
    the Immigration and Nationality (Cost Recovery Fees)  Regulations  2007
    which were in force at  the  relevant  time.   Regulation  16  entitled
    "Consequences of failing to pay the fee specified for  an  application"
    states as follows:

         "(1)    Subject to paragraph (2) where  an  application  to  which
             Regulation 3, 4, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 or  16  refers  is  to  be
             accompanied by a specified fee, the application  will  not  be
             considered to have  been  validly  made  unless  it  has  been
             accompanied by that fee".


    It was not disputed before us that this particular provision applied in
    the circumstances of this case.  Accordingly,  Mr  Duffy  argued  that,
    since the fee had not been paid with the application and on  time,  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal proceeded on an error of law.


6.   Mr Tariq submitted  that  there  were  facts  and  circumstances  which
    entitled the First-tier Tribunal Judge to conclude that the application
    was made timeously.  In respect of the application form it bore  to  be
    signed by the administrator on 29 September 2007.  Further it  bore  to
    be signed by the respondent himself on 29 August 2007 (see page 9 of 16
    of the appellant's bundle submitted to this Tribunal).  On page  10  of
    16, under the applicant's checklist, the box against which appears  the
    question "Have you completed the payment  details  page  and  made  the
    correct payment?" is ticked.  For data protection purposes the  payment
    detail portion  of  the  application  would  not  be  retained  by  the
    respondent in any event and was not available.  Those factors, combined
    with the existence of the covering letter of 29  September  2007,  were
    capable of yielding an inference that the payment was made  along  with
    the application form dated 29  September  2007.   The  judge  had  been
    entitled to draw that inference.

7.   Also produced by Mr Tariq was a payment processing centre stream  sheet
    at page 12 of 16 which appears to show that payment  arrived  from  the
    appellant on 15  November  2007  and  was  made  by  payment  from  his
    MasterCard.  However, Mr Tariq argued that was not determinative  since
    there might have been a number of reasons why  payment  offered  in  an
    application form sent in September may not have  been  processed  until
    November.  In addition, the date stamp on page 1 of 16 of  15  November
    2007 could not necessarily be said to  be  the  date  upon  which  that
    application was first received by the respondents.

8.   It is apparent from the way in which this application  has  been  dealt
    with by the respondent that it was considered that no valid application
    had been made by the appellant until 14 November  2007.   That  is  the
    date that was stated in the refusal letter of 11 September 2014 as  the
    date upon which the appellant had submitted an out of time  application
    for leave to remain as a student.  Why that date is  mentioned  is  not
    clear especially since the only date stamp appearing in the application
    form is that of 15 November 2007.  It may be that in view of the policy
    brought to our attention, the Secretary of State has concluded  that  a
    November date was the date that the application was received because on
    15  November  2007  payment  was  made  of  the  accompanying  fee   as
    demonstrated by the payment processing centre's stream sheet.  We  note
    that the policy guidance states that

         "If the envelope in which the application was posted is missing  or
         the postmark is eligible you must take the date of posting to be at
         least one day before it is received.  You must  take  the  date  of
         processing on the payment contractor's stream sheet as the date the
         application was received".


    While the Secretary of State apparently applied  that  policy  in  this
    case (although relying on 14 not 15 November), the First-tier  Tribunal
    had before it a number of adminicles of evidence which entitled it,  in
    our view, to come to a different conclusion.  The judge noted that  the
    fee had arrived on 15 November 2007 but referred  to  other  pieces  of
    evidence which indicated that the application had been submitted at  an
    earlier date.  That included the date  upon  which  the  applicant  had
    signed the application form (28 August 2007) and the  date  upon  which
    the educational establishment signed the application form (29 September
    2007).  That date is  also  the  date  of  the  covering  letter  which
    emphasised the need for  the  application  to  be  processed  speedily.
    Furthermore, the First-tier Tribunal had regard to  the  fact  that  in
    2008 Immigration Officers had visited the appellant's premises  and  at
    that time had made no mention to him that an out  of  time  application
    had been made and he had at that stage no right to  be  in  the  United
    Kingdom.


    9.   Taking all these factors in  combination,  we  consider  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal was entitled to come to the conclusion it  did  and
    to draw the inference from the evidence presented to  it.   It  may  be
    that a  different  conclusion  would  have  been  arrived  at  had  the
    Secretary  of  State  deployed  a  representative  to  argue  the  case
    differently or to provide further information to the Tribunal.  However
    that was not the case.  In the light of the factual situation presented
    to the First-tier Tribunal, we do not consider that  it  committed  any
    material error of law and we accordingly refuse this appeal.

Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed

Lord Burns
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal

