
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Ia/37616/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 13 August 2015                    |On 15 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER


                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR WEI CHENG LI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No attendance


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is not subject to an  anonymity  order  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.  Neither  party
    has invited me to make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI  2008/2698)  and  I
    have not done so.

 2. The appellant (hereafter the Secretary of State)  appeals  against  the
    decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Lever)  allowing   the
    respondent's appeal against a decision taken on 10  September  2014  to
    cancel the respondent's leave to remain as a Tier 4 Student.

Introduction

 3. The respondent came to the UK in September 2011 to study a  three  year
    course at Manchester University but transferred to St Peters College in
    London because the second year was too difficult. He  obtained  an  NVQ
    level 6 certificate in business studies from St Peters College and then
    another NVQ level 6 certificate in  business  management  from  Central
    College in June 2014. He then returned to China and was stopped at  the
    airport on his return in September 2014. Despite  the  cancellation  of
    his leave, he was able to commence an NVQ level 7 marketing  management
    degree course at the University of Southampton which was due to  finish
    on 26 September 2015.

 4. The Secretary of State cancelled the respondents  leave  on  the  basis
    that he fraudulently obtained an English language test  certificate  as
    part of the basis for his application for further leave to remain as  a
    student which was made in November 2013. He had  submitted  an  invalid
    English language  test  certificate  provided  by  Educational  Testing
    Service (ETS) following an English language test at St  Peters  College
    on 15 October 2013. The sponsor licence for Central College was revoked
    on 5 September 2014.

The Appeal

 5. The respondent appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an oral
    hearing at Manchester on 22 December 2014. He was represented  by  Miss
    Smith of Yingde Lawyers Ltd. The First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the
    respondent had a good command of  English  and  had  little  reason  or
    motive for acting dishonestly in obtaining a test certificate.  He  had
    previously successfully obtained an international English language test
    certificate following a test at the British  embassy  in  Beijing.  The
    University of Southampton had  carried  out  their  own  assessment  of
    English language ability before issuing a CAS. The  evidence  submitted
    to prove that respondent had used a proxy was  unsatisfactory,  generic
    and in large part lacked any specific relevance. There was no  evidence
    as to the reasons behind the cancellation of the result or what  caused
    concern or who generated the cancellation.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law  in
    finding  that  the  burden  of  proof  had  not  been  discharged.  ETS
    identified the respondent after a systematic investigation and in order
    to be assessed as invalid there  had  been  a  rigorous  analysis  -  a
    computer programme analysing speech and two independent voice analysts.
    All three were in agreement that a proxy had been used  for  the  test.
    The judge had provided inadequate reasons for rejecting  the  evidence,
    the respondent's English language ability was not determinative and the
    judge had applied an elevated standard of proof.

 7. Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Designated  First-Tier  Tribunal
    Judge Murray on 24 February 2015. It was arguable that  the  judge  had
    wrongly identified the main  issue  in  the  case  and  may  well  have
    misunderstood the core of the claim and used too  high  a  standard  of
    proof.

 8. Thus, the appeal came before me

Discussion

 9. Mr Nath submitted that the main issue is deception. The judge was wrong
    to make  his  own  assessment  of  the  respondent's  English  language
    ability. The Secretary of State  only  had  to  prove  deception  on  a
    balance of probabilities. The  judge  has  not  set  out  what  further
    evidence was required and the Secretary of State could  not  have  done
    any more. The respondent has failed to attend and the  decision  should
    be remade today.

10. The judge referred to the  respondent's  English  language  ability  at
    paragraphs 7, 16, 18, 21 and 25 of the decision. At  paragraph  16  the
    judge stated that the respondent's level of  English  was  the  central
    issue in the case. I find that the judge erred in law by misidentifying
    the central issue in the case and allowing the appeal substantially  on
    the basis that the respondent had variously demonstrated a good command
    of English. The actual issue in the case was whether the  Secretary  of
    State had proved on a balance of probability that the  respondent  used
    deception in his application for further leave to remain.

11. The judge considered the evidence from  Peter  Millington  and  Rebecca
    Collins at paragraph 27 of the  decision.  The  judge  found  that  the
    statements amount to no more than a  general  summary  of  the  systems
    undertaken by ETS and the methodology provided little  or  no  evidence
    insofar as any specific case is concerned. I find that  the  judge  has
    given inadequate reasons for those findings -  the  witness  statements
    are detailed and supported by evidence confirming that the test  result
    for the respondent was invalid. The witness statements set out why  the
    specific evidence in relation to the respondent shows that a proxy  was
    used. The judge  has  not  adequately  engaged  with  the  evidence  or
    balanced the weight of that evidence against the respondent's assertion
    that he undertook the English language test himself. I find that  is  a
    further material error of law.

12. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  allow  the  respondent's
    appeal under the Immigration Rules involved the making of an  error  of
    law and its decision cannot stand.

Decision

13. Mr Nath invited me to allow the  appeal  and  remake  the  decision  by
    dismissing  the  respondent's  appeal  without  hearing   any   further
    evidence. Bearing in mind  paragraph  7.2  of  the  Senior  President's
    Practice Statements I do not consider that  an  appropriate  course  of
    action. I find that the errors of law infect the decision  as  a  whole
    and therefore the re-hearing will be de novo  with  all  issues  to  be
    considered again by the First-tier Tribunal.

14. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    order the appeal to be heard again in the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined de novo by a judge other than the previous First-tier judge.


Signed   [pic]    Date 13 September 2015

Judge Archer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
