
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37676/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 21 May 2015                                |On 9 June 2015                |
|Prepared 21 May 2015                          |                              |

                                   Before

              LORD MATTHEWS, SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       Mr Nishith Sureshchandra Patel
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Jones, Counsel instructed by Deccan Prime
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this decision the Appellant is  referred  to  as  the  Secretary  of
    State and the Respondent is referred to as the Claimant.

2.   The Claimant, a national of India, date of birth 28 August  1982,  made
    an application on 10 June 2013 for leave to remain as a  partner  of  a
    Tier 1 Migrant under the  points-based  system.   The  application  was
    refused by the Secretary of State on 2 September 2013  and  a  decision
    was made to issue removal directions under Section 47 of the IANA 2006.

3.   The basis of the Secretary of State's decision was  that  the  Claimant
    had failed to  make  proper  disclosure  and  thus  the  non-disclosure
    engaged paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended).
     The Secretary of State had refused the application with  reference  to
    paragraph 245(b) of the Rules but it is accepted that no-one  can  find
    such a Rule in existence even as set out or indeed as pertinent to such
    an application.

4.   The matter came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Fletcher-Hill, who  on
    15 January 2015, allowed the appeal under the  Immigration  Rules  with
    particular reference to non-existent paragraph 245(b) of the Rules  and
    also under Article 8 of the ECHR.

5.   There are three principal criticisms, the first being  that  the  judge
    did not properly assess the evidence concerning the misinformation that
    had been provided by the Claimant in an application form  completed  by
    his wife and an unknown third party.

6.   These were issues raised at the  hearing  and  in  part  cited  in  the
    judge's decision but ultimately, whilst the judge heard  evidence  from
    the Claimant and found him  to  be  a  credible  witness  of  fact  and
    accepted that evidence, he nevertheless never addressed, as  he  should
    have done, the issue of the Claimant's wife's intentions and motives in
    completing an application form in  which  there  was  a  material  non-
    disclosure of a previous criminal conviction.

7.   In the circumstances, whilst the judge was satisfied  as  to  what  the
    Claimant had said of the matter, he made no findings (and  acknowledged
    he could not because he did  not  have  the  evidence)  on  the  wife's
    actions.  Accordingly in the light of the case of AA  (Nigeria)  [2010]
    EWCA Civ 773,in particular paragraphs  76  to  81,  the  judge  made  a
    material error of law in failing properly to assess the evidence as  to
    whether or not the  Claimant  had  properly  faced  refusal  under  the
    general grounds with reference to paragraph 322(1A).

8.   The second criticism was  that  the  judge,  at  paragraph  50  of  the
    decision, noted what he believed to be evidence upon which he concluded
    the Claimant had not been acting to conceal the criminal conviction  in
    2011. The judge said, "I find that in view of this, he would  not  have
    regarded the offence of 2011 to be a material fact". This was all based
    on what was said to be a passage in a statement by the Claimant but  no
    such passage in fact exists. A finding on the basis of  evidence  which
    did not exist cannot be sustained. Paragraph 43 narrates  a  submission
    based on this phantom passage and the judge, in reaching this  view  on
    the actions of the Claimant and his intentions, was plainly misled into
    making an error of  fact  which  made  a  material  difference  to  his
    reasoning in decision; as such that was a material error of law.

10.   The  third  criticism  is  that  the  judge,  having  wrongly  recited
    paragraph 245(b) of the Immigration Rules, went on to allow the  appeal
    under the very same paragraph.  It may be that the  considerations  did
    fall under paragraph 319C of  the  Immigration  Rules  in  relation  to
    requirements for entry clearance or leave to remain as a partner  of  a
    relevant points-based person.  However, the fact is  the  Secretary  of
    State, as can be gathered from the Reasons for Refusal Letter, had  not
    undertaken the exercise.  It is  certainly  arguable  that  before  the
    judge went on to consider whether the appeal could be  allowed  it  was
    going to be necessary for the matter to be remitted to the Secretary of
    State to provide reasons with reference to whatever was the  Rule  upon
    which the application had been made and entertained.  Even if that were
    not correct, it is plain from the decision that the judge did not carry
    out the exercise of looking at paragraph  319C  and/or  any  equivalent
    paragraph of the Immigration Rules  to  make  a  decision  on  material
    issues that arose.

11.  Accordingly  the  judge's  decision  to  allow  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules was flawed and cannot stand.

12.  Finally, a further criticism was that in relation  to  Article  8  ECHR
    the judge's decision in five lines was simply absent of reasons.  There
    is a finding that the Secretary of State's decision is disproportionate
    but no more than that.  There was  no  reference  to  material  factors
    taken into consideration and no analysis in the balancing exercise with
    reference to the public interest-a matter that should have  been  given
    weight.

13.  For these reasons we are satisfied  that  the  original  Tribunal  made
    material errors of law and its decision cannot stand.

14.  The matter should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  decided
    again and before such rehearing takes  place  the  Secretary  of  State
    should serve a supplementary Reasons for  Refusal  Letter  setting  out
    with  reference  to   the   correct   Immigration   Rule   what   other
    considerations have been addressed and  whether  there  was  any  other
    basis to refuse  leave  to  remain  other  than  by  reference  to  the
    misrepresentation issue that has previously been raised.

LISTING

(1)  Listed in the First-tier Tribunal.

(2)  Hearing time estimate one and a half hours.

(3)  No interpreter required.

(4)  Any further documents relied upon other than the supplementary  Reasons
    for Refusal Letter to be served not less than ten working  days  before
    the further hearing.

(5)  The matter is not to  be  relisted  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Fletcher-Hill.



NOTICE OF DECISION

The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed to the extent that the matter  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be re-made

Signed                                  Date 28 May 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey



