
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37791/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham, Sheldon Court              |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 13th June 2014                               |On 21st July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                             mrs Zahida parveen
                         (ANONYMITY order NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Tariq Mahmood (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Neville Smart (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Rose, promulgated on 7th  March  2014,  following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham, Sheldon Court on 27th February 2014.  In the determination,
    the judge dismissed  the  appeal  of  Zahida  Parveen.   The  Appellant
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was born  on  17th  February
    1979.  She appeals against the refusal of the Respondent  Secretary  of
    State to refuse to vary her leave to remain in the UK to be allowed  to
    remain in this  country  on  a  permanent  basis.   The  basis  of  the
    application is her Article 8 rights.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The basis of  the  Appellant's  claim  is  that  she  is  in  a  loving
    relationship with a Mr Suleman, with whom she is married,  although  he
    too is not a British citizen but a national of Pakistan, and  that  the
    two of them have been living together since she came to  the  UK,  when
    she arrived in July 2001 as a domestic worker.  The Appellant's case is
    also that she has a relationship with two of her sisters, a cousin, and
    children of one of those sisters in the UK that go  to  her  Article  8
    rights.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge observed how the Appellant  had  been  granted  discretionary
    leave to remain in 2010, when she was unmarried.  The judge  noted  the
    facts that the Appellant maintained that  she  came  to  the  UK  as  a
    domestic worker and that her employer had simply  abandoned  her.   She
    had nowhere to return to back in Pakistan.  Her family had approached a
    firm of solicitors to make an application for  leave  to  remain.   The
    solicitor had assured her and the family that he would do so, and  over
    the years they have chased the solicitor, and had been assured that the
    matter was in hand and that this took quite a bit of time.

 5. The Appellant then only discovered that no application  had  been  made
    when she was caught up in a  raid  at  a  restaurant  by  the  Midlands
    Enforcement Unit in May 2008.  She was detained,  but  was  not  caught
    working, as she had no family in Pakistan,  such  that  she  could  not
    return there, because returning there would be  a  return  to  poverty.
    The judge had noted these facts (at paragraph 11).

 6. However in making  his  findings,  the  judge  went  on  to  note  (see
    specially paragraphs 14 to 16) that both the Appellant and  Mr  Suleman
    were "evasive" as witnesses, and the judge  did  not  accept  that  the
    Appellant was not aware of Mr Suleman's  immigration  status  if  their
    relationship was as loving as it was claimed.  The Appellant  was  also
    equivocal in saying whether or  not  she  would  return  back  with  Mr
    Suleman were he to be removed.  The judge did not believe the Appellant
    when she said  she  had  no  relatives  left  in  Pakistan.   This  was
    inconsistent with what had been maintained before (see paragraph 19).

 7. Although the judge believed that the Appellant had a relationship  with
    her sisters and other close family members in  the  UK,  "none  of  the
    Appellant's family members were called to give evidence at the hearing"
    and the judge attached "limited weight to the information  provided  in
    their letters" (paragraph 18).  Following  these  findings,  the  judge
    went on to apply the jurisprudence on Article 8  rights,  referring  to
    the leading cases, and the two step approach that has to be adopted  in
    such cases (see paragraphs 23 to 25) before dismissing the appeal.

Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application state  that  the  judge  made  contradictory
    findings in relation to paragraphs 9 and 26,  and  that  he  failed  to
    follow the relevant case law.

 9. On 15th April 2014 permission to appeal was granted.  It was noted that
    many of the grounds are simply disagreements with the judge's reasoning
    and conclusions.  However, given that the judge had found (at paragraph
    9) that the Appellant enjoys a family life, in the context  of  Article
    8, with two of her sisters  in  the  United  Kingdom,  he  should  have
    addressed the effects upon  that  family,  were  the  Appellant  to  be
    removed.

10. On 29th April 2014, a Rule 24 response was entered  by  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State to the effect that the  judge  at  paragraph  9  had
    recorded that there is  family  life  between  the  Appellant  and  her
    sibling sisters.  However, given that the  judge  had  attached  little
    weight to  the  information  provided  in  the  sister's  letters  (see
    paragraph 18) the finding of  family  life  could  not  necessarily  be
    sustained.  There was no family life engaged.  The judge was  wrong  to
    conclude that there was family life.  But in any event the  judge  held
    that the Appellant could not meet the requirements of paragraph  276ADE
    and Appendix FM.  Given that this was the case there were no compelling
    circumstances to consider a freestanding Article 8 consideration.

The Hearing

11. At the hearing before me on 13th June 2014 Mr Tariq Mahmood,  appearing
    for the Appellant submitted that the judge had erred at paragraph 9  of
    the determination in finding that there was a family life  between  the
    Appellant and  her  siblings,  and  then  not  taking  this  conclusion
    forwards  to  its  logical  conclusion.   The  judge  also   erred   in
    disbelieving Mr Suleman when he said that his family had  disowned  him
    because he had married an older woman.  Finally, the  judge  erred  (at
    paragraphs 14  to  17)  in  not  attaching  sufficient  weight  to  the
    interests of the two sisters.

12. For his part, Mr Smart relied upon the Rule 24 response.  He  submitted
    that the judge may well have been right in  concluding  as  he  did  at
    paragraph 9.  He referred to  the  Razgar  principles.   But  the  main
    question was the impact that the Appellant's relationship  had  on  her
    two sisters.  The sisters did not give evidence.  The  judge  made  his
    findings at paragraph 18.

13. He decided that "none of the Appellant's family members was  called  to
    give evidence at the hearing,  and  I  attach  limited  weight  to  the
    information provided in their letters" (paragraph 18).  He was entitled
    to  come  to  this  conclusion.   Thereafter,  there  was  the  judge's
    concluding paragraph where he stated that,

         "I have given careful consideration to  the  evidence  of  both  in
         relation to the Appellant's circumstances in the UK, including  her
         relationship with family members  here,  and  in  relation  to  the
         circumstances in Pakistan for the Appellant  and  for  Mr  Suleman"
         (paragraph 26).

    It  was  clear  from  this  that  he  had  left  nothing  out  of   his
    consideration.  This was a comprehensive determination.  It  could  not
    be faulted.

No Error of Law

14. I am satisfied that the making of the decision of  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making  of  an  error  on  a  point  of  law.   This  is  a
    comprehensive and clear  determination  by  the  judge.   It  is  well-
    established  that  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Upper  Tribunal   is   a
    supervisory jurisdiction enabling the Upper Tribunal to intervene  only
    where a case can be made for "perversity"  or  "irrationality"  on  the
    part of the judge below.  This is a "very high hurdle"  (see  R  (Iran)
    [2005] EWCA Civ 982 at paragraph 11).

15. The judge was entitled to make findings of fact on the question whether
    the Appellant had family ties still remaining in Pakistan,  on  whether
    the Appellant knew of Mr Suleman's immigration status, on whether  both
    she and Mr Suleman were "evasive" in giving their evidence.  These  are
    all matters that fall for  the  judge's  decision  at  a  fact  finding
    Tribunal.

16. In the same way, however, the judge was entitled to conclude  that  the
    Appellant had a claimed relationship with her sisters and other  family
    members as evidenced in the documentation  before  him  (see  paragraph
    18).  However, neither of the sisters had attended  to  give  evidence.
    The judge did not reject the evidence in the documentation.

17. What the judge said was that he would "attach  limited  weight  to  the
    information provided in their letters"  (paragraph  18).   This  was  a
    finding that was entirely open to the judge.  In the same way, although
    Mr Mahmood criticises paragraph 9  of  the  determination,  the  Razgar
    steps that the judge  sets  out  there  are  meticulously  applied  and
    followed and no criticism can be made of  the  step  by  step  approach
    taken by the judge in this regard.  There is no error of law.

Decision

18. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

19. No anonymity order is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 21st July 2014
