
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37061/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  27th June 2014                            |On 2nd July 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          MR PATRICK NWABUEZE OFILI
                        (no anonymity direction made)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr J Parkinson, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr D Aihe, of Wisestep Immigration Specialists


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State but I will refer to  the
       parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

    2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on  12th  June  1980.  He
       arrived in the UK on 25th September 2008 as a student and had  leave
       to remain in  this  capacity  until  22nd  February  2013.  On  21st
       February 2013 he applied to remain as a Tier  2  (general)  migrant.
       This application was refused on 25th July 2013  because  he  had  no
       certificate of sponsorship assigned so could receive no points under
       Appendix  A,  although  the  necessary  points  were  awarded  under
       Appendix B and C. The appellant began a relationship with  Ms  Sarah
       Oyenuga (the sponsor), a Citizen of Nigerian born on 17th July  1985
       in 2010. The couple say that they are in a durable relationship, and
       have been cohabiting for the past two years. The sponsor came to the
       UK on 22nd August 2003 as a student and has limited leave as a  Tier
       2 (general)  migrant  until  22nd  January  2015.  She  applied  for
       indefinite leave to remain on 13th March 2014; her passport is  with
       the respondent;  and  she  is  still  awaiting  a  decision  on  her
       application. The appellant's appeal against the decision was allowed
       by First-tier Tribunal Judge Canavan in a determination  promulgated
       on the 8th April 2014 on the basis that the decision was a breach of
       Article 8 ECHR.

    3. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal McClure on 19th May 2014 on  the  basis  that  it  was
       arguable that the First-tier judge had erred in law  in  failing  to
       apply the case of Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach)
       2013 UKUT 00640 and R (on the application of) Nagre  v  SSHD  [2013]
       EWHC 720, and there was nothing in the facts that was exceptional to
       allow the matter to be allowed under Article 8 ECHR.

    4. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions

    5. Mr Parkinson relied upon the grounds of appeal.  He  contended  that
       this was a case which concerned  an  appellant  who  had  precarious
       immigration status as this was to be equated with anyone who did not
       have indefinite leave to remain. In such circumstances the arguments
       in Nagre should be applied, as the Court of Appeal had approved that
       approach at paragraph 41 of MF (Nigeria)  v  SSHD  [2013]  EWCA  Civ
       1192. There were no  compelling  circumstances  in  this  case.  The
       appellant could return to Nigeria and maintain his  relationship  by
       other means of communication. If there was a  period  of  separation
       then this was not disproportionate.  It  was  not  unduly  harsh  to
       expect the couple to  have  their  family  life  in  Nigeria.  Judge
       Canavan had noted that the human rights claim had been raised  at  a
       late stage and that the appellant and sponsor  could  not  meet  the
       Immigration  Rules  at  Appendix  FM.  It  might  be  difficult   or
       inconvenient for the appellant to return to Nigeria but this was the
       correct and lawful approach.

    6. Further the finding by Judge Canavan that the couple  had  cohabited
       for  two  years  at  paragraph  18  of  her  determination  was  not
       compatible with her finding at paragraph  15  that  the  appellant's
       spouse had not explained why her bank statements and wages slips did
       not go to the  couple's  address.  The  Tribunal  had  not  properly
       considered  this  discrepancy,  and  there  was  inadequate  reasons
       supporting her conclusion.

    7. Mr Aihe submitted that the decision of Judge Canavan was a safe one.
       She had looked at all the evidence in the  round  with  regards  the
       couple's cohabitation. She had heard from the appellant, the sponsor
       and a friend. She had other  documentary  evidence  of  cohabitation
       from things such as bills. She had noted the evidence which did  not
       support the  appellant's  case  but  ultimately  had  found  herself
       satisfied to the correct standard of proof.

    8. With respect to the approach under Article 8 ECHR Judge Canavan  had
       followed Gulshan. She had identified the appellant  as  being  in  a
       "Catch 22" situation whilst the sponsor's application for indefinite
       leave to remain  was  pending.  She  had  found  that  this  was  an
       exceptional situation where it would be unduly harsh to require  the
       appellant to return to Nigeria as he could  not  currently  make  an
       application to return despite having a  genuine  relationship  which
       had lasted for two years. In these circumstances Judge  Canavan  has
       made a very specific and limited finding that  until  the  sponsor's
       application for indefinite leave to remain was  determined  that  it
       would be a breach of Article 8 ECHR to remove the appellant.

    9. At the end of  the  hearing  I  informed  the  parties  that  I  was
       satisfied that there was no error of law  in  the  determination  of
       Judge Canavan, but that I would set out my full reasons in writing.

Conclusions

   10. Judge Canavan carefully considered the evidence with respect to  the
       two year cohabitation of the appellant and sponsor.  She  finds  the
       appellant, sponsor and friend all credible witnesses, and that  they
       all gave consistent  evidence  regarding  the  cohabitation  of  the
       appellant and sponsor. There was evidence  of  their  joint  tenancy
       agreement and a landlord's letter; evidence from the bank statements
       regarding payment of rent by the sponsor on behalf of the  appellant
       via transfers; evidence re the payment of bills at the address;  and
       evidence re preparatory steps for a marriage. All this  evidence  is
       set out at paragraphs 15 to 18 of the determination.  Judge  Canavan
       does give weight to the fact that the sponsor has not explained  why
       her bank statements and  wage  slips  do  not  have  the  cohabiting
       address on them (and notes  that  the  appellant  had  an  explained
       arrangement for his to be sent to a friend's address) but ultimately
       she states  at  paragraph  18  of  her  determination  that  she  is
       satisfied on the balance of probabilities  that  the  appellant  and
       sponsor have  been  cohabiting  as  claimed.  This  was  a  reasoned
       decision she was entitled to reach on the evidence before her.

   11. Judge Canavan explicitly applies Gulshan to the facts of this  case,
       at  paragraph  24  of  her  determination,   despite   having   some
       reservations of its compatibility with MF (Nigeria),  Huang  v  SSHD
       [2007] UKHL 11 and Patel & Others v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72.  She  notes
       that it would normally be expected that the appellant should  return
       to Nigeria and apply for entry clearance to return at  paragraph  23
       of her determination. However she finds,  at  paragraph  24  of  her
       determination in this case that there are  compelling  circumstances
       as the appellant is in a "Catch  22"  situation  whereby  he  cannot
       apply for entry clearance as a durable partner on return due to  the
       sponsor's pending indefinite leave to remain application. Further it
       is not possible to know how long  the  indefinite  leave  to  remain
       application will take: some applications take months or even  years.
       It would not be reasonable or proportionate to expect the sponsor to
       leave the UK given her long residence, job  and  pending  settlement
       application. Judge Canavan is very specific that her finding is just
       that it would be disproportionate to remove the appellant limited to
       the  time  when  the  sponsor's  indefinite  leave  application   is
       determined. At this point the appellant can reasonably  be  expected
       to follow the normal route and return to Nigeria to apply for  entry
       clearance.

   12. I find that Judge Canavan has followed Gulshan  as  she  finds  that
       there are arguably good  grounds  for  granting  leave  outside  the
       Article 8 ECHR Rules (as required by b)  of  the  headnote)  as  the
       Immigration Rules do  not  sufficiently  recognise  the  appellant's
       circumstances, see paragraph  25  of  her  determination.  She  also
       identifies non-standard and particular features  demonstrating  that
       removal would be unjustifiably harsh  (as  required  by  c)  of  the
       headnote in Gulshan). She finds  the  situation  is  that  that  the
       appellant is unable to apply for entry under the  Immigration  Rules
       for an unknown and possibly long period of time due to the sponsor's
       limbo status (which could persist for a very long period  of  time),
       see paragraphs 24 and 25 of her determination. This is clearly found
       to be unjustifiably harsh in the context  of  the  findings  in  the
       determination that the appellant and  sponsor  have  a  genuine  and
       durable relationship, involving a  period  of  cohabitation  of  two
       years, and their having adequate accommodation and support.

Decision

   13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making
       of an error on a point of law.

   14.  The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the  appeal  on
       Article 8 ECHR grounds is upheld.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley
27th June 2014

