
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW/KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37227/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15th February 2016                |On 25th April 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                        MR SURESHKUMAR Somasabapathy
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs C Hulse (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mrs Brockleby-Weller (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Sangha promulgated on 5th August 2015,  following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham Sheldon Court on 24th July 2015.  In the determination,  the
    judge allowed the  appeal  of  Mr  Sureshkumar  Somasabapathy  when  he
    applied for further leave to remain to study for an MSc in Tourism  and
    Event Management at  the  University  of  Bedfordshire,  whereupon  the
    Secretary of State applied for, and was granted, permission  to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

Permission to Appeal

 2. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the ETS spreadsheet,
    which was attached to Annex G of the  Explanatory  Statement  from  the
    Respondent's side, identifies the Appellant by name  and  records,  and
    states that the test taken on 6th February 2013  by  him  was  invalid.
    The judge failed to take this  matter  into  account  in  reaching  his
    decision to allow the appeal of the Appellant.

 3. The Appellant attended the hearing.   I  heard  submissions  from  both
    representatives following which I announced that  I  would  reserve  my
    determination.

No Error of Law

 4. In her submissions before me, Mrs Brockleby-Weller, appearing on behalf
    of the Respondent Secretary  of  State,  relied  essentially  upon  the
    Grounds of Appeal.  She stated  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for findings  on  material  matters.   The  judge  had
    stated (at paragraph 28) that, "on the totality of the evidence  before
    me, therefore, I find that the Respondent has failed to  discharge  the
    burden of proof upon her and the reasons given by the Respondent do not
    justify the refusal."

 5. However, the Immigration Officer  had  provided  an  appeal  bundle  of
    documents in support of the allegation (in respect of paragraph 321A of
    the Immigration Rules)  including  witness  statements  from  Mr  Peter
    Millington and Miss Rebecca Collings, and an email  document  from  ETS
    task force dated 10th September 2014.   A  witness  statement  from  Mr
    Michael Sartorius was also provided.

 6. In particular, the witness statements from Mr Peter Millington and Miss
    Rebecca  Collings  clearly  provided  that  tests  are  categorised  as
    "invalid" where ETS are certain that there is evidence  of  proxy  test
    taking or impersonation.  They make it clear that,

         "ETS described that any test categorised as cancelled (which  later
         became known as invalid) had  the  same  voice  for  multiple  test
         takes.  On questioning they advised that they  were  certain  there
         was evidence of proxy test taking or impersonation in those  cases"
         (see  paragraph  28  of  the  witness  statement  of  Miss  Rebecca
         Collings).

 7. The witness statement of Mr Peter Millington also is to the same effect
    when it observes that,

         "Following  comprehensive  investigations  ETS  provided  the  Home
         Office  with  lists  of  candidates  whose  test   results   showed
         'substantial evidence of invalidity.'  The Home Office was provided
         with the background to the process used by ETS  for  reaching  that
         conclusion" (see paragraph 6 of the witness statement of  Mr  Peter
         Millington).

 8. Indeed, Mr Peter Millington went on to say  in  his  witness  statement
    that, "where  a  match  has  been  identified  their  approach  was  to
    invalidate the test result.  As set out in  the  witness  statement  of
    Miss Rebecca Collings, ETS have informed the Home Office that there was
    evidence of invalidity in those cases" (see paragraph 46 of the witness
    statement of Mr Peter Millington).

 9. Accordingly, what Mrs Brockleby-Weller argued before me was that taking
    account of this evidence it was clear that in order to  be  categorised
    as "invalid" on the spreadsheet provided to the Home Office,  the  case
    has to have gone through a computer programme analysing speech and then
    two independent voice analysts.  If all three are in agreement  that  a
    proxy has been used then the test will be categorised as "invalid."   A
    print-out of the relevant section of the ETS spreadsheet  was  attached
    at Annex G of the Explanatory Statement.   The  spreadsheet  identifies
    the Appellant by name and records that the test taken on  6th  February
    2013 was invalid.

10. For her part, Mrs Hulse argued that the background to  this  appeal  is
    the fact that the Appellant had initially had no problems whatsoever in
    undertaking studies as a student when he arrived at Kensington College,
    because he had studied English in India already, and it was  only  upon
    completion of his course  at  Kensington  College,  that  he  then  had
    aspirations of undertaking a masters course at Bedfordshire University,
    for which he enrolled on an English language course.

11. Mrs Hulse  explained  that  the  Appellant  undertook  an  ECS  English
    language course, which had been approved by the Home  Office,  and  the
    attractiveness of this course was that it was an online course, and the
    dates that the Appellant had been given were of 6th February  2013  and
    15th February 2013.  The Appellant sat the test on those two  days  and
    within fifteen days he was issued with an English language certificate,
    which would have enabled him to undertake  his  masters  course  as  he
    intended.

12. What is extraordinary about the allegation made by the Respondent  Home
    Office is that an imposter was used only with respect to  the  test  on
    6th February 2013.  Nothing is said about the second date on which  the
    Appellant sat the test, namely, on 15th February 2013.  It did not make
    sense to have this allegation raised, unless it could be said that  the
    Appellant had used an imposter for both days.

13. In any event, the Appellant was never called  in  subsequently  by  the
    test providers to have the voice of  the  Appellant  matched  with  the
    voice of the  claimed  imposter.   Mrs  Hulse  then  went  through  the
    background to the difficulties that had arisen  with  the  ETS  system,
    which had delegated responsibility for the undertaking of  these  tests
    for various centres, but which centres had then fallen short of  proper
    standards, whereby some centres were  shown  to  have  used  imposters,
    which the Home Office had found out to have been the case, resulting in
    considerable reputational damage to the ETS.

14. She drew my attention to what Mr Peter Millington describes at  page  8
    (paragraph 29) and at paragraph 32, and at  paragraph  39,  the  latter
    involving a statement by Mr Millington that the tests are "as  accurate
    as possible" and acknowledges that the system that  was  in  place  was
    "imperfect."

15. It is only because  the  system  was  "imperfect,"  that  two  language
    analysts were then used, only one of which was an expert in the  field,
    and the second one of which simply tended to follow  the  findings  and
    views of the first expert.  These matters had been exposed following  a
    Panorama programme, which highlighted the exercise  of  abuse  by  some
    centres, and the Home Office  had  been  naturally  most  concerned  to
    ensure that ETS was employing the  system  in  the  correct  manner  as
    intended.

16. It is for all these reasons, that the use of a "generic"  test  by  the
    Respondent Home Office is bound to lead to some cases which  have  been
    wrongly identified as involving abuse.  This  is  especially  the  case
    here, where the Appellant is only faulted for one of the days,  namely,
    6th February 2013, but not the second day on 15th February 2013,  which
    would appear to make no sense whatsoever.

17. All in all, concluded Mrs  Hulse,  the  judge  at  the  hearing,  Judge
    Sangha, had been correct to undertake the sort  of  analysis  which  he
    did, which was after all as a result of a first judge having  adjourned
    the matter a month earlier because that judge was  not  satisfied  that
    the system employed  by  the  government  through  test  providers  was
    sufficiently clear and credit worthy.  Judge  Sangha  was  entitled  to
    conclude as he did and this Tribunal  should  not  intervene  to  upset
    those conclusions.

18. In reply, Mrs Brockleby-Weller simply stated that she would  rely  upon
    the fact that a system, described through the witness statements of  Mr
    Peter Millington and Miss Rebecca Collings, was backed up by a computer
    programme analysing speech and two independent voice analysts.

19. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA [2007]) that I should set  aside  the  decision  and  re-make  the
    decision.  It is well-known that the test for "perversity" is  a  "very
    high hurdle" see Brooke LJ in R (Iran) [2005] EWCA Civ 982.

20. This is a case where the Appellant was only apprehended  after  he  had
    gone on holiday  back  to  India,  whereupon  on  his  return  on  16th
    September 2014 he was  subjected  to  an  initial  examination  and  an
    interview because the Home Office records appeared to indicate that  an
    English language certificate which was used by the Appellant in support
    of a previous application for leave to  remain  had  been  fraudulently
    obtained.

21. The Respondent relied upon evidence from the ETS which was validated by
    witness statements provided by the Home Office officials namely Rebecca
    Collings and Peter Millington (see paragraph 20 of the  determination).



22. The judge went on to state that the burden rests upon the Secretary  of
    State, relying upon AA (Nigeria) [2010] EWCA Civ 773.   The  judge  had
    regard to the Upper Tribunal's determination in Gazi [2015] UKUT 00327,
    where Mr Justice McCloskey stated (at paragraph 27) that,

         "In most of them the appeals have succeeded on the grounds that the
         Secretary of State had failed to discharge the  burden  of  proving
         fraud on the part of the Appellant.  The effect of these decisions,
         explicit in some and implicit in others, is that  the  ETS  testing
         has yielded false positive results.  In all  of  these  cases,  the
         evidence considered by the FTT has included the witness  statements
         of Mr Millington and  Miss  Collings"  (see  paragraph  23  of  the
         determination).

23. The judge then went on to say that the evidence before  the  judge  had
    "some minor inconsistencies," but the burden of proof still remained on
    the Respondent to provide

         "Specific and individual evidence in relation to this Appellant  to
         support the allegation that he used deception by relying on the ETS
         documents that he submitted with his application"  (paragraph  24).
         The judge went on to say that, "the only evidence before me is  the
         generic evidence of Ms Collings and Mr Millington and that,  in  my
         assessment, does not show the exact reason why the ETS  invalidated
         the certificate of this Appellant in particular  and  there  is  no
         evidence before me relating to this Appellant specifically to prove
         that his test was undertaken by a proxy" (paragraph 24).

24. The judge finally ended by saying that the documents  attached  to  the
    "generic statements of Rebecca Collings  and  Peter  Millington  simply
    record the words 'invalid'  against  the  Appellant  but  there  is  no
    documentary evidence to prove that the test taken by this Appellant was
    taken by a proxy" (paragraph 26).

25. It seems to me that the judge was entitled to come  to  the  conclusion
    that he did.  Such a finding is not "perverse" and cannot be said to be
    irrational.  This was the evidence before the judge and the judge  gave
    the evidence the weight that he could in the precise  circumstances  of
    this case, which included the fact that the Appellant sat his  test  on
    two days, on 6th February 2013 and  on  15th  February  2013,  but  the
    allegation was only in respect of the test on 6th  February  2013,  and
    the Appellant was not thereafter called back to the centre to have  his
    voice assessed against that of the alleged imposter.

26. In Dasgupta [2016] UKUT 0028 the Tribunal made it clear that  in  error
    of law appeals, the Upper  Tribunal  should  apply  the  principles  in
    Edwards v Bairstow [1956] AC 14.  This being the case, I find that  the
    decision of Judge Sangha cannot be set aside and must stand.

Decision

27. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

28. No anonymity order is made.


Signed   Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    21st April 2016
