
[pic]

First-tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/37261 /2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 November 2015                   |On 2 December 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                             MR MD BADRUL ISLAM
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr M Hassan of Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department. The respondent is Mr Islam. However for the convenience,  I
    shall continue to refer to Mr Islam as the appellant and the  Secretary
    of State as the respondent which were the designations they had in  the
    proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal against the  determination
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge R Cooper of 31  March  2015  allowing  the
    appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  the  respondent  dated  4
    September 2014 refusing his application to remain in the United Kingdom
    as a spouse of a British citizen pursuant  to  paragraph  321A  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Zuker granted the  respondent  permission  to
    appeal on 3 June 2015, stating that  it  is  arguable  that  the  Judge
    materially erred in law by his approach to the evidence  generally  and
    referred to the guidance in R (on the application  of  Abu  Shahdat  MD
    Sayem Gazi) JR/12120/2014.

    First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings

 4.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  for  the
    following reasons which I summarise.

 5. The respondent alleges  fraud  and  therefore  the  burden  is  on  the
    respondent to provide cogent evidence to support that allegation, on  a
    balance of probabilities that this appellant used deception in order to
    obtain his TOEIC Certificate in 2012.

 6. There is  no  evidence  from  the  respondent  demonstrating  that  the
    certificate which has not been invalidated  by  the  ETS  was  in  fact
    relied upon by the appellant to obtain further  leave  to  remain.  The
    respondent has simply made an assertion in her Refusal Letter.  However
    the appellant in a statement confirms he relied on this to apply for an
    extension of his Tier 4 Student visa. The Home  Office  had  identified
    that the appellant had a pending application for leave to remain  as  a
    spouse and "was seeking to rely upon the invalid certificate".

 7. The respondent relied on statements of Mr  Peter  Millington  and  Miss
    Rebecca  Collings  providing  background  information  concerning   the
    relationship between  the  Home  Office  and  ETS.  These  are  generic
    statements and they do not relate to this appellant directly, but  they
    set out the processes by which ETS reportedly identified and  confirmed
    the identity of those people who had sought to obtain a certificate  by
    deception, the procedures by  which  the  ETS  sought  to  verify  test
    results, and the way in which ETS informed the  Home  Office  of  those
    certificate holders have been cancelled or invalidated. The  makers  of
    the statements did not attend the hearing.

 8. The witness statement of Matthew  Harold  is  the  only  evidence  that
    specifically relates to  this  appellant.  He  exhibits  a  spreadsheet
    (Annex A) which records that the appellant speaking score of 190 (which
    I understand is out of a possible  200)  is  "invalid".  This  evidence
    appears from the date at the  top  of  the  screenshot,  to  have  been
    printed on 11 November 2014, yet  was  only  produced  at  the  hearing
    itself.

 9. These statements of Mr Millington explains in considerable  detail  the
    procedure by which ETS have sought to verify the test scores  of  those
    sitting their tests, (including TOEIC language tests). He sets out  the
    background to the  development  and  introduction  of  Biometric  Voice
    Recognition Technology, which was then used by ETS to analyse the TOEIC
    test data. Mr Millington confirms that the ETS acknowledged  the  voice
    recognition  technology  was  imperfect,  and  that  samples  would  be
    incorrectly flagged as false positives. He states that flagged  matches
    were then subjected to human verification to ensure  greater  accuracy.
    He confirms at paragraph 45 that 20% of  those  flagged  by  the  voice
    recognition technology were not confirmed, once human verification  had
    taken place, but he states matches were rejected where  there  was  any
    doubt. In paragraph 46 he states that where the ETS believe an impostor
    was involved with the test  because  speech  samples  displayed  marked
    similarity, "scores will be cancelled" and  then  the  tests  analysed,
    where ETS (ETS's office of testing  integrity)  identifies  the  speech
    sample indicates the same  individual  has  taken  tests  in  place  of
    numerous candidates, "their approach is to invalidate the test result".

10. At paragraph 47, Mr Millington confirms that even where match has  been
    identified and verified "an  individual's  test  result  may  still  be
    invalidated on the basis of test administration irregularity  including
    the fact that their test was taken at a UK testing centre when numerous
    other results have been invalidated on the basis of a match".

11. The Judge stated:

         "In her reasons for refusal letter the respondent states "during an
         administrative review process, ETS have confirmed that your clients
         test obtained was through deception. Because the validity  of  your
         clients test results could not be authenticated, your client scores
         ... have been cancelled". However the evidence  before  me  is  not
         that his test scores have been cancelled, indeed it is still listed
         in the spreadsheet as being 190. The spreadsheet simply  said  that
         his test is invalid."

12. The Judge also stated:

         "There  is  no  evidences  before  me  to  indicate  whether   this
         particular appellant's test or has  been  individually  subject  to
         analysis or assessment by ETS, or simply whether  it  is  the  case
         that he was unfortunate enough to attend a college where there  are
         high number of irregular scores. These are matters which could have
         been clarified had Mr Harold been present, but he was not."

13. The Judge additionally stated:

         "The  only  evidence  before  me  that  actually  relates  to  this
         appellant is one line in  a  spreadsheet,  without  any  supporting
         evidence to show the bases on which his test has  been  treated  as
         invalid."

14. The statement of Rebecca Collins was considered which sets out in  some
    detail the timeline of the work done with ETS to analyse the  data.  In
    paragraph 26 she says that in late  March  2014  The  Home  Office  was
    informed by ETS that they have been able to "identify impersonation and
    proxy testing using voice recognition software". In  paragraph  28  she
    describes that ETS described that any  test  categorised  as  cancelled
    (this later became known as invalid) had the same  voice  for  multiple
    test takers. On questioning, they advised that there were certain  that
    there was evidence of proxy  test  taking  or  impersonation  in  these
    cases". She refers in paragraph 29 to there being  correspondence  with
    ETS about the difference between those categorised as "questionable" as
    opposed to those which were "cancelled/invalid".

15. There are certain inconsistencies between these explanations set out in
    Rebecca Collings statement and that of Mr Millington, but these are not
    material that could be pursued  in  the  absence  of  the  respondent's
    witnesses. I therefore attach less weight to the evidence that has been
    produced by the respondent, as it is not evidence that could be tested.

16. The Judge stated:

         "I find that the appellant has provided  evidence,  which  was  not
         challenged by the respondent, about the  process  he  undertook  to
         obtain his TOEIC test. I find he has also provided evidence, albeit
         postdating the time of his original TOEIC test, confirming  he  has
         obtained merit at grade 5 of the Trinity College graded examination
         in spoken English (equivalent to entry level  certificate  in  ESOL
         International (level 3 and B1. 1 of the CEFR.), Indicating that  he
         has more skills in this area  than  the  minimum  required  by  the
         respondent in marriage applications."

17. Taking all the evidence into account the respondent has not  discharged
    the burden on her to demonstrate with cogent evidence on the balance of
    probabilities that this appellant obtained his TOEIC test result of the
    use of deception.

18. The Judge allowed the appeal pursuant to the Immigration Rules.

    Grounds of appeal

19. The respondent in her grounds of appeal states as follows.   The  Judge
    has made a material error of law in the determination by  stating  that
    the Secretary of State has  not  discharged  the  burden  of  proof  in
    demonstrating  that  this  appellant  used  deception.  The  first-tier
    Tribunal Judge's reasoning for this is entirely inadequate.

20. The Judge indicates at paragraph 45 that the witness statements and the
    extract from the spreadsheet do not assist the respondent's case  which
    is incorrect. Though witness statements, when read in conjunction  with
    one another, details extensively the investigation undertaken by ETS on
    this appellant's case, along with thousands of  other  applicants,  and
    the process of identifying those tests found to  be  "invalid".  It  is
    clear from the statements that ETS identified this  appellant  after  a
    lengthy and systematic investigation.

21. The Judge should have given due consideration to the specific  evidence
    which identifies this appellant  as  an  individual  who  has  exercise
    deception  together  with  the   witness   statements   outlining   the
    investigation process.

22. The Judge relies on the appellant's evidence of what  happened  at  the
    test centre in paragraph 30. However the Judge fails to note that  this
    account is entirely uncorroborated and thus provides only very  limited
    assistance in determining the deception.







    The hearing

23. At the hearing I heard submissions as to whether there  is  a  material
    error of law in the determination.

    Decision on error of law

24. I have given  anxious  scrutiny  to  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge who allowed the appellant's appeal under the Immigration
    Rules for leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a spouse. The  Judge
    essentially found that the respondent, on whom the burden lies, had not
    proved that the appellant's application  was  correctly  refused  under
    paragraph 321A of the Immigration  Rules  in  respect  of  the  English
    language test and as such, the respondent had not demonstrated that the
    appellant employed fraud.



25. In the Judicial Review application  JR/12120/2014  President  McCloskey
    stated that the litigation context in which  this  challenge  (the  ETS
    English language test) unfolds is conveniently identified in an earlier
    decision of this Tribunal promulgated in September 2014, R (Mahmood)  -
    v - Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] UKUT 00439 (IAC),
    at [1]:

         "This is another of the currently plentiful crop of "ETS"  judicial
         review cases. These have gained much currency during recent months,
         stimulated by action taken on behalf of the Secretary of State  for
         the Home Department ("the  Secretary  of  State"),  the  Respondent
         herein, in the wake of the BBC "Panorama" programme broadcast on 10
         February 2014.   "ETS"  denotes  Educational  Testing  Services,  a
         global agency contracted to provide certain educational testing and
         assessment services to the Secretary of State.  In order to  secure
         leave to remain in the United Kingdom, by virtue  of  the  relevant
         provisions of  the  Immigration  Rules  it  was  incumbent  on  the
         Applicant to provide evidence that he had obtained a specified type
         of English language qualification.  The action taken on  behalf  of
         the Secretary of State, which the  Applicant  challenges  by  these
         proceedings, was based on an assessment that the  English  language
         certificate on which he relied had been procured by deception."

26. The Judge correctly identified that the  burden  of  proof  is  on  the
    respondent and it is on a balance of  probability.  However  the  Judge
    failed to take into account certain evidence and  to  place  sufficient
    emphasis  on  material  evidence  and  came  to  a  legally   erroneous
    conclusion.

27. The evidence provided by  the  respondent  was  a  statement  from  Mrs
    Rebecca  Collings  who  stated  that  "ETS  described  that  any   test
    characterised as cancelled (which later became known  as  invalid)  had
    the same voice for multiple test takes. On questioning  the  respondent
    was advised that they were certain that there  was  evidence  of  proxy
    test taking or impersonation in those cases. The  Judge  did  not  give
    good reasons for why the witness statement of Mr Peter Millington could
    not be relied on in respect of  this  particular  appellant.  Mr  Peter
    Millington stated, "it is clear that in order to  be  characterised  as
    'invalid' on the spreadsheet provided to the Home Office the  case  has
    to have gone through a computer program analysing speech and  then  two
    independent voice analysts. If all three are in agreement that a  proxy
    has been used then the test would be characterised as 'invalid'".

28. The evidence of both witnesses is clear that  when  a  test  result  is
    characterised  as  "invalid",  it  has  gone  through  rigorous  checks
    including a computer program analysing speech and two independent voice
    analysts. The Judge by accepting the evidence of the two witnesses fell
    into material error by finding that the respondent has not proved  that
    the appellant has used deception. Although the Judge advised himself in
    the determination that the respondent's  standard  of  proof  is  on  a
    balance of probabilities, it is implicit in the  determination  that  a
    higher standard of proof was employed.  That  brought  the  Judge  into
    material error.

29.  The  Judge  at  paragraph  43   stated   that   "there   are   certain
    inconsistencies between these explanations set out in Rebecca  Collings
    statement and that of Mr Millington, but these were  not  matters  that
    could be  pursued  in  the  absence  of  the  respondent's  witness.  I
    therefore attach less weight to the evidence that has been produced  by
    the respondent, as it is not evidence that could be tested".

30. The Judge materially erred in not setting  out  these  inconsistencies.
    There was a failure by the Judge to take into account all the  evidence
    in the appeal and give adequate reasons for why the respondent had  not
    discharged her burden of proof that the appellant used deception.

31. The features of the general grounds  for  refusal  in  Part  9  of  the
    Immigration  Rules  were  considered  by  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal in JC (Part 9 HC395 - burden  of  proof)  China  [2007]  UKAIT
    00027 ('JC').  Part  9  of  the  Immigration  Rules  contains  "general
    grounds"  for  the  refusal  of  entry  clearance  or  leave  to  enter
    (paragraphs 320, 321), for the cancellation of leave to enter or remain
    (paragraph 321A) and for refusal of variation  of  leave  to  enter  or
    remain or for curtailment of leave (paragraph  322).  These  provisions
    represent, as it were, the list  of  general  grounds  which  the  Home
    Secretary currently thinks must or should  operate  to  complement  the
    substantive Immigration  Rules.  They  cover  circumstances  where  the
    respondent considers that a person should not be permitted to enter  or
    remain even though he meets the ordinary  substantive  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules. They are general grounds for saying "no".   Each
    of  the  general  grounds  has  an   exclusionary,   rather   than   an
    inclusionary, intent.  The applicant is not showing why  he  qualifies;
    rather the decision-maker is seeking to show why the applicant  is,  or
    should normally be, disqualified.  (See JC, paras. 8, 10 and 14.)

32. Each of the general grounds depends for its application on the decision-
    maker being able to  establish  a  precedent  fact  or  facts,  and  in
    relation to all of the general grounds the burden of proof  is  on  the
    decision-maker to establish the facts relied upon (JC, para. 10).   The
    reason why the burden rests on the decision-maker is that each of these
    grounds alleges in one way or another failing or a  wrongdoing  on  the
    part of an applicant (JC, paras. 11-12).  The standard of proof  is  at
    the higher end of the spectrum  of  balance  of  probability,  but  the
    standard is flexible in its  application,  and  the  more  serious  the
    allegation or the more serious the consequences if  the  allegation  is
    proven, the stronger must be the evidence before a court will find  the
    allegation proved on the  balance  of  probabilities  (JC,  para.  13).
    However, once the decision-maker establishes the underlying facts,  the
    burden shifts to the appellant, even when the general ground  concerned
    is discretionary, stating that refusal  should  "normally"  be  refused
    (JC, para. 15).

33. In respect of paragraph 321A(ii),  the  precedent  fact  on  which  the
    application of this provision depends is that the appellant produced  a
    false English test result with  his  application,  and  the  burden  of
    establishing this fact lies on the respondent (JC, paras. 16-17).

34. The ETS entity is one of a small number of Home Office suppliers of so-
    called "Secure English Language Testing" ("SELT") and was appointed  in
    2011. The test is taken by an applicant and he is notified by  the  ETS
    of their grades and ETS issue a certificate which is then forwarded  to
    the respondent for further leave to remain.

35. The respondent provided evidence in the form  of  statements  from  two
    witnesses that there was evidence of fraud at the ETS test centres. The
    full procedure of the test are set out in the President's determination
    so I will not repeat it here. Suffice it to say that it is evident that
    ETS informed the Home Office  that  they  had  been  able  to  identify
    impersonation and proxy testing using voice recognition  software.  ETS
    sent the Home Office the results of their analysis of the  first  batch
    of test centres on 24 and 28 March 2014. Ms  Rebecca  Collings  in  her
    statement stated that any test categorised by ETS as  cancelled,  which
    later became known as "invalid", had the same voice for  multiple  test
    takers. On questioning, ETS "advised that they were certain  there  was
    evidence of  proxy  test  taking  of  impersonation  in  those  cases".
    [Emphasis mine]

36. There was no dispute that the appellant's  test  results  were  amongst
    10,000's test scores analysed and his test was deemed to  be  "invalid"
    i.e. that the ETS was certain there was evidence of proxy  test  taking
    or impersonation in her case.

37.  I  take  into  account  President  McCloskey's  observation  "At  this
    juncture,  it  is  appropriate  to  highlight  the  single   piece   of
    documentary evidence relating to the decision in the  Applicant's  case
    which has been produced by the Secretary of State.  It  consists  of  a
    photocopied excerpt from a spreadsheet taking the form of a  horizontal
    line containing six pieces of information: the "ETS  Registration  ID",
    the Applicant's first and last names, the test  date,  the  Applicant's
    date of birth and the name  of  the  test  centre.   Neither  the  word
    "invalid" or "cancellation" or any derivative of  either  appears".  Mr
    Millington  stated  that  the  technology  used  entailed  over  70,000
    pairings of nonmatching  comparisons  and  that  the  matching  samples
    produced values that were higher  than  values  from  the  non-matching
    samples the majority of the time, with  a  less  than  2%  error  rate.
    [Emphasis mine.]   I  take  into  account  that  the  statement  of  Mr
    Millington is that "the ETS accepted that voice biometric technology is
    currently  imperfect  ...   too  many  false  positives  would  fatally
    undermine the integrity of the voice  biometric  system".  However,  Mr
    Millington stated "In recognition of the risk  of  'false  positives'",
    ETS ".... subjected each flagged match to a further human  verification
    process".  This required the recruitment of additional staff who, it is
    said, received "mandatory training in voice recognition  analysis"  and
    were "initially mentored by experienced OTI  analysts".  The  statement
    continues "Having engaged the necessary number of analysts, the process
    operated was that each 'flagged comparison' would be considered by  two
    analysts separately.  Each analyst would then  form  an  opinion.   The
    purpose of the exercise was to establish  whether,  in  both  analysts'
    opinion, the samples constituted a "match", having been thus designated
    by the "biometric engine." Given the evidence by the respondent  it  is
    clear that the Home Office accepts the results provided by the ETS  and
    conduct no further investigations.

38. The respondent has the burden of proving the existence of  the  factors
    upon which reliance is placed  to  found  the  exercise  of  the  power
    conferred by paragraph 321A of the  Immigration  Rules.  The  stringent
    civil standard applicable in cases of fraud has been  achieved  by  the
    respondent's evidence: see RP (Proof of Forgery) Nigeria [2006] UK  AIT
    00086. It is argued that the evidence provided  by  the  respondent  is
    generic and in the absence of  individual  evidence  pertinent  to  the
    appellant, the Appellant's test  performance  cannot  be  shown  to  be
    fraudulent. I consider less than 2% error  rate  to  be  proof  by  the
    respondent by evidence on a balance of probabilities.

39. I have a duty to enquire, and determine, whether  there  is  sufficient
    evidence to justify the respondent's belief that appellant attempted to
    get further leave to remain in the United Kingdom through deception.  I
    have to consider the evidence against this specific appellant.  I  have
    conducted this enquiry on  the  evidence  and  the  onus  lies  on  the
    respondent to prove to the satisfaction of the court, on the balance of
    probabilities, the facts relied on by the respondent.

40. Even applying a standard at the higher end of the spectrum  of  balance
    of probability, on  the  evidence,  I  find  that  the  respondent  has
    established the precedent fact of the production  of  a  false  English
    test result. The burden therefore now shifts to the appellant  to  show
    that the respondent's decision to exercise her  power  under  paragraph
    321A is improper.

41. The appellant's case is that he  has  produced  a  valid  English  test
    result and that the respondent has not discharged her burden of  proof.
    There is no other  credible  evidence  provided  by  the  appellant  to
    challenge the respondent's case other than to set out the procedure  as
    to what happens at the test centre. Having this information  in  itself
    does not mean that the appellant took the test. He could have  acquired
    this information by any other means and would not have to take the test
    to know the procedure at the test centre.

42. Having considered all of the evidence in this case as a whole,  I  find
    that  the  appellant  fraudulently,  in  an  attempt  to  mislead   the
    respondent, provided his English-language test results which  she  knew
    to be obtained by fraud. I find that the respondent has discharged  her
    burden of proof. I find that the respondent  has  demonstrated  on  the
    requisite standard of proof that the appellant's  appeal  falls  to  be
    refused pursuant to paragraph 321A of the Immigration Rules.

43. I therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  allowing
    the appellant's appeal and  substitute  my  decision  and  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal.

DECISION

I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   allowing   the
appellant's appeal

I dismiss the appellant's appeal.


      Dated this 25th day of November 2015
Signed by

.............................................
Mrs S Chana
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Chana

