

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
           (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/37010/2014
                                                               IA/37011/2014
                                                               IA/37012/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |           Decision & Reasons       |
|On 14 March 2016                          |Promulgated                         |
|                                          |On 30 March 2016                    |
|                                          |                                    |
|                                          |                                    |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM

                                   Between

                      THE IMMIGRATION OFFICER, HEATHROW
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                        HETAL AJITKUMAR LUMBHANI (1)
                        DHYANI AJITKUMAR LUMBHANI (2)
                     AJIT KUMAR JAYANTILAL LUMBHANI (3)
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr H Patel, Solicitor


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. The respondents to this appeal are citizens of India. They are a  mother,
   her child and her husband respectively. The appellant is the Secretary of
   State for the Home Department, who has appealed with  the  permission  of
   the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal R Chowdury, allowing the respondents' appeals against  decisions
   of the appellant, dated 21 September 2014, to refuse them  entry  and  to
   cancel their existing leave. The appellant  considered  the  first  named
   respondent had obtained leave by deception. She  had  submitted  a  TOEIC
   language certificate with her application for leave as a Tier 1  Migrant.
   Evidence from ETS confirmed the certificate was false. Paragraph  321A(2)
   of the Immigration Rules, HC395 applied. The respondents appealed on  the
   basis that there had been no  deception  and  the  certificate  had  been
   validly earned. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal found  the  evidence
   relied on by the appellant in support of  the  allegation  was  "woefully
   inadequate" and allowed the appeals. Permission to appeal was refused  by
   the First-tier Tribunal but granted on a renewed application by the Upper
   Tribunal.


2. It is more convenient to refer to the parties as  they  were  before  the
   First-tier Tribunal. I shall therefore refer to the members of the family
   from now on as "the appellants"  and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  "the
   respondent".

3.  The  respondent's  application  to  adjourn  this  appeal  pending   the
   anticipated Presidential decision on  ETS  cases  was  refused  by  Upper
   Tribunal Judge Jordan. It was renewed by Ms Fijiwala.  She  said  grounds
   seeking permission to appeal engaged the question of whether the  Judge's
   assessment of the evidence was adequate. The Tribunal would benefit  from
   waiting for the impending Presidential decision.  Mr  Patel  opposed  the
   application.

4. Having considered the arguments I  refused  the  application.  The  first
   issue to be decided was whether  the  first-tier  Tribunal  decision  was
   vitiated by error of law and there was no reason I could not decide  that
   issue without waiting for the Presidential decision.


5. I was not asked and saw no reason to make an anonymity direction.


6. I heard argument on the question  of  whether  the  judge's  decision  is
   vitiated by material error of law.

7. Ms Fijiwala relied on the  grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal.  She
   relied on the point made in the grant of permission to  appeal  that  the
   Judge had only looked at the parts of the judgment of McCloskey  J  in  R
   (on the application of Gazi) v SSHD (ETS - judicial  review)  IJR  [2015]
   UKUT 00327 (IAC) which were critical of the generic evidence and she had,
   in particular, overlooked paragraph 35. The Judge had not made a full and
   balanced analysis of all the evidence.

8. Mr Patel made contrary submissions which I do not need to set  out  here.
   Having considered the matter, I find the Judge did not  make  a  material
   error of law such that her decision allowing the appeals should stand. My
   reasons are as follows.

9. The Upper Tribunal granted permission to appeal because it  was  arguable
   the First-tier Tribunal had erred by  overlooking  paragraph  35  of  the
   judgment of McCloskey J in R (on the application of Gazi) v SSHD  (ETS  -
   judicial review) IJR  [2015]  UKUT  00327  (IAC).    In  that  case,  the
   President said,

    "... the Respondent's  evidence  ...  was  sufficient  to  warrant  the
    assessment that the Applicant's decision had been procured by deception
    and, thus, provided an adequate foundation for the decision made ..."

10. However, those words are apt to be misconstrued if  read  in  isolation.
   Read in the context that the Upper Tribunal was  assessing  a  ground  of
   challenge in judicial review proceedings that the  Secretary  of  State's
   decision was vitiated by improper purpose in that she knew  or  ought  to
   have known that there was no or insufficient evidence that the  applicant
   had engaged in deception. All the President is saying in paragraph 35  is
   that the generic evidence consisting of the statements of Ms Collings and
   Mr Millington was sufficient to warrant an assessment  of  deception.  He
   was not saying that evidence would in  all  cases  prevail.  Indeed,  the
   ratio of the case is that the best forum for a challenge was  the  First-
   tier Tribunal because of its ability to investigate the facts. The  Judge
   did not therefore err in overlooking that particular passage.

11. A fair reading of the  decision  shows  the  Judge  considered  all  the
   evidence and made  a  thorough  assessment  of  it.  She  considered  the
   statements of Ms Collings and Mr Millington,as produced in the  statement
   of Mr Harold, and also took into account the President's comments on that
   sort of evidence in Gazi.  She  also  took  into  account  Dr  Harrison's
   report, which was also considered in Gazi. She noted the  respondent  had
   not provided  disclosure  of  the  voice  recordings  relied  on  despite
   requests being  made  by  the  appellants'  solicitors.  She  heard  oral
   evidence from the first appellant,  who  was  cross-examined.  The  Judge
   considered the fact the first appellant thought she had taken  the  TOEIC
   test in London whereas the college which gave the certificate appeared to
   be in Leicester. She did not regard this as significant  and  it  appears
   the appellant had taken the test twice. The  Judge  directed  herself  in
   terms of RP (Proof of forgery) Nigeria [2006] UKAIT 00086 and  found  the
   respondent's evidence was "woefully inadequate" and did not discharge the
   burden of establishing deception.  She  was  entitled  to  come  to  that
   conclusion and I see no error in her approach or assessment.

12. I find therefore that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  does  not
   contain a material error of law of the kind contended by the  respondent.
   Accordingly it shall stand and the respondent's appeal is dismissed.

NOTICE OF DECISION

     The First-tier Tribunal did not make a material error on  a  point  of
    law and its decision allowing the appeals under the  Immigration  Rules
    shall stand.


    No anonymity direction has been made.


                               Signed                 Date 14 March 2016


                               Judge Froom, sitting as a Deputy Judge of
                               the Upper Tribunal
