
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37521/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 September 2015                 |On 9 October 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between
                              MR JAMES KIYEMBA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Garrod of counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. In this appeal, the appellant appeals against a decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against  a  decision  taken  on  29
    August 2014 to refuse to issue a permanent residence card as  a  family
    member of a European Economic Area ('EEA') national.



Background Facts

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Uganda who was born on 12 November  1972.
    He applied for a permanent residence card as a family member of an  EEA
    national  (Katarzyna  Kowalczyk  Kiyemba  -  a  Polish   National)   in
    accordance  with  Regulation  15(1)(b)   of   the   Immigration   (EEA)
    Regulations 2006 ('the EEA Regulations').  That application was refused
    on the basis that the Secretary of  State  was  not  satisfied  on  the
    evidence provided that the appellant had demonstrated that the  Sponsor
    had been and continued to be  economically  active  in  the  UK  for  a
    continuous period of five years.

The Appeal

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  The  appellant  had
    asked for the appeal to be decided on the  papers  without  a  hearing.
    Judge Robson dismissed the appellant's appeal in a  decision  dated  20
    February 2015.  The First-tier Tribunal found that there  was  evidence
    of four years continuous employment from 6 April 2010. The judge  found
    that there was no evidence of a fifth year of employment.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  On  5
    May 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Levin granted permission to  appeal.
    Thus, the appeal came before me.

Summary of the Submissions

 5. The grounds of appeal assert  that  the  judge  imposed  too  narrow  a
    construction of how the appellant's wife ('the sponsor') could meet the
    criteria under Regulation 6 of the EEA Regulations. It was submitted by
    Mr Garrod that the relevant period can also cover 2014 - 2015 not  just
    up to 2014. The EEA Regulations require simply a period of 5  years  at
    any time up to the date of the hearing. The judge materially  erred  in
    law in paragraph 20 by finding that he had to consider whether a  fifth
    year of employment has been demonstrated. The judge imposed too high  a
    standard of proof. Regulation 6 of the EEA Regulations covers more than
    being a worker. It includes self-employment and work seekers. The judge
    accepted that the sponsor was in self-employment in 2008, at  paragraph
    8, and accepts the evidence that she was working between April  2010  -
    2014. On the balance of probabilities if she had proved four  years  of
    working and there was evidence that she had been in the UK  then  there
    was no reason why the judge could not have found that the  sponsor  was
    working during the remaining periods. There is  no  need  for  absolute
    proof. There is a requirement to take extraneous evidence into account.
    There is scope within the Regulations for interpretation  and  in  this
    case the appellant doesn't  have  to  provide  proof  there  are  other
    factors that can be taken into consideration.  The  judge  should  have
    considered  whether  it  was  probable  that  the   sponsor,   in   the
    circumstances, had been in the UK under one of the Regulation  6  heads
    for 5 years. The sponsor must have been in  the  UK  exercising  treaty
    rights prior to 2010 as the appellant was granted leave  on  1  January
    2009. Mr Garrod submitted that there was nothing to show that  she  had
    not been exercising treaty rights since 2008.

 6. Mr Garrod also submitted that under Regulation 3 it is clear  that  the
    sponsor is permitted to be outside of the UK for a period of 6  months.
    It follows from this, in his submission, that she has  been  exercising
    her treaty rights before 2010. It was not submitted  that  the  sponsor
    had in fact been outside of the UK but the effect of  Regulation  3  is
    that in either of the years at the beginning  or  end  of  the  4  year
    period she would be deemed to be exercising treaty rights for a  period
    of six months.

 7. Mr  Garrod  submitted  that  the  appellant's  case  was  supported  by
    Paragraphs 4 and 5 of the headnote  in  the  case  of  Idezuna  (EEA  -
    permanent  residence)  Nigeria  [2011]UKUT  00474  (IAC).  This  was  a
    surprisingly similar  case  in  terms  of  the  arguments  raised.  The
    approach in Idezuna should  have  been  followed  and  if  it  had  the
    decision would have read significantly differently.

 8. Mr Avery submitted that the grounds were merely a disagreement with the
    findings of the judge. The judge was confined to the documents in front
    of him. The lack of evidence was flagged up in the reasons for  refusal
    letter. The appellant asked for the appeal to be heard on  the  papers.
    If the sponsor has been exercising treaty rights in the UK there should
    be no reason why that cannot be demonstrated. It is speculation  as  to
    whether the sponsor was exercising treaty  rights  in  the  absence  of
    evidence.

 9. With regard to the Regulation 3 issue Mr Avery submitted that this  was
    not relevant as it was not being argued that the  sponsor  was  outside
    the UK. The problem is that we do not know what the  sponsor  has  been
    doing.

Discussion

10. Regulation 6 of the EEA Regulations  provides that a  qualified  person
    is:

         6. (1) In these Regulations, "qualified person" means a person  who
         is an EEA national and in the United Kingdom as-

           (a) a jobseeker;

           (b) a worker;

           (c) a self-employed person;

           (d) a self-sufficient person; or

           (e) a student.

11. I accept Mr Garrod's submission that employment is only one of a number
    of ways that an EEA national can be considered to be exercising  treaty
    rights. The First-tier Tribunal judge was therefore incorrect  to  find
    that he had to consider whether or not a fifth year of  employment  had
    been demonstrated (paragraph 20). That is an error of law,  however  it
    is not a material error for the reasons set out below.

12. What the appellant was required to demonstrate was that  his  wife  had
    exercised treaty rights for a continuous period of five  years  in  the
    UK, had resided here for a continuous period of five years and that the
    appellant had lived with his wife in the  UK  throughout  that  period.
    Regulation 15, insofar as is relevant, provides:

         Permanent right of residence


         15. (1) The following persons shall acquire the right to reside  in
         the United Kingdom permanently-

            (a) an EEA national who has resided in the United Kingdom in
            accordance with these Regulations for a continuous period of
            five years;

            (b)a family member of an EEA national who is not himself an EEA
            national but who has resided in the United Kingdom with the EEA
            national in accordance with these Regulations for a continuous
            period of five years;

13. The 5 year continuous period need  not  be  immediately  prior  to  the
    application for a permanent  residence  card  and  the  period  can  be
    considered up to the date of the hearing of the appeal.

14. In this case there is no evidence of  a  five  year  continuous  period
    where it can be demonstrated that the appellant's wife was a  qualified
    person. The evidence is:

           . September 2008 HMRC  confirmed  that  the  sponsor  was  self-
             employed in the UK from February 2008

           . Bank statements showing payments from Riverwoods  on  27/6/08,
             29/8/08 and 22/12/08

           . One Bank statement for the period January 2009 - February 2009
             which demonstrate that the sponsor was in the UK  during  that
             period but no evidence of receiving any income from employment
             or self-employment

15. There is then a  gap  until  2010.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  accepted
    evidence covering the period April 2010 -  April  2014  primarily  from
    self-completed tax returns. I do not go behind that finding  except  to
    record in passing that in the absence of other corroborating evidence I
    would not have accepted such  self-completed  returns  as  evidence  of
    working either as employed or self-employed.

16. There is evidence post April 2014 in  the  form  of  a  bank  statement
    covering the period May - June 2014. I am not entirely clear  what  the
    payments into the bank account during this period represent - there are
    'bill payments' from M Wronski and Z Stezalska. However,  the  lack  of
    clarity concerning these payments is immaterial as  that  is  the  only
    evidence post the accepted four year period. I asked Mr  Garrod  if  he
    could point me to any evidence  of  employment/self-employment  in  the
    period April 2014 - February 2015 (the date of the hearing).  He  could
    not take me to any such evidence.

17. The  appellant  cannot  demonstrate  from  the  evidence  a  five  year
    continuous period of employment or self-employment as the  evidence  at
    its highest demonstrates employment/self-employment from February  2008
    - December 2008 with a gap then of 16 months to April 2010. Even if the
    bank statement of January 2009 - February 2009 were taken into  account
    together with the issue of a residence card to the appellant in January
    2009 as evidence of exercise of treaty rights  by  the  sponsor,  there
    remains a gap of 14 months from February 2009 - April 2010.

18.  It was not submitted that the sponsor had been a work seeker, was self-
    sufficient or was a student during these periods.  In  the  appellant's
    EEA4 Permanent Residence card  application  he  ticked  the  box  self-
    employment recording 3/2/08 - to present in the section on  details  of
    the exercise of treaty rights that he relied on. In that section  there
    are other options, namely,  seeking  work,  economic  sell-sufficiency,
    study, permanent incapacity, temporarily incapacitated  and  unemployed
    and undertaking training. None of these boxes were ticked.

19. Mr Garrod submitted that  strict  proof  was  not  necessary  and  that
    extraneous factors could be taken into account. It is for the appellant
    to demonstrate that he meets the requirements of the Regulations.  That
    will require evidence of some description to be produced and whilst the
    judge can take any relevant factors into consideration this was a  case
    that the appellant requested be considered on the papers. The Secretary
    of State had already indicated that there was insufficient evidence  in
    the reasons for refusal letter.

20. Mr Garrod also submitted, in effect, that only four years needs  to  be
    demonstrated as a six month period either side of a  four  year  period
    deems the sponsor to have been exercising treaty rights  in  accordance
    with Regulation 3 of the EEA Regulations.  I  reject  that  submission.
    There was no evidence that the sponsor had in fact been outside the  UK
    during the relevant period. Regulation 3 is not a deeming provision  in
    the manner suggested by Mr Garrod. It merely enables an EEA national to
    continue to build up a continuous period of  residence  notwithstanding
    periods in which they are outside the UK for specified periods  in  any
    one year.

21. Although the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  made  an  error  of  law  by
    considering that he had to find a further year of employment  this  was
    not material. The judge would  inevitably  have  arrived  at  the  same
    conclusion, namely that the appellant has not demonstrated a five  year
    continuous period where the sponsor was exercising treaty rights.

22. Mr Garrod relied on the case of Idezuna. This case does not assist  the
    appellant. In Idezuna the appellant had established that his  wife  had
    exercised treaty rights for a five year continuous period. The error in
    relation to this issue was that the First-tier Tribunal had been  wrong
    to focus exclusively on the appellant's circumstances in the five years
    immediately preceding his divorce.

23. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously. Having
    considered all the circumstances and evidence  I  do  not  consider  it
    necessary to make an anonymity direction.

Decision

24. There was no error of law such that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is set aside.


Signed   P M Ramshaw   Date 9 October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw
