
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Ia/37767/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 11 February 2016                    |On 10 March 2016                    |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER

                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            kimbrad kyron skerrit

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:          Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Naik, Counsel, instructed by the Bar Pro-Bono
Unit


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This appeal is not subject to an  anonymity  order  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.  Neither  party
    has invited me to make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI  2008/2698)  and  I
    have not done so.

 2. The appellant (hereafter the Secretary of State)  appeals  against  the
    decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Martins)  allowing  the
    respondent's appeal against a decision taken on 10  September  2014  to
    refuse to issue an EEA residence card as the spouse  of  Gilda  Shaunay
    Janine Agostini, a citizen of Italy exercising treaty rights in the  UK
    ("the EEA sponsor").

Introduction

 3. The respondent is a citizen of Trinidad and Tobago born in 1985. He was
    previously granted leave to remain until 31  May  2006  but  thereafter
    failed to obtain indefinite leave to remain. By 27 August 2008  he  had
    accumulated 13 criminal convictions and had overstayed for  two  years.
    He was notified of a decision to make a deportation order  against  him
    and  unsuccessfully  appealed  that  decision.  He  was  appeal  rights
    exhausted by 25 November 2008 and the deportation order was signed  and
    served on the respondent by 29 December 2008. There  were  attempts  to
    obtain an emergency travel document in December 2008 and a  request  to
    set removal directions in March 2009. Removal was scheduled for 9 April
    2009 but was  then  deferred.  Further  representations  were  made  in
    relation  to  the  deportation  order  on  1  April  2009   but   those
    representations were  rejected  on  8  April  2009.  Removal  was  then
    scheduled for 12 May 2009 but a judicial review was lodged  on  14  May
    2009. The respondent was released on bail on 6 July 2009.

 4. The respondent applied for a certificate of approval to marry  the  EEA
    sponsor on 30 September 2009 and that was  issued  on  29  March  2010.
    However, the respondent was then arrested for firearms offences  on  21
    April 2010 and was subsequently sentenced to 6 years imprisonment on  9
    September 2011. By then he had already served 18 months on  remand.  He
    was released in December 2013 and married the EEA sponsor in June 2014.



 5. On 1 May 2013, the Secretary of  State  again  refused  to  revoke  the
    deportation order. The respondent appealed that decision  and  attended
    an oral hearing at Hatton Cross on 13 November  2014.  On  14  November
    2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Adio found that the Secretary  of  State
    had failed to consider whether the decision to  refuse  to  revoke  the
    deportation order was taken on public policy, public security or public
    health in accordance  with  regulation  21  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2006 or whether to  exercise  discretion  under  regulation
    17(4). The decision was therefore not in accordance with the law.

 6. The respondent applied for an EEA residence card as a spouse on 26 June
    2014. The Secretary of State accepted the respondent's identity and the
    relationship with the EEA sponsor but concluded that  the  respondent's
    criminality demonstrated  very  serious  behaviour  showing  a  blatant
    disregard for the laws of the UK. Firearms offences  were  particularly
    serious  and  the  respondent's  extensive  criminal  record  showed  a
    propensity to re-offend. That highlighted the potential danger that the
    respondent posed to the society of the UK. He  committed  the  offences
    whilst  on  bail  and  appealing  a  previous  deportation  order.  His
    continued presence in the UK was considered to pose a genuine,  present
    and  sufficiently  serious  threat  to  the  fundamental  interests  of
    society.

The Appeal

 7. The respondent appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an oral
    hearing at Richmond on 19 March 2015. He was represented  by  Ms  Naik.
    The First-tier Tribunal found that the respondent had committed serious
    offences between the ages of 20 and 26. In  2012  he  was  assessed  as
    being of medium risk to the public. However, the last  prison  sentence
    (during which the respondent was gravely ill with a  rare  disease  and
    nearly lost his life) was a trigger for a process of change. All  those
    with whom the respondent interacted in prison, his church,  his  family
    and in society generally testified to a real change in  the  respondent
    who was now determined to be a good husband  and  father  to  his  twin
    daughters now aged 8. He had been in the UK since the age  of  14.  His
    children were British citizens. He did not represent a genuine, present
    and  sufficiently  serious  threat  to  the  fundamental  interests  of
    society.  The  decision   not   to   issue   a   residence   card   was
    disproportionate.

 8. In relation to Article 8, the judge found that  the  respondent  had  a
    rare disease which was life-threatening and could flare up again.  That
    had led to both hips being replaced. If the  illness  flared  up  again
    then he would need expert highly specialist care. The waiting  list  in
    Trinidad and Tobago was 2-3 years. His doctor was of the  opinion  that
    he needed to remain in the UK or a country with  an  equivalent  health
    service. The children were British and could not be expected to  go  to
    live in Trinidad and Tobago. There was an  independent  social  workers
    report which stated that the attachment of the twins  to  their  father
    should not be disrupted. The decision was disproportionate in  relation
    to regulation 21(6) of the 2006 Regulations.

 9. The judge allowed the appeal under the 2006 Regulations and  Article  8
    of ECHR.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

10. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law  by
    failing to adequately engage with the provisions  of  regulation  21(5)
    and had failed to give adequate reasons  for  allowing  the  appeal  on
    proportionality grounds.

11. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge White  on
    28 October 2015 on the basis that it was arguable that the judge  erred
    in law by allowing the appeal under Article 8, considering  Amirteymour
    and others (EEA appeals, human rights) [2015]  UKUT  466.  No  arguable
    error of law arose in relation to the 2006 Regulations.

12. Thus, the appeal came before me



Discussion

13. Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted that the permission to  appeal  was  not
    expressly limited and therefore all  grounds  were  arguable.  Ms  Naik
    submitted that there was only one ground in the grounds of  appeal  and
    the  Article  8  appeal  was  technically  not  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. The error was not material and no permission  to  appeal  was
    granted under the 2006 Regulations. I have considered  Ferrer  (limited
    appeal grounds, Alvi) [2012] UKUT 00304 (IAC). I am satisfied that  the
    grant of permission does not make it abundantly clear  that  permission
    was granted only in respect of Article 8 and no  notice  was  sent  out
    informing the Secretary of  State  of  her  right  to  make  a  further
    application to the Upper Tribunal on grounds that had been  refused  by
    the First-tier Tribunal. This was not a limited grant of permission and
    all grounds were arguable.

14. Ms Brocklesby-Weller then agreed that the judge had no jurisdiction  to
    consider Article 8.  The  judge  had  referred  to  the  recent  prison
    sentence  but  there  was  no  consideration  of  the  fact  that   the
    stabilising factors had historically been present but had not prevented
    re-offending in the past.  The  respondent  was  someone  who  has  had
    disregard for the laws of the UK.  The  judge  did  not  give  adequate
    reasons  for  finding  that  family  members  would   prevent   further
    offending. The OASYS report refers to a medium risk of re-offending and
    it was unclear how recent activities would be  a  preventative  factor.
    The proportionality assessment was parasitic on the fact finding. There
    was nothing new in the fact finding in relation to proportionality.

15. Ms Naik relied upon her  skeleton  arguments  and  submitted  that  the
    Secretary of State had glazed over the fact finding. The facts were set
    out at paragraphs 21-96 of the decision. The last prison  sentence  was
    the trigger for change. There was a near death experience in prison and
    the respondent is now a changed man. The decision was based upon  sound
    evidence and the appeal ground cannot be made out. The  proportionality
    findings were relevant to regulation 21(5). The decision should stand.

16. I find that the judge has provided a comprehensive account of the facts
    and submissions which are fully set out  at  paragraphs  25-96  of  the
    decision. The reasons for the decision under the 2006  Regulations  are
    clearly set out  at  paragraphs  100-114  of  the  decision.  They  are
    summarised at paragraphs  7-8  above.  I  find  that  the  reasons  are
    adequate. The judge resolved all relevant matters in the  evidence  and
    it is clear from the decision why  the  Secretary  of  State  lost  the
    appeal. The Secretary of State has not identified any legal  ground  as
    to why the findings and decision were not properly open to  the  judge.
    The fact that other judges might have reached a different conclusion is
    not sufficient. I  find  that  the  ground  in  relation  to  the  2006
    Regulations lacks merit and is no more than a disagreement with the key
    findings of the judge.

17. I have also considered SSHD v Jacek Straszewski [2015]  EWCA  Civ  1245
    and I am satisfied that the judge followed the approach set out by  the
    Court of Appeal in that case in relation to consideration of regulation
    21. The general proposition is that great importance is to be  attached
    to the right of free movement which can  be  interfered  with  only  in
    cases where the offender represents a serious threat to some aspect  of
    public policy or public security. Save in exceptional cases, that is to
    be determined solely by reference  to  the  conduct  of  the  offender.
    General considerations of deterrence and public revulsion normally have
    no part to play in  the  matter.  In  those  respects,  the  principles
    governing the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  in  general  differ
    significantly from those governing EEA nationals. There is  nothing  in
    the authorities to suggest  that  the  judge's  approach  to  the  2006
    Regulations was wrong in law.

18. The respondent has had the benefit of the strong support of his  family
    and witnesses, many of whom also attended  the  hearing  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal. The respondent will be aware that any further offending  will
    wholly change the factual matrix of this case and is likely to make the
    continued presence of the respondent in the UK completely untenable.

19. Both parties accepted that the  judge  erred  in  law  by  additionally
    allowing the appeal under Article 8 ECHR. The facts of this appeal  are
    different from most residence card appeals because there is  an  extant
    deportation order against the respondent. However, deportation was  not
    before the judge and First-tier Judge Adio had already found  that  the
    refusal to revoke the deportation order was not in accordance with  the
    law. Amirteymour was cited with approval by the Court of Appeal  in  TY
    (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 1233. I  therefore  agree  that  the
    judge erred at  paragraphs  116-117  of  the  decision  by  considering
    Article 8 on a standalone basis.

20. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  allow  the  respondent's
    appeal under Article 8 ECHR involved the making of an error of law  and
    that decision cannot stand.

Decision

21. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    relation to Article 8 ECHR. The decision to allow the appeal under  the
    2006 Regulations stands. The  appeal  of  the  Secretary  of  State  in
    relation to the 2006 Regulations is dismissed.

22. The Secretary of State will now make a further decision in relation  to
    revocation of the deportation order.


Signed   [pic]                      Date 1 March 2016


Judge Archer

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
