
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/37528/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22nd September 2015               |On 21st October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                             JASPREET SINGH GILL
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms M. Chagger, Counsel instructed by French &
Company
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appeal

 1. This is an appeal against the decision promulgated on 5th January  2015
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Baldwin who refused the Appellant's appeal
    against the decision of the Respondent  dated  3rd  September  2014  to
    refuse the appellant's application for leave to  remain  on  Article  8
    grounds.

 2. Judge Baldwin dismissed the appeal on the basis  that,  although  Judge
    Baldwin was not satisfied that  the  Respondent  had  proved  that  the
    Appellant's English language Certificate was not genuine, Judge Baldwin
    found that the Cambridge Regional college and  ICICI  Bank  letter  and
    bank statement had been shown to not be genuine.  Judge Baldwin went on
    to find that 'there were no exceptional circumstances in this case  and
    under Article 8 outside the Rules'.

 3. Permission to appeal on error of law  grounds  was  granted  by  Deputy
    Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman on 20th May 2015.  This was on  the  basis
    that it was arguable that for the reasons set out  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal the Judge erred materially in law.  The grounds of appeal are in
    essence: 1. That the Judge erred  in relation to the issue of the false
    documentation; having found that the respondent  had  failed  to  prove
    that the English test certificate submitted with  the  application  was
    not genuine, the judge was incorrect in his application of  the  forged
    Cambridge Regional College and ICICI bank documents to this application
    as the Suitability requirements indicate including at S-LTR.2.2:

         'Whether to the applicant's knowledge-

         (a) false  information,  representations  or  documents  have  been
         submitted  in  relation  to  the   application   (including   false
         information submitted to any person to obtain a  document  used  in
         support of the application), or

         (b) there has been a failure to disclose material facts in relation
         to the application.'

 4. It was the Appellant's case that as the Cambridge Regional College  and
    ICICI Bank documents were not submitted in relation to this application
    (but to a previous Tier 4 application and thus did not fall foul of  S-
    LTR2.2,  the  Judge  should  have  disregarded  this  aspect   of   the
    Respondent's refusal.

 5. Ground 2 asserted that the Appellant can meet the financial  aspect  of
    the Immigration Rules and the First-tier Tribunal failed to have regard
    to this aspect of Appendix FM (considering only the exception EX.1) and
    therefore erred in law.

Ground 2

 6. Mr Clarke conceded that if the Appellant succeeded under Ground 1, then
    Ground 2 falls away.  In addition Ground  2  also  falls  away  if  the
    appeal does not succeed on Ground 1 as Ground 2,  in  relation  to  the
    lack of consideration of the financial requirements of Appendix FM, can
    only be considered if the  Appellant  is  found  to  meet  all  of  the
    suitability criteria.

Ground 1

 7. In relation to Ground 1 Ms Chagger submitted that having found that the
    burden of proof was not discharged by the Respondent in relation to the
    English language test certificate, it  was  clearly  incorrect  of  the
    Judge to take into account the other forged documents as they  did  not
    relate to this application.  Therefore she submitted that the Appellant
    met all the suitability requirements.

 8. Mr Clarke referred me to the discretion exercised under S-LTR.2.2.   Mr
    Clarke relied on the Judge's findings at paragraph 23  where  he  found
    that the documents submitted with the previous application  were  found
    to be not genuine and this has not been disputed by the Appellant.   Mr
    Clarke referred me to the Respondent's  bundle  before  the  First-tier
    judge and in particular the application form completed by the Appellant
    (at Q33 of the bundle).  Question 10.10 of the application form asks:

         '10.10 Have you or any dependants who are applying  with  you  ever
         engaged in any other activities which might indicate that  you  may
         not be considered to be persons of good character?'

 9. The Appellant answered 'No' to this question.  It was Mr Clarke's  case
    that this goes to the question of  materiality.   The  judge  had  also
    clearly found the Appellant's claim to have not been aware  that  these
    two documents were not genuine to be 'not credible'.  The judge went on
    to find at paragraph 23 that:

         'The deception he has been proved to have employed  reflects  badly
         on his credibility generally and causes me to find it unlikely that
         his claim, to have been unaware of his July 2013 Refusal of Student
         leave until September 2014, is genuine.'

10. Although therefore the judge makes no specific  reference  to  question
    10.10 of the application in his determination it is clear that  he  was
    aware that  the  Appellant  had  engaged  in  activities  which  'might
    indicate that  you  may  not  be  considered  to  be  persons  of  good
    character'.  It was Mr Clarke's case that it was open to the  judge  to
    exercise the discretion,  in  relation  to  the  applicability  of  the
    suitability criteria at S-LTR.2.2 of Appendix FM, in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's failure at  question  10.10  of  the  application  form  to
    disclose the issue of the forged documents in respect of  the  previous
    application.

11. Ms Chagger was of the view that it is unclear at  question  10.10  what
    the Secretary of State is looking for and speculated that it might be a
    criminal conviction.  However that is incorrect as Question 10.1 of the
    application form specifically  asks  whether  the  application  or  any
    dependants have been convicted of any criminal offence in the UK or any
    other country and question 10.5 deals with  any  charges  for  criminal
    offences not yet tried.  The questions  asked  at  section  10  of  the
    application form are sufficiently wide-ranging for  Question  10.10  to
    encompass the Appellant's activity in relying on forged documents in  a
    previous application.

12. It was Mr Clarke's submission in the alternative if there was an  error
    of law in the judge's consideration of this issue,  then  he  submitted
    that any remaking should involve an exercise of that discretion  and  a
    dismissal of the Appellant's appeal on the grounds of  suitability  due
    to his withholding of the  information  in  relation  to  the  previous
    forgeries in his application form.

13. Although the judge did, in my findings, make clear findings in relation
    to the forged documentation (submitted with the  previous  application)
    and the Appellant's lack of credibility, it cannot  be  said  that  the
    judge took this into consideration  specifically  in  relation  to  the
    suitability requirements of Appendix FM as  the  judge  relied  on  the
    respondent's bundle including the refusal letter which relied  only  on
    the English language test in considering suitability.  I  am  satisfied
    that in so far as the  judge  failed  to  specifically  deal  with  the
    requirements of S-LTR.2.2, and the fact that the English language  test
    was not proved to be false meant that S-LTR.2.2(a)  could  not  be  met
    with reference to the previously forged documents, the judge fell  into
    material error.  I therefore set aside the judge's findings in relation
    to S-LTR.2.2.

14. However, I preserve all of the judge's remaining findings including  in
    relation to the forged documents in respect of the previous application
    and the findings in relation to the Appellant's lack of credibility.

15. I remake the decision and relying on the judge's finding  of  fact  (as
    noted above these credibility findings were not challenged) I find that
    the Appellant does not fall foul of S-LTR.2.2(a)  in  relation  to  the
    document submitted with the application, the English language test,  as
    this has not been proved to be not genuine.

16. However relying on those  findings  of  fact  and  on  credibility,  in
    relation to the Appellant's failure to disclose in his application,  at
    Question 10.10, that he had previously submitted forged documents  with
    an earlier application, I am satisfied that S-LTR.2.2(a) applies.  This
    is     because     the     Appellant      has      submitted      false
    information/representations in his application  in  answering  'no'  to
    Question 10.10.  Further and in the alternative, S-LTR.2.2(b)  applies,
    as there has been a failure to disclose material facts in  relation  to
    the application, in failing  to  disclose  the  information  about  the
    earlier forged documents.

17. As the Appellant's appeal fails on suitability grounds I need not go on
    to consider the financial  requirements  of  Appendix  FM.   I  further
    preserve the judge's findings (which  again  were  not  challenged)  in
    relation to Article 8 both within and outside of the Immigration Rules.

Notice of Decision

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law.   I
    remake the decision dismissing the Appellant's appeal.

Anonymity

19. No anonymity direction was sought or made either before the  First-tier
    Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal.


Signed   Date: 29 September 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

    TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date: 29 September 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
