
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
IA/37412/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 9 May 2016                            |On 20 May 2016                      |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

                                 DAVID ESSI
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Adjarho, solicitor of Chancery CS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, of the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

   1. The Appellant is a Nigerian citizen born  on  7  August  1979.   On  9
      September 2014 the Respondent refused his application for a  residence
      card by reason of his marriage on 29 November 2013 to Ludmila  Eugenia
      Fermina, a Dutch national said to be exercising Treaty rights  in  the
      United Kingdom under Regulation 7 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations
      2006 as amended (the EEA Regs). No removal direction was made.

   2. By a decision promulgated on 30 December 2014 Judge of the  First-tier
      Tribunal Jerromes allowed the  appeal  under  the  EEA  Regs.   On  11
      February 2015 Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  McDade  granted  the
      Respondent permission to appeal and on  17  April  2015  Deputy  Upper
      Tribunal Judge Juss found that there was a material error  of  law  in
      the decision of Judge Jerromes and remitted  the  appeal  for  hearing
      afresh in the First-tier Tribunal.

   3. By a decision promulgated on 29 September 2015 Judge of the First-tier
      Tribunal Parkes dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  on  the  basis  of
      unexplained inconsistencies in material matters in the evidence  given
      by each of the Appellant and his wife.

   4. The Appellant again sought permission to appeal and on  7  March  2016
      Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Reid refused  permission  to  appeal.
      The Appellant renewed his application to the Upper Tribunal and  on  6
      April 2016 Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy  granted  permission  on  the
      basis that it was arguable that Judge Parkes  had  placed  too  low  a
      standard of proof on the Respondent and that, on the  evidence  before
      the First-tier Tribunal Judge he should have found that the Respondent
      had not discharged the burden of proof.

Development Subsequent  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  Second  Substantive
Decision

   5. The Court of Appeal handed down judgments on 26 November 2015 in  Agho
      v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ.1198 and on 15 January  2016  in  Rosa  v  SSHD
      [2016] EWCA Civ. 14 in which the Court affirmed the  jurisprudence  in
      Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage of convenience) Greece  [2012]  UKUT
      38 (IAC).

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

   6. The Appellant and his wife attended the  hearing.   She  produced  her
      passport to show she was born on 4 March 1968 in Curacao.  I explained
      the purpose  of  the  hearing  and  procedure  to  be  followed.   The
      Appellant confirmed his present address.

Submissions for the Appellant

   7. Mr Adjarho handed up the  Court  of  Appeal's  judgment  in  Agho  and
      referred to in Rosa.   He  submitted  Judge  Parkes  had  mis-directed
      himself at paragraph 2 of his decision as to the burden of proof.  The
      Respondent had not made  any  visit  to  the  Appellant  to  ascertain
      whether he was living with his wife.  The Appellant had failed on  two
      separate occasions to attend for interview by the Respondent.  On  the
      date of the first interview he had been ill and on  the  date  of  the
      second he with his  wife  had  missed  their  train.   Eventually,  Mr
      Adjarho handed up a copy of internet train bookings for the  date  and
      to the city where the place appointed for their  second  interview  is
      situated.

   8. He submitted that notwithstanding the provisions of Regs.20B(4)-(6) of
      the EEA Regs which state:-

         (4) If,  without  good  reason,  A  or  B  failed  to  provide  the
         additional information requested or, on  at  least  two  occasions,
         failed to attend an interview if so invited, the SSHD may draw  any
         factual inferences about A's entitlement to a right  to  reside  as
         appear appropriate in the circumstances.

         (5) The SSHD may decide following an inference under paragraph  (4)
         that A does not have a right to reside.

         (6) But the SSHD must not decide that A does not have or ceases  to
         have a right to reside on the sole basis that A  failed  to  comply
         with this regulation.

    Regs.20(B)(4)-(6) did not provide for a burden of proof different  from
    that described in Papajorgji and approved in Agho and Rosa. Further, Mr
    Adjarho submitted the Judge had  not  addressed  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant's  marriage  certificate.  I  find  little  weight  in   this
    submission because it would not appear to take into account that for  a
    marriage to be a marriage of convenience there needed to be a marriage;
    invariably evidenced by a document, generally a marriage certificate.

Submissions for the Respondent

   9. Mr Melvin referred to the Judge's findings at paragraph  6ff.  of  his
      decision.  The Judge had clearly placed the burden  of  proof  on  the
      Secretary of State and the Respondent and taken the correct  approach.
      He had considered individual  aspects  of  the  evidence  before  him.
      Looked at in the round and as a whole the decision  did  not  disclose
      any material mis-direction in law.

Response for the Appellant

  10. Mr Adjarho reminded me that he had attended  the  hearing  before  the
      First-tier Judge and the Appellant had stated where his  wife  worked.
      The identity of the restaurant, KFC  or  McDonald's,  near  which  the
      Appellant had proposed to his wife was not material.   The  burden  of
      proof remained on the Respondent.  The Judge had not dismissed all the
      evidence for the Appellant. He  had  found  in  the  evidence  of  the
      Appellant and his wife that although there were differences there were
      also consistencies.  He  produced  photographs  from  the  Appellant's
      wedding.  He referred generically to paragraph 13 of the  judgment  in
      Agho which states:-

         Thus far, the UT was concerned with the approach to be followed  by
         the ECO. At paras. 33-38 it goes on to discuss the burden of  proof
         in proceedings in the Tribunals. It was concerned about a  possible
         reading of an earlier decision  -  IS  (Marriages  of  Convenience)
         Serbia [2008] UKAIT 31 - to the  effect  that   "once  evidence  of
         reasonable suspicion has been raised, there is a  legal  burden  on
         the applicant to demonstrate that it is more probable than not  the
         marriage is not one of convenience" (see para.  33).  It  expressed
         considerable reservations about such an approach, and  although  it
         said that the issue did not fall for decision it went on at  paras.
         34-37 to explain why it was strongly inclined to  believe  that  it
         was wrong in principle. Mr Gullick took no issue with the reasoning
         in those paragraphs, but it is fair to  say  that  the  grounds  of
         appeal did not turn on the issue of the burden of proof and it does
         not fall for decision before us any more than it did before the  UT
         in Papajorgji.  In  those  circumstances  I  will  not  attempt  to
         summarise the passage in detail. What it comes down to is that as a
         matter of principle a spouse establishes a prima facie case that he
         or she is a family member of  an  EEA  national  by  providing  the
         marriage certificate and the  spouse's  passport;  that  the  legal
         burden is on the Secretary of State to show that any marriage  thus
         proved is a marriage of convenience; and that that  burden  is  not
         discharged merely by showing "reasonable suspicion". Of  course  in
         the usual way the evidential burden may shift to the  applicant  by
         proof of facts which justify the inference that the marriage is not
         genuine, and the facts giving rise to the inference may  include  a
         failure  to  answer  a  request  for  documentary  proof   of   the
         genuineness of the marriage where grounds for suspicion  have  been
         raised. Although, as I say, the point was  not  argued  before  us,
         that approach seems to  me  to  be  correct  -  as  does  the  UT's
         statement that the standard of proof must be the civil standard, as
         explained by the House of Lords in Re B (Children) [2008] UKHL  35,
         [2009] 1 AC 11.

    In the light of this, he concluded the decision should be set aside and
    the appeal allowed.

Findings and Consideration

  11. Notwithstanding paragraph  2  of  the  Judge's  decision,  I  find  he
      properly directed himself as to the  relevant  law  and  the  relevant
      burden of proof at paragraphs 4 and 11 of his decision.  In the course
      of his submissions Mr Adjarho accepted the implied  criticism  of  his
      firm in paragraph 6 of the Judge's decision and in the preparation  of
      the statements filed for each of the Appellant and his wife.

  12. It  is  clear  the  Judge  found  that  some  evidence  supported  the
      Appellant's claim and some  evidence  did  not.  He  referred  to  and
      identified some inconsistencies in paragraph 12 of his decision but he
      did not similarly address any one particular consistency  and  in  his
      assessment at the end of paragraph 13 of  his  decision  he  concluded
      that the differences identified in paragraph 12 were  sufficient  when
      set against the consistencies generically referred to in paragraph  13
      to support the conclusion  that  the  Respondent  had  discharged  the
      burden of proof.

  13. Having regard in particular to the judgments in Agho  and  Rosa  which
      explained the extent of the burden of proof on the Respondent in cases
      of marriages of convenience, I have come to the  conclusion  that  the
      Judge erred in law because he did not address specific  parts  of  the
      evidence in sufficient detail to amount to sustainable reasons for his
      conclusions adverse to the Appellant who had given explanations why he
      and his wife did not attend on at least two occasions for interview by
      the Respondent. These  needed  to  be  expressly  addressed.   I  find
      looking at the matter in the round that the Judge who did not have the
      benefit of the jurisprudence in Agho and Rosa explaining the  relevant
      law and that the determination in IS (marriages of convenience) Serbia
      [2018] UKAIT 00031 was not to be followed made a material error of law
      his application of the burden  of  proof  to  the  assessment  of  the
      evidence before him.

14.  It follows that his decision should  be  set  aside  in  its  entirety.
      Having regard to the substance of the  appeal  which  relates  to  the
      factual matrix of the Appellant's marriage and that  it  was  accepted
      for the Appellant that  the  evidence  previously  submitted  for  the
      Appellant was not all  that  it  could  or  should  have  been,  I  am
      satisfied it is appropriate for the matter to be heard afresh  in  its
      entirety before a Judge other than Judges Jerromes or Parkes.



Anonymity

  15.   There was no request for an anonymity order  and  having  considered
      the appeal I find none is warranted.



SUMMARY OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and is set aside in its entirety.


    The matter is to be heard afresh.


    No anonymity order is made.

Signed/Official Crest                                          Date  19.  v.
2016




Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
