
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37009/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                          |    Decision & Reasons         |
|                                             |Promulgated                    |
|On 3rd November 2015                         |    On 4th January 2016        |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD

                                   Between

                            mrs Tanzeela Shazadi
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Holt - Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison - Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by Mrs Tanzeela Shazadi, a citizen of  Pakistan  born
    10th January 1989.  She appeals against the decision of the  Respondent
    made on 3rd September 2014 to refuse  further  leave  to  remain  as  a
    spouse and to remove her from the United Kingdom.

 2. The Appellant appealed against that decision and her appeal was allowed
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Farrelly in December 2014.  He allowed  it
    on  Article  8  grounds.   The  Secretary  of  State  had  refused  her
    application because she was not satisfied that the  Appellant  met  the
    English  language  requirements  set  out  in  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Permission to appeal was sought by the Respondent and granted.  On  6th
    August 2015 having heard submissions, I found that there was a material
    error of law in the determination of Judge Farrelly in that he had  not
    given sufficient reasons for allowing the appeal under Article 8 and  I
    set his decision aside with no preserved findings of fact.

 3. The appeal came before me for a rehearing on 3rd November 2015.  I  was
    advised that the Appellant  had  sat  a  test  at  Manchester  Learning
    Academy on 14th October 2015.  The test that she did was  not  a  valid
    one.  It seems to be likely that she was misled by Manchester  Learning
    Academy who set the test.

 4. Mr Holt then provided guidance notes from the Home Office  which  would
    indicate that where the Home Office has already accepted a test it  can
    accept a test that does not meet the current requirements.  The  issues
    are the validity date  and  the  provider.   Mr  Holt  said  that  this
    argument was not run before the First-tier Tribunal.  He noted that the
    Appellant has done three tests:

      i) An ETS test in Pakistan.  This test was not valid and  ETS  are  no
         longer on the approved list.

     ii) A test set by EMDQ which was not valid and so was not acceptable.

    iii) The test done in October 2015 which is apparently not valid either.

 5. Mr Harrison submitted that this is a very impressive argument.  He said
    it is a question of whether or not  discretion  was  exercised  by  the
    decision-maker.  He said that his view would be that the discretion was
    exercised because the decision-maker said that there  was  insufficient
    evidence that the relationship was subsisting and the English  language
    requirement issue  was  raised  as  an  ancillary  matter.   The  issue
    therefore would be whether the discretion was exercised  properly.   Mr
    Holt submitted that it is not clear  that  the  Home  Office  has  even
    purported to exercise its discretion.  Mr Holt said he would forward to
    me the current guidance.  The view of Mr Harrison was that there is  no
    bar to the Appellant making a further application.

 6. I did receive both the historic and the current  guidance  as  well  as
    that applicable at the date of the decision. The paragraph relied  upon
    states -

         'You may not need  to  provide  evidence  of  meeting  the  English
         Language Requirements if you have previously done so as part  of  a
         successful application for leave as a partner or parent, or if  you
         sat your approved English language test on or after 6th April 2015.



 7. The issue of this  discretionary  provision  had  not  previously  been
    raised. Mr Ahmed who represented the Appellant at the  hearing  on  6th
    August 2015 submitted  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  failed  to
    exercise her discretion but when I asked what discretion  he  meant  he
    said it was her general discretion under the Immigration Act 1971.

 8. There was nothing in the grounds  seeking  permission  challenging  the
    subsistence of the marriage. I accept that the marriage is  subsisting.
    It would arguably be perfectly reasonable for me to take the view  that
    the Appellant has again quite simply failed  to  provide  the  required
    English Language Certificate and so her appeal must  fail.  I  do  note
    however that once again there was a problem with the college. It  seems
    that the Appellant was misled. I also cannot ignore the fact  that  the
    Home  Office  have  published  guidance  which  appears  to  cover  the
    situation the Appellant finds herself in.  It  may  well  be  that  the
    Respondent will not exercise her discretion in favour of the  Appellant
    and will give sound reasons for doing so  but  the  fact  is  that  the
    Appellant did submit satisfactory evidence of her English ability  with
    a previous application  and  there  is  nothing  to  suggest  that  the
    Respondent did exercise her discretion. Indeed as I have  already  said
    the issue of discretion was raised at the previous hearing  before  me.
    The Respondent was represented  and  the  Presenting  Officer  did  not
    mention this specific guidance but appeared  to  agree  that  the  only
    discretion available was that under the 1971 Act.

NOTICE OF DECISION

In all the circumstances I allow the appeal to the extent that the  case  is
remitted to the Secretary  of  State  so  that  she  can  consider  properly
exercise her discretion in terms of the guidance referred to above.

Signed                              Date: 13th December 2015

N A Baird
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
