
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ia/37913/2013
                                                               ia/37914/2013
                                                               ia/37915/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 20 May 2014                                  |On 1 July 2014             |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

                             Shahidul Islam Khan
                            Janiya Sultana Jesmin
                              Jasmir Sami Khan
                       (anonymity direction Not mADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr T Bin Aziz of TSA Law
For the Respondent:    Mr G Jack of the Specialist Appeals Team

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Appellants

 1. The Appellants are husband (the Appellant), wife and their  minor  son,
    born in 2010.  They are all citizens of Bangladesh.  The husband is the
    lead Appellant, whose date of birth is given as 1 January 1978.

 2. On 7 October 2007 the Appellant  arrived  with  leave  to  enter  as  a
    student which was subsequently extended until 28 May 2011.  He was then
    granted further leave as a Tier 1 (Highly Skilled) Migrant, expiring on
    21 July 2013.  His wife arrived on 28 April  2009  with  leave  as  the
    spouse of a student which leave was subsequently extended and varied in
    line with that of the  Appellant.   On  20  July  2013,  in  time,  the
    Appellant applied for further leave outside the Immigration Rules  with
    his wife and son as his dependants.

The Decisions

 3. On 2 September 2013 the Respondent refused the applications and decided
    to remove the Appellants by way of directions under Section 47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality  Act  2006.   The  Respondent  gave
    reasons for the decision in letters of 2 September 2013 and 17  January
    2014. She noted the Appellant lived with his wife and child as a family
    unit, none of them were British citizens and  they  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.
     The Respondent then went on to  consider  276ADE  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and noted the  Appellant  did  not  meet  any  of  the  residence
    requirements of the Rules.  The  Respondent  separately  addressed  the
    position of the Appellant's wife and son  under  Paragraph  276ADE  and
    Appendix FM. She refused his application and those of his wife and  son
    as his dependants.

 4. On 16 September 2014 each of the Appellants  lodged  notice  of  appeal
    under Section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as
    amended.  The  grounds  refer  to  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  had
    completed a first degree in law and was in  the  process  of  finishing
    vocational training for the Bar and needed to re-sit some  modules  for
    which his college had declined to assign him a Certificate of  Approval
    for Studies. The Appellant had a strong private and family life in  the
    United Kingdom and took part  in  various  community  activities.   The
    grounds assert the Respondent had not considered the best interests  of
    their son and that the decision to refuse leave was disproportionate to
    the need to maintain proper immigration control.

The First-tier Tribunal's Determination

 5. By a determination promulgated on 14 February 2014 Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Beach dismissed the appeals of each Appellant  under  the
    Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.  The  Appellants  sought
    permission to appeal.  The grounds to a considerable extent repeat  the
    original grounds for appeal.  They go on to assert the Judge gave  only
    an incomplete consideration of their claims under Article 8 in that  at
    paragraph 24 of her determination the Judge had accepted the Appellants
    had established a private and family life but had not considered  fully
    their relationships with friends and family and the  private  lives  of
    the Appellant and his wife.

 6. On 3 April 2013 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Chambers  granted  the
    Appellants permission to appeal. The Respondent  filed  a  response  in
    accordance with Rule 24 of the Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as
    amended.  The response asserts the grounds  for  appeal  are  merely  a
    disagreement with the Judge and that her decision was proportionate  to
    the need to maintain immigration control and  was  sustainable  because
    the Appellant could continue his studies in Bangladesh and  seek  entry
    clearance to re-sit his  examinations,  as  mentioned  in  the  Judge's
    determination.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 7. The Appellant attended the hearing.  Mr Jack stated the  Appellant  had
    sat  two  examinations  in  April  and  had  a  single  written   paper
    outstanding which he would sit by 29 May.

 8. Mr Bin Aziz relied  on  the  grounds  for  appeal.   Mr  Jack  for  the
    Respondent submitted that the Judge's determination  was  detailed  and
    addressed all the relevant points.  The Judge had recited  or  referred
    to the recent jurisprudence on claims under Article 8 of  the  European
    Convention.  At paragraphs 27 and  28  of  her  determination  she  had
    addressed the essential issues raised in the appeal.   He  referred  to
    the determination in Azimi-Moayed [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC).  At  paragraph
    12 the Upper Tribunal had found that it was not likely there  would  be
    any welfare concerns for a child if the effect of a decision  was  that
    the child would continue to live with both his parents.

Consideration

 9. At the hearing I was shown a letter of 19 May 2014 from City Law School
    stating the Appellant had  been  permitted  to  convert  from  his  Bar
    vocational studies to pursue studies leading to an LLM degree.  I noted
    the proposed conversion to a Master's degree course was not before  the
    Judge.  Indeed, quite the  contrary  was  clear  from  the  Appellant's
    letter to the Respondent at page 53 of the Respondent's bundle.

10. The Judge made clear findings  about  the  nature  and  extent  of  the
    private and family life of the Appellant and his wife at paragraphs 24-
    26 of her determination.  At  paragraph  28  she  fully  addressed  the
    Appellant's  wish  to  re-sit  the  outstanding  elements  of  his  Bar
    vocational examinations. Given the circumstances of the  Appellant  and
    his  wife,  the  Judge's  consideration  of  their  son's  position  at
    paragraph 26 was adequate and sustainable.

11. The Judge's determination does not contain any error of law  and  shall
    stand.



Anonymity

12.  There was no request for an anonymity direction and  having  considered
    the appeal do not find there is any need for one.







DECISION

    The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain any  error
    of law such that it should be set aside and it shall stand.

     Anonymity direction not made.



Signed/Official Crest                                          Date 30.  vi.
2014




Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



