
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37407/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |             Decision & Reasons     |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 5 August 2015                         |             On 14 August 2015      |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               OLUWASEGUN UJI
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Dr A Corban of Corban Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


The Respondent

 1. The Respondent to whom I shall refer as "the Applicant" is a citizen of
    Nigeria born on 27 September 1969.  He states he arrived on 15 May 2005
    using a fraudulently obtained Nigerian passport in a  false  name.   He
    has a child born in late 2010 by his ex-partner who is  said  to  be  a
    Nigerian national  with  indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  There was no evidence before the Tribunal that their child is
    a British citizen.

 2. The Appellant's sister is a British citizen and she and her husband and
    other family members live together in Peckham Rye.

 3. On 17 May 2011 the Applicant sought to formalise his immigration status
    and made an application for his case to be considered under  Article  8
    of the European Convention on the basis of his private and family  life
    with his partner, their child and his extended family.

The Original Decision

 4. On 17 September 2014 the Appellant (the SSHD) refused  the  Applicant's
    claim and proposed to make directions for his removal under Section  10
    of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 to Nigeria.

 5. The SSHD considered the Applicant's claim under paragraph 276ADE of the
    Immigration Rules and Appendix FM. She noted there was  no  record  the
    Applicant's  child  was  a  British  citizen  or  that  he   had   sole
    responsibility for the child who resided with  the  mother.   The  SSHD
    concluded the Applicant did not have any  family  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom which would engage the State's  obligations  under  Article  8.
    She went  on  to  consider  the  claim  under  Article  8  outside  the
    Immigration Rules, taking account of the Applicant's  relationship  not
    only with his child's mother but also his extended family and concluded
    that such family life did not warrant the grant of  leave  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.

 6. The Respondent considered the Applicant's private life and noted he did
    not meet the relevant length of residence and other requirements  under
    paragraphs 276ADE(iii)-(vi). Further,  he  had  substantial  ties  with
    Nigeria including three children identified at an interview on  13  May
    2011.  She referred to the lack of evidence that the  Appellant  had  a
    material role in his child's life and that the Applicant was no  longer
    in a relationship with the child's mother.

 7. On 22 September 2014  the  Applicant  lodged  notice  of  appeal  under
    Section 82 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  as
    amended (the 2002 Act).  He continued to assert his child was a British
    citizen; he maintained contact with the child and he relied on  Article
    8 of the European Convention, asserting further that the SSHD  had  not
    adequately considered her duties to his child under Section 55  of  the
    UK Borders Act 2007.

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

 8. By a decision promulgated on 15 April  2015  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Quinn allowed the Applicant's appeal under Article  8  of  the
    European Convention outside the Immigration Rules.

 9. The SSHD sought permission to appeal on the basis that  the  Judge  had
    not adequately dealt with the best  interests  of  the  child  and  had
    expressed doubts about the reason  why  the  Applicant  no  longer  had
    contact with his child.  The SSHD asserted the Judge had failed to give
    any reasons why the best interests of the child, in the light that  the
    Applicant had no current contact, would outweigh  the  public  interest
    factors outlined in Section 117(B) of the 2002 Act.  The  SSHD  further
    challenged the factors in respect of which the Judge had referred to in
    his consideration of the proportionality of the decision  and  that  he
    had placed undue weight on  the  Applicant's  claim  that  he  had  not
    committed any criminal offence or been reliant on public funds.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

10. At the start of the hearing Dr Corban produced a copy of  an  order  in
    the Croydon Family Court providing for the Applicant  to  have  contact
    with his child.  The order is dated 21 April 2015 and  provides  for  a
    further hearing four months thereafter to discuss progress  unless  the
    Applicant and his partner had resolved matters between  themselves.   I
    remind myself that the order was made subsequent  to  the  hearing  and
    promulgation of the Judge's decision and therefore could not  have  any
    relevance to whether the Judge's decision contained a material error of
    law.

11. Following a  discussion  between  the  representatives  and  myself,  I
    indicated that I found that there were material errors of  law  in  the
    decision and that  in  the  circumstances  I  considered  it  would  be
    necessary to set it aside.  During the  course  of  the  discussion  Dr
    Corban had given reasons why the decision should stand but he  had  not
    persuaded me and in all the circumstances did  not  wish  to  make  any
    further submissions in open court.

Material Errors of Law in the Judge's Decision and Reasons

12. The Judge failed to address the SSHD's claim that the Applicant said he
    had three children in Nigeria.  He made no findings  about  the  nature
    and quality of the Applicant's life with his extended family.

13. At para.40 of his decision the Judge made no reference to the  evidence
    or reasons for finding that the Applicant had a  close  bond  with  his
    child. The Judge did not assess all the  relevant  evidence  before  he
    reached his conclusion.  Crucially, the Judge made a  finding  that  it
    was in the child's best interests to remain with the mother.  There was
    no decision before the Judge that the SSHD proposed to or  had  refused
    any application made for the child or the child's mother for  leave  to
    remain or that there were any proposals for the child's removal.  There
    was no finding on the desirability and importance  of  contact  between
    the Applicant and his child.

14. At para.41 the Judge failed to take any account of the public  interest
    referred to in Sections 117(A)-117(D) of the 2002 Act.  Having  made  a
    finding at para.40 that the Applicant had no means  of  supporting  his
    child and accommodation of his own, the  Judge  failed  to  incorporate
    these findings into his  assessment  of  the  factors  referred  to  in
    Sections 117(A)-117(D) which he considered at paras.41-45.

15. In Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC  74  Lord  Hodge  stated  that  the  best
    interests of a child  are  an  integral  part  of  the  proportionality
    assessment under Article 8  of  the  European  Convention.   The  Judge
    concluded his assessment under Article 8 at  para.46  of  his  decision
    found the interference to the Applicant's private and family life which
    would be caused by his removal would be proportionate.  Then at para.48
    he commenced his consideration of the SSHD's duties under Section 55 of
    the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

16. The Judge's finding  at  para.46  was  that  the  interference  to  the
    Applicant's private and family life was proportionate, presumably  (but
    not stated) to the legitimate objective of the economic  well-being  of
    the State which includes the maintenance of proper immigration control.
    However, at para.59 he  concluded  that  the  decision  to  refuse  the
    Applicant leave and to remove  him  to  Nigeria  was  disproportionate.
    These two findings are contradictory and the Judge gave no  explanation
    for or attempt to reconcile this contradiction before  he  reached  his
    conclusion at para.61.

17. For these reasons, I find the decision to contain  material  errors  of
    law and must be set aside in its entirety.

The Next Steps

18. The Applicant's position has now altered by reason of the making  of  a
    Child Arrangement Programme (CAP) in the Croydon Family Court.  Any re-
    hearing would now have to be taken in this was evidence which would  be
    available for the Tribunal to consider.  The Applicant  would  wish  to
    provide evidence to show how the CAP was working out and Dr Corban  did
    not have that evidence and was not  in  a  position  to  proceed  to  a
    substantive re-hearing.

19. The decision has been set aside. Section 12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts
    and Enforcement Act 2007 allows for the case  to  be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal with directions or for the Upper  Tribunal  to  re-
    make it. Having regard to Practice Statement 7.2(b) and the nature  and
    extent of the fact finding required, I conclude the decision should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to decide afresh.

Anonymity

20. There was no request for  an  anonymity  order  and  having  heard  the
    appeal, I find that none is warranted.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The First-tier Tribunal's decision contained errors of law such that it
    should be set aside in its entirety and  the  appeal  should  be  heard
    afresh in the First-tier Tribunal.
Signed/Official Crest                            Date 11. viii. 2015


Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
