
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37639/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 August 2015                    |On 9 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                              NAQEEB UR REHMAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Islam, a legal representative
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, a Home Office Presenting Officer


              DECISION AND REASONS FOR FINDING NO ERROR OF LAW

Introduction

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Lloyd ("The Immigration Judge"), following a hearing at  Birmingham  on
    26 January 2015? The  appeal  was  run  both  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant fell within the  Immigration  Rules  under  paragraph  276ADE
    (private life) and/or Appendix FM (family life) or,  alternatively,  on
    the  basis   that  his  claim  should  be  considered  as  a  so-called
    "freestanding" one under Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human
    Rights ("Article 8"). The Immigration  Judge  decided  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal on all grounds.

2.   The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal  from  that  decision  and
    the matter came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Nicholson.  Judge
    Nicholson thought that there were arguable grounds in relation  to  the
    failure of the judge to consider Section 117B and in particular 117B(6)
    of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.  That  section
    requires that, in the case of a person not liable to  deportation,  the
    public interest does not require a person's  removal  where  he  has  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with  a  qualifying  child  and  it
    would not be reasonable  to  expect  the  child  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom. A "qualifying child" is defined in section 117 D of  that  Act
    as a child who is a  British  citizen  or  who  has  lived  in  the  UK
    continuously for 7 years or more.

The Upper Tribunal hearing and consideration of the merits

3.   In have been assisted by oral submissions by both  representatives.  Mr
    Islam helpfully explained the background to the present appeal.   Where
    appropriate his client tried  to  give  additional  assistance  to  the
    Tribunal.

4.   The present the appeal is on a point of law (see section 11 (1) of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007). The appellant  essentially
    attacks the decision of the First-tier Tribunal for its failure to give
    a property reasoned decision.

5.   I have to say when I initially considered the  decision  of  the  First
    Tier Tribunal (FTT) I could not see any  obvious  error  of  reasoning.
    However, it became clear from Mr Islam's submissions that some  of  the
    Immigration Judge's reasons could have been fuller. The  focus  of  the
    present appeal, however, relates to the welfare of Yusaf, who was  born
    on 7th April 2013.

6.   I found the arguments for each side quite evenly  balanced  but  having
    examined the First-tier Tribunal's decision with care and heard all the
    submissions, I am not persuaded that there was a failure of  reasoning.
    The Immigration Judge decided the case based on the evidence before the
    FTT.  There was evidence that Yusaf suffered from ADHD but it  was  far
    from conclusive evidence and  it  was  quite  an  early  stage  of  the
    diagnosis of this behavioural disorder. There has since  been  evidence
    in the form of the detailed a report from a paediatrician but this  was
    not available before the FTT and there  is  no  application  to  adduce
    further evidence before the Upper Tribunal. Furthermore, the welfare of
    Yusaf,  although  a  paramount   consideration,   is   not   the   only
    consideration. The Immigration Judge found that Yusaf  and  his  mother
    would not be required to leave the UK in the event that  the  appellant
    were removed. Therefore it appears that section 117B (6), which  states
    that the public interest does not require a person's removal where   he
    has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a child who is a British
    citizen where it would not be reasonable for the child to leave the UK,
    was not shown to be relevant. The rights of Yusaf for his welfare to be
    safeguarded had to  be  balanced  against  the  other  public  interest
    considerations under that  section  and  under  the  wider  Immigration
    Rules.  The Immigration Judge, particularly  in  paragraph  28  of  his
    decision, carried out a balancing exercise. He considered  the  welfare
    of the Yusaf as part of that exercise.

7.   The evidence at the date of the hearing before the FTT appears to  have
    been  inadequate  to  justify  a  conclusion  that  there  had  been  a
    fundamental change in position since the hearing before  Judge  Elvidge
    in November 2013. At  that  date  it  appears  that  the  sponsor  gave
    assurances that the appellant did not want to settle in the UK and they
    did not intend to pursue family life in the UK, at least at that stage.
    It may be the evidence has moved on since and it may be that  with  the
    passage of time further and better evidence may be  obtained.   But  it
    would be speculative to consider what the evidence might  show  in  the
    future. The Immigration Judge was  entitled  to  conclude  it  was  not
    adequate to show any basis upon which the appellant ought to be allowed
    to stay in the UK.

8.   In  addition,  I  am  persuaded  by  Mr  Avery,  who  appears  for  the
    respondent, that  the  hearing  before  Judge  Elvidge  is  significant
    background evidence to the present application. The appellant  came  to
    the UK on a visit visa. The appellant  claims  that  his  circumstances
    were quite different when he applied for the visit visa than they  were
    when Yusaf was born in  April  2013.  As  Mr  Avery  pointed  out,  the
    circumstances had changed when the matter came  before  Judge  Elvidge.
    It seems that before Judge Elvidge the appellant claimed that, although
    he may be tempted to remain in the UK at the conclusion of his visa, he
    specifically assured the tribunal that was not what he intended to  do.
    The appellant would probably have been  aware  of  Yusaf's  behavioural
    difficulties by the date of the hearing before Judge Elvidge  since  it
    has been contended that these were manifest within 10 or 11  months  of
    his birth. At the very least this undermines  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant's claim. Additionally it seems that the parties  specifically
    recognised the difficulties in advancing a claim to family life in  the
    UK, leading Judge Elvidge to conclude  (in  paragraph  27)  that  there
    appeared no circumstances in which he could envisage an Article 8 claim
    being made. He would regard any such application as a "gross deception"
    of the immigration authorities and one which would be rightly refused.

9.   I find that not to be disproportionate  to  require  the  appellant  to
    return to Pakistan to make an  application  to  join  his  family  from
    there. The reasonableness of placing that requirement on the  appellant
    must be seen in the context of his earlier immigration history referred
    to above.

10.  Mr Islam says that there has been  a  change  in  circumstances  but  I
    think that the  answer  to  this  is  that  the  Immigration  Rules  do
    prescribe a route for coming to the UK to form  family  life.  No  good
    reason has been shown why the  appellant  should  not  be  required  to
    pursue that route to settlement.  I  hope  that  that  route  is  still
    available to him because, obviously, in the long term,  it  is  in  the
    interests of the family to be reunited. The Immigration  Judge  himself
    recognised this at to be desirable at paragraph 28.  If  this  were  to
    occur the sponsor would remain in the UK where, I understand, she has a
    number of close relatives.

11.  Alternatively,  the  appellant  must  have  maintained  close  ties  in
    Pakistan with a number of relatives  there.  Indeed,  the  sponsor  had
    retuned there as recently as September 2013 with the appellant.   I  am
    not satisfied that it would be contrary to the child's  best  interests
    to return to Pakistan with his parents  if  this  was  the  course  his
    mother chose to adopt.

Conclusion

12.  I have decided that the Immigration Judge was entitled to  conclude  on
    the evidence that the welfare of the child was not such an overwhelming
    factor as to effectively trump all  other  considerations.  Accordingly
    the appeal against the decision of the FTT will be dismissed.

Notice of Decision

There is no error of law in the decision of  the  FTT.  The  appeal  against
that decision is dismissed. The  respondent's  decision  to  refuse  further
leave to remain stands.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury
