

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)      APPEAL NO: IA/37292/2013





Heard at Field House on    Determination promulgated on
6 October 2014    23 October 2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


                                   Before


                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL DIGNEY



                     OLUWATOYIN OLUWASEUN SHIYANBOLA (MS)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                                  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME
DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the respondent: Ms Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the appellant: Ms Record



                               DETERMINATION AND REASONS




   1. The appellant, a citizen of Nigeria, applied to remain in this country
      on the basis of her relationship with  her  husband  and  their  three
      children. That application was  refused  and  an  appeal  against  the
      decision dismissed. A first-tier judge refused permission to appeal on
      the basis that the judge was  entitled  to  reject  the  evidence  put
      before him on behalf of the appellant and that the grounds  of  appeal
      rely on a version of the facts  that  the  judge  expressly  rejected.
      Upper Tribunal Judge Freeman  granted  permission  to  appeal  because
      there was now DNA evidence that proved that the three children of  the
      appellant were the children of her  husband.  In  the  light  of  that
      evidence the judge's findings of fact (that the children were not  the
      children of the appellant's husband) might be an error  of  fact  that
      amounted to an error of law; see E&R [2004] EWCA Civ 49. That evidence
      would then need to be looked at in the light of the  judge's  findings
      on the rest of the case which would have to be considered as a  whole.
      The implication is that the new evidence might cast doubts on the rest
      of the judge's findings.


   2. Paragraph 66 of E&R reads:


                  In our view, the time  has  now  come  to  accept  that  a
                  mistake of fact giving rise to unfairness  is  a  separate
                  head of challenge in an appeal on a point of law, at least
                  in those statutory contexts where  the  parties  share  an
                  interest in co-operating to achieve  the  correct  result.
                  Asylum law is undoubtedly such an area. Without seeking to
                  lay down a precise code, the ordinary requirements  for  a
                  finding of unfairness are apparent from the above analysis
                  of CICB. First, there must have been a mistake  as  to  an
                  existing fact, including a mistake as to the  availability
                  of evidence on a particular matter. Secondly, the fact  or
                  evidence must have been "established", in the  sense  that
                  it was uncontentious and objectively verifiable.  Thirdly,
                  the  appellant  (or  his  advisors)  must  not  have  been
                  responsible for the mistake. Fourthly,  the  mistake  must
                  have played a material (not necessarily decisive) part  in
                  the Tribunal's reasoning. (emphasis added)


   3. E&R suggests that this principle applied in the area of asylum law.  I
      first of all have to decide whether it goes further. Paragraph  25  of
      MM  (unfairness; (E&R) Sudan [2014] UKUT 00105 (IAC) reads:


                  The pivotal importance of the error of   fact  upon  which
                  the reasoning of the judge was demonstrably based helps to
                  explain why, in appeals based on issues  of  international
                  protection, (emphasis added) there is room  for  departure
                  from an inflexible application of  common  law  rules  and
                  principles where this is necessary to redress  unfairness.
                  This is especially so where the  respondent  has....failed
                  to  co-operate  to  achieve  a  correct  result  (emphasis
                  added).


   4. The passage that I have highlighted suggests that this principle  only
      applies in appeals concerning international protection.  This  is  not
      such a case  and  is  one  where  there  is  no  reason  why  a  fresh
      application could not be made. I conclude that the principle does  not
      apply in a case such as this.


   5. Should I be wrong about this I go on to consider the  principles  laid
      down in E&R. I deal with the third point first.  The  error  here  was
      indubitably the error of the appellant's  advisors.  The  question  of
      paternity had not been conceded, and bearing in mind the flaws in  the
      appellant's  evidence,  which  must  have  been  as  apparent  to  the
      appellant's advisors as they were to the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge,
      DNA evidence was clearly called for.


   6. I turn to the first and second requirements.  What they must be  taken
      to mean is that there can be no doubt about  the  error;  that  it  is
      "uncontentious". Ms Record says  that  the  new  evidence  leaves  the
      matter beyond doubt. However,  whilst  DNA  evidence  cannot  lie  its
      provenance is not necessarily as claimed. Here when one looks  at  the
      judge's reasons for concluding that the husband was not the father  of
      the children, it is difficult to see how he could have been, and  that
      throws doubt on the provenance of the evidence. Those two requirements
      are not satisfied. The facts of this case do not come within  the  law
      as set down in E&R.


   7. That is enough to dispose of that appeal but Ms Record  relies  on  MM
      and I must say a word about that. That was a case where the respondent
      had been a party to the error, as the missing letter that showed  that
      there had been a mistake, had been sent to the UKBA. It followed  that
      the respondent was a party to the error and relied on  a  matter  that
      she should not have relied  on.  That  brings  into  play  the  second
      emphasised matter in  the  quotation  in  paragraph  3.  There  is  no
      suggestion here that the respondent was in any way party to the error.


   8. It follows that there is here no factual error that could amount to an
      error of law.


   9.  It follows that the original determination did not contain  an  error
      of law and the original decision shall stand.

The appeal is accordingly dismissed


Designated Judge Digney
Judge of the Upper Tribunal     10 October 2014



