
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA373882014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 10 May 2016                             |On 25 May 2016                 |
|                                           |                               |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                           MS DAMILOLA MERCY RASAQ
                        (NO anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. J. Dhanji of Counsel, instructed by SLA
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By way of a decision promulgated on 4 December 2015,  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 24 April 2015 was set  aside  to
    be remade.  The appeal in respect of  the  Appellant's  son,  Alexander
    Rasaq, was allowed under the immigration rules, paragraph 276ADE(1)(v).




 2. At the resumed hearing I heard oral evidence  from  the  Appellant  and
    from her  son,  Alexander  Rasaq.   They  both  adopted  their  witness
    statements dated 28 April 2016.  Alexander also provided a letter dated
    26 April 2016.  Both representatives made oral submissions.  I reserved
    my decision which I set out below with my reasons.


 3. It was accepted at the error of law hearing that  the  Appellant  could
    not meet the requirements of the immigration rules.   Consequently  the
    appeal before me was in respect of Article 8  outside  the  immigration
    rules.


Credibility


 4. I found both the Appellant and Alexander  to  be  honest  and  credible
    witnesses who answered the questions put to them and were not  evasive.
    Their evidence was consistent.  I  find  that  their  evidence  can  be
    relied on.


Article 8 outside the immigration rules


 5. I have considered the Appellant's appeal under Article 8 outside of the
    immigration rules in accordance with the steps set out in Razgar [2004]
    UKHL 27.  Alexander's appeal was allowed on the basis that he  met  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(v), as he is aged 18 years or above
    and under 25 years, and has spent at least  half  of  his  life  living
    continuously in the United Kingdom.


 6. At paragraph [54] of the First-tier Tribunal decision the  judge  found
    that there was family life between the  Appellant  and  Alexander.   Ms
    Brocklesby Weller referred to this finding  and  did  not  submit  that
    family life for the purposes of Article 8 did  not  exist  between  the
    Appellant and Alexander.  I find that, although  Alexander  is  now  18
    years old and therefore an adult, he has a family life with his  mother
    for the purposes of Article 8.  I find that he is the Appellant's  only
    child and has been living in the United Kingdom with her for almost  12
    years.  I find that the family  unit  consists  of  the  Appellant  and
    Alexander.  He has no contact with his father.  I find that there is an
    extremely strong dependency between the  Appellant  and  Alexander.   I
    find that he is part of a family unit which consists  of  him  and  the
    Appellant, and that he has not formed his own independent  family  unit
    outside of this.  I find that the Appellant and Alexander have a family
    life for the purposes of Article 8.


 7. Continuing the steps set out  in  Razgar,  I  find  that  the  proposed
    interference would be in accordance with the law, as  being  a  regular
    immigration decision taken by UKBA in accordance with  the  immigration
    rules.  In terms of proportionality, the Tribunal has to strike a  fair
    balance between the rights of the individual and the interests  of  the
    community.  The public interest in this case  is  the  preservation  of
    orderly and fair immigration control in the interests of all  citizens.
    Maintaining the integrity of the immigration rules is self-evidently  a
    very important public interest.  In practice, this will  usually  trump
    the  qualified  rights  of  the  individual,  unless   the   level   of
    interference is very significant.  I find that in this case, the  level
    of  interference  would  be  significant  and  that  it  would  not  be
    proportionate.


 8. In carrying out the  proportionality  assessment,  I  have  taken  into
    account the factors set out in section 117B of the 2002 Act insofar  as
    they are relevant.  Section 117B(1) provides that  the  maintenance  of
    effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the  public  interest.    The
    Appellant speaks  English  (section  117B(2)).   I  find  that  she  is
    dependent financially on her cousin, friends, and members of her church
    (section 117B(3)).   Sections 117B(4)  and  (5)  are  not  relevant  to
    family life.


 9. Section 117B(6) is not relevant as Alexander is now an adult.   However
    it was submitted by Mr. Dhanji that, had there not been an error of law
    in the original decision promulgated in April 2015, Alexander's  appeal
    should have been allowed under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv),  and  therefore
    the Appellant's appeal should have been allowed under Article 8 outside
    the immigration rules with reference to section 117B(6).  He  submitted
    that this was a relevant factor to be taken into  account  in  carrying
    out the proportionality exercise.  I find that the judge in the  First-
    tier Tribunal found that it would not be unreasonable for Alexander  to
    leave  the  United  Kingdom  after  he  had  completed  his   A-levels.
    Therefore  logically  the  judge  found  that  it   would   have   been
    unreasonable for him to leave before his A-levels, and the hearing  was
    before he had taken his A-levels.  I therefore find that, had the judge
    considered the circumstances  as  at  the  date  of  the  hearing,  the
    Appellant's appeal would have  been  allowed  outside  the  immigration
    rules by reference to section 117B(6).


10. I find that in carrying out the proportionality assessment I must  take
    into account both the rights of the Appellant to a family life, and the
    rights of Alexander.  I have carefully  considered  Alexander's  letter
    where he sets out in his own words the strength of the bond that he has
    with his mother.  He states that that there is nobody else to  whom  he
    can turn.  The Appellant is the only family  that  he  has  and  he  is
    extremely close to her.  He states that  he  needs  her  for  emotional
    support.  He states that she is the most important and essential person
    in his life and he would be devastated if she had to leave  the  United
    Kingdom.  I have found above that I can rely  on  Alexander's  evidence
    and I find that,  although  he  is  technically  an  adult,  given  his
    circumstances, he has a very strong relationship with his mother and  a
    very strong dependency which it is not in his interests to have  broken
    by removing the Appellant to Nigeria.


11. I find that the Appellant lives with Alexander in one room in a  rented
    property.  I find that  Alexander  has  been  in  full-time  education,
    completing his A levels in July 2015.  I find that Alexander has offers
    from Portsmouth and Kent universities but he has not been able to  take
    up these offers owing to his immigration status.  I find that  he  does
    not work as he is not able to do so and that he depends on  his  mother
    financially.  I find this is not a case  where  Alexander  is  a  young
    adult with an independent life where he  support  himself  financially,
    but I find that he has been  in  full-time  education  and  intends  to
    continue with his education.  I find that Alexander intends to study at
    Kent University in order that he can live at home  with  the  Appellant
    while doing so, and thereby continue to  receive  strong  support  from
    her.


12. I find that Alexander is unable to access a subsistence  loan  for  his
    university studies although he is able to access  a  tuition  loan.   I
    find that if the Appellant is  forced  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom,
    Alexander  will  have  to  set  up  home  alone  and  support   himself
    financially at the  same  time  as  starting  university,  without  the
    support of his mother, the adult  who  has  been  the  main  source  of
    support during his life.  Although  Alexander  and  the  Appellant  are
    currently supported financially by the church and by  his  uncle,  were
    the Appellant to leave the United Kingdom, I find that Alexander  would
    not be able to rely on the church to provide him with accommodation and
    finances for his university course.  I find that he would not  be  able
    to move in with his uncle who has five children of his own.


13. While of course Alexander will learn life skills over time,  and  while
    it is during early adulthood that these skills will be learned, I  find
    that it would be disproportionate to expect Alexander to set up home on
    his own at  this  stage,  given  the  strength  of  the  bonds  between
    Alexander and the Appellant, and given the reliance which he places  on
    her, which has not vanished simply because he has turned 18.


14. It was submitted by Ms Brocklesby Weller that it would be a choice  for
    Alexander to remain here rather than return to Nigeria with his mother.
     However I find that the immigration rules  set  out  the  Respondent's
    position on  where  the  public  interest  in  maintaining  immigration
    control is outweighed by the private life of  an  individual.   I  find
    that the Respondent considers that, as Alexander meets the requirements
    of the immigration  rules,  respect  for  his  private  life  therefore
    outweighs the public  interest  in  maintaining  effective  immigration
    control.  I therefore find that it is not a  choice  for  Alexander  to
    return to Nigeria as he is entitled to remain in the United Kingdom.


15. I have taken into account that the  Appellant  has  not  had  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom, but taking into account the fact that the
    Appellant is a single mother to Alexander, the fact that Alexander  has
    a right to remain in the United Kingdom under  the  immigration  rules,
    and the fact  that  the  Appellant's  relationship  with  Alexander  is
    extremely strong, much closer than would usually be the case  owing  to
    their circumstances, I find that the balance comes down  in  favour  of
    the family life between Alexander and  the  Appellant  and  that  their
    interests  outweigh  the  public  interest  in  maintaining   effective
    immigration control.


16. I find that the Appellant has shown on the balance of probabilities, at
    the date of the hearing, that the decision is a breach of  her  rights,
    and those of Alexander, to a family life under Article 8 ECHR.


Decision


   17. The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds, Article 8.


No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date 24 May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

