
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/37145/2014
                                                               IA/37157/2014
                                                               IA/37151/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30th November 2015                |On 21st December 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                            BM (FIRST APPELLANT)
                            IM (SECOND APPELLANT)
                            UM (THIRD APPELLANT)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr H Kannangara of Counsel, instructed by Jade Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellants appeal against a decision of Judge Thanki of the  First-
    tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 22nd April 2015.

 2. The Appellants  are  citizens  of  Mauritius.   The  First  and  Second
    Appellants are married and are the parents of the Third  Appellant  who
    was born in the UK on 8th August 2005.

 3. The Appellants applied for leave to remain in the UK based  upon  their
    family and private life rights.  The applications were refused  on  3rd
    September 2014.

 4. The appeals were heard together by the FTT  on  30th  March  2015,  and
    dismissed under the Immigration Rules, and with reference to Article  8
    of the 1950 European Convention on Human Rights (the  1950  Convention)
    outside the rules.

 5. The Appellants applied for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.
    The application was refused by Judge Kelly of the FTT  who  noted  that
    the Appellants disagreed with the reasons for refusal, but  found  that
    the grounds did not identify any errors of law.  It was found that  the
    question of whether it is "reasonable" for a child to leave the UK  "is
    a matter of judgment for the Tribunal  and,  absent  irrationality,  it
    will not be interfered with on appeal."  It was found that rather  than
    identify  any  irrationality  in  the  decision,  the  application  for
    permission merely expressed disagreement.

 6. The Appellants renewed their application for permission to appeal,  and
    amended the grounds to  contend  that  the  decision  of  the  FTT  was
    irrational.  It was submitted that the FTT, when considering whether it
    was reasonable for the Third Appellant to leave  the  UK,  should  have
    arrived at  a  different  decision,  given  the  fact  that  the  Third
    Appellant had been born in the UK, had resided in the UK all his  life,
    which was in excess of nine years, and had educational, social,  family
    and cultural ties to the UK.

 7. It was accepted that the First and Second Appellants had overstayed and
    had been without leave in the UK since 30th November 2010, but  it  was
    submitted that the Third Appellant, as a child, should not be penalised
    for this.  Reliance was placed upon JO and Others (Nigeria) [2014] UKUT
    00517 (IAC).

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Archer
    who found, inter alia;

         "The judge found at paragraph 42 that the principal issue  was  the
         best  interests  of  the  Third  Appellant  and  whether   it   was
         unreasonable to expect him to relocate to Mauritius.  However,  the
         judge then found that  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph  276ADE  are  a
         complete code and that 'the private life rights acquired since 2010
         must be disregarded.'  The judge  found  at  paragraph  46  of  the
         decision that it was in the best interests of the  Third  Appellant
         to return to Mauritius with his parents but did  not  balance  that
         option against the benefits to the Third Appellant of remaining  in
         the UK with his family.

         I find that it is arguable that the  judge  has  erred  in  law  by
         finding that Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE are a complete  code.
         It is also arguable that the judge has erred in law by disregarding
         private life for all of the Appellants since 2010  because  section
         117B(5) refers to giving little weight to private life  established
         by a person at a time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
         precarious rather than simply disregarding such private  life.   In
         relation to the Third Appellant it is arguable that the  judge  has
         erred in law  by  disregarding  private  life  since  2010  because
         section 117B(6) is arguably wholly independent from section 117B(5)
         and the key issue in 117B(6) is the reasonableness of expecting the
         child to leave the UK.  Arguably, the assessment of  reasonableness
         requires  an  analysis  of  all  the  circumstances  of  the  Third
         Appellant in the UK rather  than  disregarding  developments  since
         2010.

         I find that it is also arguable that the best interests  assessment
         is inadequate because the judge has assumed that the only  way  for
         the Third Appellant to remain with his  parents  is  to  return  to
         Mauritius with them."

 9. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 contending, in summary, that the judge  had  considered  the  best
    interests of the Third Appellant, and properly  considered  whether  it
    was reasonable to expect him to leave the UK.  In relation to  the  use
    of the word 'disregarded' instead of 'little weight,' it was  submitted
    that the challenge was semantic and not  material.   It  was  submitted
    that the decision of the FTT should stand.

10. Directions were subsequently issued making provision for there to be  a
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether  the  FTT  decision
    should be set aside by reason of error of law.

The Appellants' Submissions

11. Mr Kannangara relied upon the grounds seeking permission to appeal, and
    the grant of permission by Judge Archer.  Reliance was also placed upon
    a skeleton argument contained  at  pages  140-145  of  the  Appellants'
    bundle.  The Tribunal had received confirmation  from  the  Appellants'
    solicitors that the Third Appellant had become  a  naturalised  British
    citizen on 23rd November 2015 although Mr Kannangara accepted that this
    was  not  relevant  to  consideration  of  error   of   law,   as   the
    naturalisation had not taken place when the appeal was heard before the
    FTT.

12. In summary  Mr  Kannangara  submitted  that  the  FTT  had  erred  when
    considering reasonableness pursuant to paragraph 276ADE(iv) in relation
    to the Third Appellant, by only concentrating on the educational system
    in Mauritius  and  finding  that  the  Third  Appellant  would  not  be
    materially disadvantaged by being educated in Mauritius.

13. It was contended that the FTT  had  not  considered  the  private  life
    established by the Third Appellant in the UK, and  not  taken  properly
    into account, the fact that he was born here and had lived here all his
    life.  The FTT had  not  referred  to  case  law  relied  upon  by  the
    Appellants, that being  LD  (Zimbabwe)  [2010]  UKUT  00278  (IAC),  MK
    (India) [2011] UKUT 00475 (IAC), and  Azimi-Moayed  [2013]  UKUT  00197
    (IAC).

14. It was submitted that the FTT had erred in paragraph 47 of the decision
    by stating that Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE are a complete code.

15. It was submitted that the FTT had further erred, in that  having  found
    against the Third  Appellant  having  considered  paragraph  276ADE(iv)
    which provides that an individual must be under the age of 18 years and
    have lived continuously in the UK for at least seven years,  and  there
    must be a consideration of whether it would not be reasonable to expect
    the individual to leave the UK, the FTT should have gone on to consider
    Article 8 outside the rules.

16. Mr Kannangara submitted  that  the  FTT  had  not  properly  considered
    proportionality outside the Immigration Rules, and was wrong  to  state
    in paragraph 47 "that the private life rights acquired since 2010  must
    be disregarded".  Mr Kannangara submitted that the FTT  had  in  effect
    "stopped the clock" in 2010 and not considered private life since  that
    date which was an error.

The Respondent's Submissions

17. Mr Duffy submitted that paragraph 276ADE(iv) is in fact a complete code
    when a child has acquired seven  years'  continuous  residence.   If  a
    child has not completed seven years, then this would not be a  complete
    code.

18. Mr Duffy pointed out that the FTT had correctly found that there  would
    be no interference with the family life established by  the  Appellants
    because it was proposed to  remove  the  family  together.   The  issue
    before the FTT was therefore whether it  would  not  be  reasonable  to
    expect the Third Appellant to leave the UK,  taking  into  account  the
    fact that he was born here, and had lived here for  almost  ten  years'
    continuously.

19. Mr Duffy argued that the FTT  had  properly  considered  the  issue  of
    reasonableness under paragraph 276ADE(iv) and there  was  therefore  no
    need to go on and consider the best interests of a  child  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.

20. It was argued  that  the  grounds  seeking  permission  amounted  to  a
    disagreement with findings that had properly been made by the FTT.

21. With reference to paragraph 47 of the FTT decision Mr  Duffy  submitted
    that the FTT was considering the parents' private life, as the  private
    life of the Third Appellant had already been considered earlier in  the
    decision, pursuant to paragraph 276ADE(iv).  Mr  Duffy  submitted  that
    although another judge may have made a different decision, that was not
    the test to be applied, and  the  decision  of  the  FTT  disclosed  no
    material error of law.

The Appellants' Response

22. Mr Kannangara reiterated that the FTT had failed to  consider  relevant
    case law which was referred to in a skeleton argument  which  had  been
    before the FTT, and in particular the case  law  confirmed  that  seven
    years' residence after the age of 4 was the most important  period  and
    should be taken into account.  It was argued that the FTT had not taken
    into account the Third Appellant's private life in  its  entirety,  and
    had focused too much on education.

23. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Findings and Conclusions

24. I note that the Appellants  rely  upon  irrationality  in  the  renewed
    grounds seeking permission to appeal.  This involves a high  threshold,
    and I do not find that the decision of the FTT is such that no Tribunal
    reasonably directed could have come to that conclusion.   In  my  view,
    the FTT identified the relevant issues, considered  those  issues,  and
    made findings which are supported by adequate and sustainable  reasons.
    I will now explain in more detail why I conclude that the FTT  decision
    discloses no material error of law.

25. The FTT identifies the core issue in these  appeals  at  paragraph  42,
    that being whether it is unreasonable to expect the Third Appellant  to
    relocate to Mauritius given his birth  in  the  UK  and  the  continued
    residence since.

26. The FTT was not accurate in paragraph 47 in describing Appendix FM  and
    paragraph 276ADE as a complete code.  This is  not  the  case  in  non-
    deportation cases.  The Court of Appeal considered this in  SS  (Congo)
    [2015] EWCA Civ 387 and stated in paragraph 47;

         "Therefore, as the court said in MF (Nigeria) at para [45], it is a
         'sterile question' whether one is dealing with  a  'complete  code'
         case or a case falling to be addressed in the context of a part  of
         the Immigration Rules which does not constitute a 'complete  code.'
         The basic, two-stage analysis will apply in both contexts."

27. In paragraph  33  of  SS  (Congo)  the  Court  of  Appeal  stated  that
    compelling circumstances would need to be identified to support a claim
    for a grant of leave to remain outside the new rules in Appendix FM.

28. On this issue, I accept the submissions made by Mr Duffy that  in  this
    case paragraph 276ADE(iv) can be regarded as being  complete,  and  not
    requiring  an  assessment  outside  the   Immigration   Rules,   if   a
    comprehensive assessment is carried out  as  to  whether  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect the Third Appellant to leave  the  UK,  and  which
    involved assessing the best interests of the child.

29. The fact that the FTT did not specifically refer to the case law relied
    upon by the Appellants in relation to the best interests of  the  child
    is not without more  an  error  of  law,  provided  the  correct  legal
    principles have been followed in making the decision.

30. The FTT recognised and stated in paragraph 44 that the  best  interests
    of a child is a primary consideration but not the  only  consideration.
    In my view, the FTT assessed the issue of reasonableness and  the  best
    interests  of  the  child,  taking  into  account  the   evidence   and
    submissions made by both parties.

31. I do not find that the FTT  concentrated  in  the  main  on  education,
    although this was a significant consideration placed  before  the  FTT.
    The FTT stated in paragraph 42 that it was recognised  that  the  Third
    Appellant had been born in the UK, and continued to reside  here  since
    birth.  That important factor was therefore not  overlooked  but  given
    due consideration.  The FTT also noted that  the  Third  Appellant  was
    established in education (paragraph 43).

32. While the FTT recognised that the First and Second Appellants had  been
    in the UK without leave since 30th November 2010, it  was  recorded  at
    paragraph 46 that the Third Appellant was not to be  blamed  for  this.
    The FTT relied upon the recent and appropriate authority, that being EV
    (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874.  The FTT could also have relied upon
    Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74 which preceded EV (Philippines),  and  contained
    similar principles.  In paragraph 24 of Zoumbas the Supreme Court found
    no irrationality in a conclusion that it was  in  the  childrens'  best
    interests to go with their parents to the  Republic  of  Congo,  taking
    into account that the children were not British  citizens  and  had  no
    right to further education and healthcare in this country and they were
    of an age when their emotional needs could only be fully met within the
    immediate family unit.  At paragraph 25 the Supreme Court found that it
    was legitimate for a decision maker to consider first whether it  would
    have been proportionate to remove the parents if they had  no  children
    and then, in considering the best interests  of  the  children  in  the
    proportionality exercise, ask whether  their  well-being  altered  that
    provisional balance.

33. I can ascertain no material factor that has not been considered by  the
    FTT when considering reasonableness  and  the  best  interests  of  the
    child,  and  do  not  find  that  any  immaterial  factors  have   been
    considered.  I do not find that it is correct to state that the FTT did
    not consider the Third Appellant's private life after  2010.   This  is
    clearly wrong if one reads paragraph 42 which accepts  that  the  Third
    Appellant was born on 8th August 2005  and  had  at  the  time  of  his
    application seven years continuous residence in the UK, which was  only
    acquired post-2010, and if one also considers paragraph  44.   In  that
    paragraph the FTT considers evidence from the head teacher of the Third
    Appellant's school, which confirms that  he  had  attended  since  12th
    September 2012.  There is also consideration of the letters of support,
    which refer to periods of time post-2010.  In my view it  is  therefore
    not correct to say that the FTT focused upon education when considering
    the Third Appellant's private life to the exclusion of all else.  It is
    clear that the FTT have considered the letters of  support  which  deal
    with the Third Appellant's life outside school as well as in school.  I
    do however find that one of the major issues relied upon on  behalf  of
    the Third Appellant, did relate to the fact that his education would be
    disrupted if he had to leave the UK,  and  therefore  the  FTT  had  to
    consider in detail that issue.

34. In conclusion the FTT adequately considered both the best interests  of
    the child, which would be to remain with his parents, and the issue  of
    reasonableness, when paragraph 276ADE(iv) was  considered.   I  do  not
    discern any material error of law in that consideration.

35. Therefore because reasonableness and best interests of the  child  were
    adequately considered under the Immigration Rules, there was in my view
    no need for the FTT to go on and consider Article 8 outside  the  rules
    in relation to the  Third  Appellant.   If  Article  8  was  considered
    outside the rules, section 117B of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act) would have to be  considered,  and  this
    would  include  section   117B(6)   which   involves   the   issue   of
    reasonableness, which is the same test as under  paragraph  276ADE(iv).
    In any event, the FTT did go on in paragraph 47 to consider  Article  8
    outside the Immigration Rules.  The FTT  did  err  in  concluding  that
    private life rights acquired since 2010 must be disregarded.   The  FTT
    should have recorded pursuant to section  117B(4)  that  little  weight
    should be given to a private life established by a  person  at  a  time
    when the person is in the UK unlawfully, and  pursuant  to  (5)  little
    weight should be given to a private life established by a person  at  a
    time when the person's immigration status is precarious.

36. The private lives of the First and Second Appellants have  always  been
    precarious since their arrival in the UK as they  have  only  ever  had
    limited leave.  Their immigration status has been unlawful  since  30th
    November 2010 because they have had no leave.

37. I do not find that the error is material.  This is because the  private
    life of the Third Appellant was not disregarded.  In  relation  to  the
    First and Second Appellants, they could only succeed  under  Article  8
    outside the Immigration Rules if there  were  compelling  circumstances
    which would need to be identified to support a claim  for  a  grant  of
    leave to remain outside the new rules (paragraph 33 of SS (Congo)).  In
    this appeal the FTT found, correctly, that the private life  claims  of
    the First and Second  Appellants  relied  upon  the  Third  Appellant's
    claim.  I can ascertain no  evidence  of  compelling  circumstances  in
    relation to the First or Second Appellants, that was placed before  the
    FTT.

38. In conclusion the decision of the FTT was  not  irrational.   The  best
    interests of the child were adequately  considered  together  with  the
    question of whether it would be reasonable for him  to  leave  the  UK.
    The findings made were supported by sustainable reasons.  The  FTT  did
    not disregard the Third Appellant's private life after 2010 and did not
    materially err on the facts  of  this  case,  in  describing  paragraph
    276ADE as a complete code although that would not always be  the  case.
    There was no material error in the consideration of Article  8  outside
    the Immigration Rules.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law such that  the  decision  must  be  set
aside.

I do not set aside the decision.  The appeals are dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

No anonymity  direction  was  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   However
because these appeals have involved considering  the  best  interests  of  a
child I have made an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  The  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity and no report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead
to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 3rd December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeals are dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed   Date 3rd December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
