

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/37123/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 24 October 2014                |On 23 December 2014               |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                                     R K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Caskie, Advocate instructed by Latta & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1) This is an appeal with permission against a decision by  Judge  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  Scobbie  dismissing   this   appeal   under   the
    Immigration Rules and under Article 8.  The appellant is a  citizen  of
    the USA.  Her husband is a British citizen.  They were  married  on  11
    June 2009.  Together they have 3 children, born in 2005, 2009 and 2010.
     The appellant's husband had, in addition, a daughter with a  different
    mother who lives with the family.  Until recently the parents  and  all
    the children lived together in the USA.

 2) In 2011 both parents  were  convicted  in  the  USA  of  trafficking  a
    controlled  substance.   The  appellant  was  sentenced  to  3   years'
    probation and her husband 5 years' probation.  He was deported from the
    USA and the entire family are now living in the UK.

 3) The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was brought  against  a  decision
    dated 28 August 2013 by the respondent to refuse to vary leave  and  to
    remove the appellant.   It  is  recorded  in  this  decision  that  the
    appellant entered the UK on 22 September 2012 with leave to enter as  a
    visitor valid until 22 March 2013.

 4) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal found that the appellant would not
    succeed under Appendix FM.  She would not qualify as a partner  because
    she had entered as a visitor.   She  would  not  qualify  as  a  parent
    because she shared responsibility for the children  with  her  husband,
    who is a British citizen.  The  judge  found,  in  addition,  that  the
    appellant would not succeed under paragraph 276ADE.

 5) The judge then considered the application  of  Article  8  outwith  the
    Rules.  The judge found that the appellant "is the author  of  her  own
    unfortunate  circumstances  together  with  her  husband".   The  judge
    nevertheless accepted that the children were not  at  fault  and  their
    best interests had to be taken into account.  The judge noted that  the
    children were dual nationals and the children could make a choice as to
    the parent with whom they would reside.

 6) Permission was granted on the basis that the judge had not carried  out
    a proper balancing exercise under Article 8.  The judge  had  dismissed
    the appeal for reasons that the respondent had not relied upon  in  the
    refusal decision, which was not based upon the  offences  committed  in
    the USA.  It was arguable that the judge had not adequately  considered
    the position of the children.

 7) The application for permission to appeal also  criticised  the  judge's
    approach under the Immigration Rules.  Mr Matthews acknowledged at  the
    hearing that the way in which the judge had dealt with the issues under
    the Immigration Rules was probably not sufficient.

 8) For the appellants, Mr Caskie submitted there was a presumption that it
    was in the best interests of the children to be with both parents.   It
    was pointed out that there was no presumption in the law to this effect
    but in many cases it would be in the best interests  of  the  children.
    There was a lack of evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  to  allow
    the judge to consider the best interests of the children properly.

 9) Having heard submissions we were satisfied that  the  decision  of  the
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal should be set aside on the basis of an
    error of law.  The judge had failed properly to address the submissions
    made on the appellant's behalf as to the position of the  family  under
    Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.  We did not consider  that  it
    would be appropriate to re-make this decision ourselves because of  the
    paucity of evidence as to the best interests of the children.   In  our
    view it would be appropriate for the appeal to be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal for a proper fact finding exercise to be carried  out  as
    to the circumstances of the  family  and  the  best  interests  of  the
    children.

10) In deciding to remit the appeal a  number  of  directions  were  issued
    orally at the hearing.  The first of  these  was  a  direction  to  the
    respondent to indicate her view on how an attempt by the  appellant  to
    return to the UK if she left would be regarded,  bearing  in  mind  the
    circumstances of her  most  recent  entry  to  the  UK  as  a  visitor,
    seemingly  without  declaring  her  conviction  in  the  USA   or   the
    circumstances in which the family were entering the UK.

11) The second direction was to the appellant to submit any  evidence  upon
    which reliance was placed as to the best interests of the  children  in
    the UK.  It was anticipated that this  would  include  expert  evidence
    from a suitably qualified person.

12) In addition the appellant was to  submit  evidence  showing  the  exact
    consequences of her husband's sentence and deportation in terms of  how
    this would affect his re-admission to the USA and whether he  would  be
    liable to continue his probation there.  The respondent was to  provide
    any  assistance  appropriate  in  relation  to  the  question  of   the
    possibility  of  the  husband  being  re-admitted  to  the  USA.    The
    respondent might also adduce evidence on  the  best  interests  of  the
    children.

13) The additional evidence was to be submitted by 9 January 2015  for  the
    purpose of a hearing on 16 January 2015.

Conclusions

14) The making of the decision on the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

15) We set aside the decision.

16) We remit the decision to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing  before  a
    judge other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Scobbie.

Anonymity

17) Although the Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  consider  it
    appropriate to make a direction for anonymity,  having  regard  to  the
    circumstances of the four children we consider it appropriate  to  make
    such an order (pursuant to Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008.)  No report of these proceedings  shall  directly
    or indirectly identify the appellant or any member of her family.



Signed      Date 22 December 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans


