
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/37073/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On the 21st December 2015            |On the 11th January 2016              |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before:

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL MCGINTY


                                  Between:

                               MR BABIN MALLA
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Chipperford (Counsel)
For the Respondent  (the  Secretary  of  State):  Mr  Kandola  (Home  Office
                                      Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is the Appellant's appeal against  the  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Robinson promulgated on the  26th  September  2014  in
       which he dismissed the Appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules
       and on Human Rights grounds.

Background

    2. The Appellant is a citizen of Nepal. He was born  on  the  8th  March
       1983. On the 20th April 2011 he was granted leave to enter the United
       Kingdom until the 28th July  2012  as  a  Tier  4  General  dependent
       partner. On  the  27th  July  2013,  his  solicitors  applied  for  a
       variation of the Appellant's leave to enter or remain on the basis of
       the care that he provided for his mother and  on  the  basis  of  his
       private life. That application was refused by  the  Respondent  in  a
       Refusal Letter dated the 23rd August 2013 and the Appellant sought to
       appeal that decision to the  First-tier  Tribunal.  That  appeal  was
       heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Robinson at Richmond on  the  11th
       September 2014, with his decision being promulgated on 26th September
       2014.

    3. Within  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Robinson,  he
       accepted and found as a fact that the Appellant was born in Nepal  in
       1983 and that he was a Nepalese  national  and  had  lived  with  his
       parents there, but that he now lives with his  mother  in  south-east
       London. He accepted that the Appellant's father was a  former  Gurkha
       soldier and served in the British Army for 15 years between 1963  and
       1978 and that his father had  made  enquiries  about  moving  to  the
       United Kingdom in 2004, but was told  that  he  did  not  qualify  to
       settle here. His father died in  2005.  The  Appellant's  mother  was
       granted leave to enter and remain in the UK and she came to the UK on
       the 18th December 2011. The Appellant  came  to  the  UK  before  his
       mother in May 2011 as a dependent of his  wife.  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Robinson found that the Appellant is  in  employment  and  also
       that he provided day-to-day care for his mother. He noted at [28]  of
       the  decision  that  the  Appellant  had  filed  a  report  from   an
       independent social worker, in which his role in his mother's life was
       described and that his mother attended at the appeal hearing and  her
       evidence was not challenged. He noted  that  the  Appellant  and  his
       mother had been in the UK for  3  years  and  they  had  family  life
       together. However, First-tier Tribunal Judge Robinson found that  the
       Appellant's mother would be able to  live  independently  if  she  so
       chose, with support from the local authority and health services  and
       that she had some family support in the UK apart from her son in  the
       form of a relative Bishwa Pratap Singh who lived nearby and whom  the
       Judge accepted visited her often, such that she would not be  totally
       isolated if her son were to return to Nepal and she chose  to  remain
       in the UK. First-tier Tribunal Judge Robinson  found  that  she  does
       have some family support  here  apart  from  her  son  and  also  had
       independent means from her late husband's pension.  Alternatively  he
       found that it would not be unreasonable to expect her  to  return  to
       Nepal if she wished to live with her son. The Judge  found  that  the
       Appellant did not have a  family  life  in  the  UK  apart  from  his
       relationship  with  his  mother  and  found  that  it  would  not  be
       disproportionate in the circumstances  to  remove  him  from  the  UK
       having undertaken the  balancing  exercise  required  in  considering
       proportionality under the fifth stage of the test in Razgar  for  the
       purposes of Article 8(2). He  concluded  that  the  decision  of  the
       Respondent was not  disproportionate  and  dismissed  the  appeal  on
       Article 8 grounds.

    4. The Appellant has  sought  to  appeal  that  decision  to  the  Upper
       Tribunal. Within the renewed Grounds of Appeal, it is argued that the
       decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Robinson did  contain  material
       errors of law and that in the first ground of  appeal  it  is  argued
       that the Appellant is the son of a former Gurkha who in his statement
       had stated that he believed that his sisters and himself  would  have
       been to settle in the UK with his parents had they  been  given  this
       opportunity and that by the time the policy for Gurkhas was announced
       many dependants were already over the age of 18 years  old  and  that
       the Judge had failed  to  take  account  of  the  historic  injustice
       argument which would ordinarily determine the outcome of an Article 8
       proportionality assessment in the Appellant's favour.

    5. Within the second ground of appeal it is argued that  the  Judge  had
       accepted that the Appellant provided day-to-day care for  his  mother
       and that his removal would have serious  practical  implications  for
       both of them and that his mother  receives  emotional  and  practical
       support from her son and relies upon him to meet some of her physical
       needs including cooking, administering her medication,  shopping  and
       operating some electrical gadgets including washing machine and  that
       she struggles to walk. It is said that the Judge found that  the  son
       provided significant support and that as his mother  does  not  speak
       English it may prove difficult for her to continue to live alone, but
       that despite these findings the  Judge  found  the  decision  of  the
       Respondent was not disproportionate. It is argued that in this regard
       the reasons given are  inadequate,  unclear,  inconsistent  with  the
       accepted findings and unsupported by the evidence, and that the Judge
       failed to take account of material matters and various  examples  are
       given as to what are said to be inconsistencies which are a matter of
       record as they are set out in  the  grounds  and  are  therefore  not
       repeated in full here..

    6. It  was  further  argued  that  the  Judge  misapplied  the  test  of
       exceptionality and the Judge had failed to give adequate reasons  for
       his  finding  that  it  would  not  be  unreasonable  to  expect  the
       Appellant's mother to return  to  Nepal  and  had  failed  to  direct
       himself to the burden of proof laying on the Respondent,  in  respect
       of whether or not the decision to remove is proportionate.

    7. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Eshan on the
       23rd September 2015, in which she found that the grounds at paragraph
       2 (E) arguing that in finding at  [35] that no approach had been made
       to the local authority, the Judge failed to consider the evidence  at
       paragraph 25 of the social worker's report, was arguable and  further
       she found that the other grounds may be argued, but  whether  or  not
       grounds supporting  the  permission  to  appeal  were  sufficient  to
       overturn the Judge's decision and was said to be another matter.

    8. At the start of the appeal Mr Chipperford on behalf of the  Appellant
       sought an adjournment on the basis that no interpreter  was  present.
       Mr Chipperford said that the Appellant had spoken to  his  solicitors
       who had said that a Nepali interpreter was going to be in  attendance
       at the appeal hearing, but having checked the court file,  there  was
       no evidence of an interpreter having been requested, and indeed,  the
       notes from the Tribunal's clerk in  respect  of  whether  or  not  an
       interpreter  was  required,  it  was  specifically  noted   that   no
       interpreter was required. There is no  evidence  of  the  Appellant's
       solicitors having requested an interpreter, and  I  further  bore  in
       mind that the Tribunal was  simply  dealing  with  an  error  of  law
       hearing first, and that in respect of such an error of  law  hearing,
       the Appellant would not be required to give evidence. Mr  Chipperford
       was  unable  to  point  me  to  any  correspondence  sent  from   the
       Appellant's solicitors requesting an interpreter at the error of  law
       hearing. In such circumstances, in applying the overriding objective,
       I determined that it was appropriate  to  continue  with  the  appeal
       hearing in the absence of an interpreter, as Mr Chipperford was there
       to make representations for the Appellant and was perfectly  able  to
       argue the error of law hearing before the  Upper  Tribunal  and  that
       evidence would not be required from  the  Appellant  at  that  stage.
       Although the Appellant wished to  have  an  interpreter  present,  to
       understand what was being said, without there  being  a  request  for
       such an interpreter, given  the  need  to  deal  with  cases  fairly,
       justly, and proportionately  applying  the  overriding  objective.  I
       considered that the case could be dealt with fairly and justly by the
       Appellant's counsel making all representations, and  that  given  the
       cost  of  an  adjournment  and  the  delay  that  would  thereby   be
       encountered, dealing with the case justly and fairly did not  require
       the case to be adjourned.

    9. Mr Chipperford on behalf of the Appellant  in  his  oral  submissions
       sought to argue that the Judge had failed to take  into  account  the
       full contents of the social workers' report and the evidence given by
       the social worker  that  for  cultural  purposes  the  care  for  the
       Appellant's mother ought to be provided for by the Appellant and that
       it would be seriously detrimental to her if he were to be removed. He
       argued that there was a failure to consider relevant evidence in this
       regard.

   10. In respect of the historic injustice argument,  he  argued  that  the
       historic injustice argument was not taken account when the First-tier
       Tribunal Judge considered proportionality between [27] and [30],  but
       he did concede that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had found that  the
       Appellant's father had first made enquiries about moving to the UK in
       2004, by which stage the Appellant was 21 years old, and  that  there
       was no evidence of him being  dependent  upon  his  father,  for  the
       purpose of Article 8 as at that date.

   11. Mr Kandola on behalf of  the  Respondent  relied  upon  his  Rule  24
       response, which I have fully taken into account. He again argued that
       there was no evidence that the Appellant was in fact  dependent  when
       his father first sought to apply to come to the UK in 2004  and  that
       therefore the historic injustice  argument  falls  away.  He  further
       argued that the findings of the Judge were not inadequate, unclear or
       inconsistent and  that  the  Judge  fully  set  out  the  Appellant's
       mother's abilities and that the Appellant's mother  would  have  been
       able to cope in the  Appellant's  absence  with  the  involvement  of
       social services. He sought to argue that the  social  workers  report
       regarding who should care for the mother was  outside  the  remit  of
       expertise of the social worker and therefore failure to  have  regard
       to it was not a material error.

   12. In his reply Mr Chipperford sought to argue that whether or  not  the
       Appellant was the best person to give assistance to  his  mother  was
       within the remit of the social worker's evidence  and  that  evidence
       had not been considered by the Judge and was therefore a  failure  to
       consider relevant evidence. Although the social  worker  may  not  be
       able to comment upon clinical care, the social worker  was  able,  he
       argued, to give evidence on the mother's well-being, which he  argued
       was what the social worker had sought to do.

   13. I reserve my decision on error of law.

My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

   14. Although the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Robinson  at  [19]
       did make reference to the case of Gurung and Others  v  Secretary  of
       State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ8, when referring to the
       submissions made by Mr Solomon on behalf of the  Appellant  which  he
       said explained the extent to which the  historic  injustice  argument
       may be a relevant factor when considering proportionality in  Article
       8 cases, the Judge when  going  on  to  consider  Article  8  in  the
       individual circumstances of the Appellant, then made no reference  at
       all  to  the  historic  injustice  argument  or  the  relevant  cases
       including: Gurung and Others [2013] EWCA Civ8 and Ghising and  Others
       (Gurkhas/BOC's: Historic Wrong; weight) (Nepal) [2013] UKUT  567  and
       the principle that "where it is found that Article 8 is engaged  and,
       but for the historic wrong, the Appellant would have been settled  in
       the UK long ago, this would ordinarily determine the outcome  of  the
       Article 8 proportionality assessment in an Appellant's favour,  where
       the matters relied upon by the  Secretary  of  State/Entry  Clearance
       consists  solely  of  the  public  interest  in  maintaining  a  firm
       immigration policy".

   15. This therefore does amount to an error of law, but given the  finding
       of First-tier Tribunal Judge Robinson  that  the  Appellant's  father
       only made enquiries about moving to the UK in 2004 when he  was  told
       that he did not qualify to settle here, by which date  the  Appellant
       was aged 21, I find that the Judge's error in  this  regard  was  not
       material, as there was no evidence before First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Robinson that the Appellant was dependent upon his  parents  at  that
       date for the purposes of Article 8, he being an adult at  that  date,
       such that if the Appellant's father had enquired about coming to  the
       UK in 2004 as  found  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Robinson,  the
       historic  injustice  argument  would  not  in  any  event  have  been
       successful or relevant, given the  findings  of  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge  Robinson  regarding  when  enquiries  were  made   about   the
       Appellant's father moving to the UK in the absence, as  was  conceded
       by Mr Chipperford,  of  any  evidence  of  dependency  by  the  adult
       Appellant on his parents at that date. Family life for  the  purposes
       of Article 8 did not  exist  between  the  adult  Appellant  and  his
       parents on the evidence, as at that date, on the evidence before  the
       FTTJ.

   16. In respect of the second ground of appeal that the Judge has  made  a
       decision inconsistent  with  his  accepted  findings  and  has  given
       unclear and inadequate reasons for his decision that the  Appellant's
       removal would not be disproportionate, I find that the reasons  given
       by First-tier Tribunal Judge Robinson between [28] and [43] are clear
       and consistent. The Judge in carrying out a proportionality  exercise
       under Article 8, clearly has to weigh those factors in favour of  the
       Appellant's removal being disproportionate  including  the  emotional
       and practical support that Mrs Malla received from her son  including
       help  with  cooking,  administering  her  medication,  shopping   and
       operating electrical gadgets such as the washing machine and that she
       struggled to walk. However, the Judge weighed against  those  factors
       the public interest in maintaining an effective  immigration  control
       and his findings that the Appellant's mother would be  able  to  live
       independently if she so chose with support from the  local  authority
       and health services and that she had some family support  here  apart
       from her son on an independent means from her late husband's pension,
       as being factors in favour of the decision being proportionate.

   17. In respect of the ground arguing that the Judge misapplied  the  test
       of exceptionality, I find that when looking at  the  judgement  as  a
       whole, the Judge has not applied a test of  exceptionality.  Although
       he stated that there is no evidence to suggest that the circumstances
       of the case were exceptional at [38], he has  not  then  gone  on  to
       apply the exceptionality test.

   18. However, in respect of the evidence of the social worker, Mr  Charles
       Musendo although the Judge has clearly taken account of  this  report
       and described at [32] the evidence given by Mr Musendo in his  report
       at paragraph 18 and  19  of  the  report  regarding  the  Appellant's
       relationship with his mother in which the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       found "Mrs Malla receives emotional and practical  support  from  her
       son. She relies upon him to meet some  of  her  physical  needs  e.g.
       cooking, administering her medication, shopping  and  operating  some
       electrical gadgets including the washing machine. I  have  noted  her
       medical condition which is briefly described in the  GPs  letter.  Mr
       Musendo observed that she struggles to walk" and goes on at  [33]  to
       find that "the key aspect of the Appellant's case is his relationship
       with his mother and her dependence  on  him  to  perform  some  daily
       tasks. It is not suggested that she cannot wash and bath herself.  It
       is not clear whether she can cook for herself".

   19. Although First-Tier Tribunal Judge Robinson has considered the social
       workers report to the extent that he dealt  with  the  physical  care
       provided by the Appellant  for  his  mother,  the  Judge  within  his
       decision has seemingly not taken  account  of  the  evidence  of  the
       social worker Mr Musendo on the effect of the Appellant's removal  on
       the emotional and mental well-being of Mrs Malla,  which  the  social
       worker considered at paragraphs 25  to  27  of  his  report  and  his
       evidence regarding his assessment that Mr Babin Malla, the  Appellant
       and not social services, is the person needed given the  overwhelming
       dependency of Mrs Malla on her son and that  in  his  assessment  she
       does need a full-time carer and that in his assessment she could  not
       live on her own and that the Appellant's removal to  Nepal  would  in
       his assessment be seriously detrimental to Mrs Malla's well-being and
       that there was an obvious risk of a potential negative impact on  Mrs
       Malla's health, as well as obvious trauma to her to be forced  to  be
       separated from her only family member, if he were to be removed  from
       the UK. There is no evidence of First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Robinson
       having considered this aspect of the social workers evidence when  he
       found in [41] that "I take the view that his mother would be able  to
       live independently if she chose  to,  with  support  from  the  local
       authority and health services".

   20. I find that the failure to consider the social worker's  evidence  in
       this regard does amount to an error of law, in that it is  a  failure
       to take account of relevant evidence in this regard. I  further  find
       that such error of law  is  material,  given  that  this  failure  to
       consider the evidence fully from the social  worker,  may  well  have
       affected the decision  which  ultimately  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Robinson made, and that he may have reached a  different  conclusion,
       had that evidence been properly considered. I therefore do find  that
       the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Robinson  contains  a
       material error of law and I set aside that decision.

   21. In my judgement the social worker when talking about  the  effect  of
       the Appellant's removal on Mrs Malla's well-being between  paragraphs
       25 and 27, is not seeking to give any psychiatric diagnosis as to the
       effect of the Appellant's removal, but is simply stating what in  his
       opinion the effect of the Appellant's removal to Nepal on Mrs Malla's
       well-being would be. I consider that he is  in  a  position  to  give
       evidence as to the overwhelming dependency of Mrs Malla  on  her  son
       and who, in his professional opinion as a social  worker,  is  better
       placed to provide such care that she needs, and  the  effect  on  her
       well-being of her son's removal. I do not consider that he  has  gone
       beyond the remit of his expertise in this regard.

   22. In respect of the ground arguing that the Judge misapplied  the  test
       of exceptionality, I find that when looking at  the  judgement  as  a
       whole, the Judge has not applied a test of  exceptionality.  Although
       he stated that there is no evidence to suggest that the circumstances
       of the case were exceptional at [38], he has  not  then  gone  on  to
       apply the exceptionality test.

   23. In my judgement, the evidence of the social worker  Mr  Musendo  does
       need to be  properly  evaluated,  and  a  full  reassessment  of  the
       Appellant's claim under Article 8 made, taking  account  all  of  the
       relevant factors. I therefore do consider that it is appropriate  for
       the case to be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing
       de novo.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-Tier Tribunal Judge Robinson does contain  a  material
error of law and is set aside;

I remit the case back to the First-tier Tribunal,  for  hearing  before  any
judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Robinson;

I make no order in respect of anonymity, no  order  having  been  sought  in
respect thereof from the First-tier Tribunal, and no such order having  been
sought before me.


Signed      Dated 24th December 2015

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty
