
IAC-BFD- MD


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37783/2013,

                                                          IA/37792/2013,

                                                          IA/37816/2013,

                                                          IA/37800/2013,


IA/37810/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 22nd October 2014                            |On 31st October 2014       |
|Prepared                                        |                           |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

                     mr maqsood rehman - first Appellant
                     mrs sumyia hina - second Appellant
                     miss yusra maqsood- third Appellant
                    miss zaima maqsood - FOURTH Appellant
                master mewah maqsood rehman - fifth appellant
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss L Mair, of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1.  The  Appellants  are  citizens  of  Pakistan.  The  first  and  second
    Appellants are  husband  and  wife  and  the  third  fourth  and  fifth
    Appellants their children.

 2. By a decision dated 2nd  September  2013  the  Respondent  refused  the
    applications of all appellants to vary their leave to remain in the UK.
    The first Appellant had originally arrived in the UK on a student  visa
    which  was  continually  renewed  until  23rd  June  2013.  The   other
    Appellants arrived as his dependents.

 3. They appealed the Respondent's refusal on the basis that by the time of
    their applications to vary their leave to remain, the third  Appellant,
    Yusra, had been in the United Kingdom for eight years  and  the  fourth
    Appellant, Zaima, for almost seven.

 4. The appeals came before Judge Hillis who in a determination promulgated
    on 13th May 2014, dismissed all appeals, it would  appear  essentially,
    under Article 8 ECHR. However under  a  heading  in  his  determination
    entitled 'Summary of Decision' it seems the Judge  also  dismissed  the
    appeals under the Immigration Rules.

 5. Permission to appeal  Judge  Hillis'  determination  was  granted.  The
    relevant parts of the grant of permission reads as follows,

         "The Appellants seek permission  to  appeal,  in  time,  against  a
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge J Hillis) promulgated on
         13 May 2014 whereby it dismissed the  Appellants'  appeals  against
         the Secretary of State's decision to refuse to vary leave to remain
         and to remove from the UK by way of directions.

         The grounds assert that the judge made a number of material  errors
         of fact amounting to a material error of law. He  incorrectly  said
         that the decision to remove was under s. 10 of  the  1999  Act.  He
         incorrectly said that the appeal proceeded solely on the  basis  of
         Article 8 ECHR whereas it was also made under the Rules. He  failed
         to note that at the date of the hearing a second child had been  in
         the UK for 7 years and he wrongly  said  that  the  Appellants  had
         previously applied for asylum on two occasions. He failed  to  make
         findings on the first Appellant's entitlement  for  ILR  under  the
         Rules on the basis of 10 years' residence, which had accrued by the
         date of the hearing and his consideration of the situation  of  the
         two eldest children was flawed.

         In paragraph 31 the Judge refers to the previous dismissal  of  the
         first Appellant's asylum appeals. It appears  that  there  were  no
         such appeals. There may also be merit in the argument regarding the
         lack of consideration of the  situation  of  the  second  daughter.
         However it would seem that the decision itself "stopped the  clock"
         on  the  first  Appellant's  10-year  residence.  Nevertheless  all
         grounds may be argued and permission is granted."

Error of Law Hearing

 6.  Before me Mr Diwnycz on behalf of the  Respondent,  sensibly  accepted
    that not only did the grounds seeking permission have merit, but  there
    was nothing he could put forward to defend Judge Hillis' determination.
    His Rule 24 response accepts as much. In these circumstances I did  not
    need to hear from Miss Mair.

 7. I am satisfied that the determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    legally unsustainable for errors of material fact amounting to an error
    of law. The Judge wrongly asserted that the Appellants  were  appealing
    on the basis of Article 8 ECHR  only  whereas  it  is  clear  from  the
    documentary evidence that they  were  also  appealing  the  Respondents
    refusal on the basis that the decisions were not in accordance with the
    Immigration Rules. This error on the Judge's part led him  to  make  no
    assessment of the Appellants'  cases  under  the  relevant  Immigration
    Rules. In addition  there is a failure to note  relevant  facts  namely
    that the fourth Appellant had been in the UK in excess of  seven  years
    at the date of hearing.

 8. Furthermore for unknown reasons the Judge refers, on two occasions,  to
    the Appellants having applied for asylum and having had  those  appeals
    dismissed [27] and [31] This is not the case and it is  hard  to  where
    the evidence for that conclusion came from.

 9. In addition I find the determination inadequate in  terms  of  findings
    and reasons for findings. All of these matters render the determination
    legally unsustainable.

10. So far as disposal is concerned, both representatives were of the  view
    that the determination is infected by error to the extent that  nothing
    could be preserved from it. In these circumstances, this leaves me with
    no alternative but to set aside the determination and remit the  matter
    to the FtT  (not  Judge  Hillis),  to  undertake  a  new  fact  finding
    exercise. None of the findings made by Judge Hillis shall stand.

Decision

11. The determination of the FtT dated 13th May 2014 is  set  aside.  These
    appeals will be heard in the FtT (not Judge Hillis) and  that  Tribunal
    will remake the decision.

No anonymity direction is made



Signature                                             Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal                           31st October 2014

