
[pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/37907/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8th October 2015                  |On 28th October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD


                                   Between

                               Amjad Ali Amjad
                       (anonymity dirECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Saini - Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Wilding - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on  11th  March  1988.   He
    appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Aujla  issued
    on 5th May 2015, dismissing on human rights grounds his appeal  against
    the decision of the Respondent made on 9th  September  2014  to  refuse
    further leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student and to remove him
    from the United Kingdom by way of directions under Section  47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The Secretary of State refused the application  because  the  Appellant
    had not provided a Confirmation of Acceptance for  Studies  certificate
    (CAS)  and  had  not  demonstrated  the   required   English   language
    proficiency.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Chambers
    on 10th July 2015.  He said:

         "2.  The grounds aver that the Judge did  not  consider  Article  8
             ECHR; that principles of common-law fairness should have  been
             applied in the Appellant's favour and that the Appellant was a
             victim of injustice.

         3.   The Appellant said in evidence that he was unable to submit  a
             CAS with his application because he did not  have  an  English
             language certificate.

         4.   The case raised in the grounds seems to  have  been  that  the
             Appellant could not sit an English test in order to  obtain  a
             CAS without his passport which was with the Respondent.

         5.   The decision was not  made  until  9th  September  2014.   The
             application was made in July of that year when,  in  the  same
             month, the Appellant through his representatives was  pressing
             the Respondent to give an attested copy  of  the  passport  to
             enable the Appellant to sit the English language test.

         6.   Although there is  no  prospect  on  the  authorities  of  the
             Article 8 limb of the appeal succeeding it  is  arguable  that
             insufficient  consideration  was  made  to  the   'Catch   22'
             situation  the  Appellant  found  himself  in  thus   probably
             requiring consideration of the common-law fairness  argument."



 4. The position of the Home Office as set out in a Rule 24 response to the
    Grounds of Appeal is that it is not the case as stated in  the  grounds
    that the Appellant is in the middle of his studies.  It is  clear  from
    his own evidence that he is not.  It is said that if the Appellant made
    his application prior to gaining his English language requirements that
    mitigates against the finding that the Respondent acted unfairly.

 5. To elaborate somewhat on the grounds it is submitted that the  decision
    of the Tribunal is not fair on the Appellant.  The Secretary  of  State
    acted contrary to her common-law  duty  to  act  fairly.   Reliance  is
    placed on Thakur (PBS decision - common-law fairness) Bangladesh [2011]
    UKUT 00151 and R (on the application of Q and  Others)  v  SSHD  [2003]
    EWCA Civ 364.  It is submitted that the Appellant is in the  middle  of
    his studies and cannot be removed at this moment in time.  The Court of
    Appeal decided in QY China v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 680 that  removing  a
    student in the middle of his  studies  would  constitute  a  breach  of
    Article 8 ECHR.

 6. The immigration history of the Appellant can be summarised as  follows.
    He arrived in the UK on 4th October 2011  with  entry  clearance  as  a
    student valid from 24th August 2011 until  28th  December  2014.   His
    leave to remain was curtailed at some time in 2014  to  expire  on  8th
    July 2014.  On 3rd July 2014 he applied for further leave to remain  as
    a Tier 4  (General)  Student.   It  was  conceded  by  the  Appellant's
    representative at the hearing before Judge Aujla that the Appellant did
    not satisfy the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  At paragraph 19
    of the determination Judge Aujla says:

         "Mr Eruwa made submissions on behalf of the Appellant.   He  relied
         on the  Appellant's  Grounds  of  Appeal  and  submitted  that  the
         Appellant satisfied the requirements of paragraph  276ADE  although
         he was unable to assist me as to how that was  the  case.   He  had
         nothing further to add."

 7. Judge Aujla noted that the Appellant had relied on the sole  ground  of
    Article  8  in  respect  of  his  private  life.   He  found  that  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE were not met.  There was no discussion
    about unfairness.  There is nothing in the  Record  of  Proceedings  to
    indicate that this was raised and it was not  raised  in  the  original
    Grounds of Appeal.  It seems to me therefore that there was no basis on
    which the  Judge was required  to  consider  the  issue  of  common-law
    fairness. It quite simply had not been raised before him.

 8. The position of the Appellant's representative at the hearing before me
    was that it was 'Robinson obvious' and ought to have  been  considered.
    It could be implied that the decision of the judge was  unfair  in  all
    the  circumstances  and  he  ought  to   have   considered   procedural
    unfairness.

 9. The position of Mr Wilding was that the Appellant had made no effort to
    find another college once he knew that the college he  had  applied  to
    had had its licence revoked.  He said there was no evidence of  efforts
    to obtain a copy of the passport from the Home Office.   He  said  that
    the Appellant had been given 60 days to find a new college but had  not
    done  so.   Mr  Wilding  also  relied  on   paragraph   46   of   Patel
    (consideration of Sapkota - unfairness) India [2011] UKUT 484 in  which
    the court said:

         "Where the Appellant is legally represented,  it  is  difficult  to
         complain that the decision was wrong in law where the complaint  is
         a failure to address an issue that was never raised when  it  could
         have  been.   The  absence   of   reasoning   on   the   issue   is
         understandable."

Findings on Error of Law

10. I have some sympathy with the Appellant in this case because I am aware
    that it is sometimes difficult to achieve the return of a passport that
    is in the hands of  the  Home  Office.   I  also  appreciate  that  the
    Appellant in this case was under pressure to submit his application for
    further leave prior to the expiry of his leave on 8th  July  2014.   He
    therefore submitted the application without either a CAS or an  English
    language certificate.  For some reason there is nothing  before  me  to
    show when his leave was actually curtailed or how long he had  although
    Mr Wilding did make a reference to May 2014 when submitting that  there
    was no evidence of the Appellant's attempt to get either  the  passport
    or  an  English  language  certificate.   There  is  nothing   in   the
    determination of the Judge or in the Record of Proceedings to  indicate
    that he was made aware of the attempts to get  the  passport  from  the
    Home Office or of any attempt to get a  CAS  or  the  English  language
    requirement.   Certainly  no  submissions  were  made  to   him   about
    unfairness.  The case as it was put to me in  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
    different to that put before the Judge.  It was the  submission  of  Mr
    Saini that there was impliedly unfairness.  I can  see  that  this  may
    have had  some  merit  had  the  Judge  been  made  aware  of  all  the
    circumstances in this case but he was not.  Indeed reliance was  placed
    solely on paragraph 276ADE despite the fact  that  according  to  Judge
    Aujla the representative was quite unable to explain how the  Appellant
    could succeed under that provision.  He clearly could not.   Article  8
    was relied upon by Mr Saini at the hearing before me, in particular the
    decision CDS (Brazil) [2010] 305 although I have to say  that  although
    this was in the original Grounds of Appeal it was not  referred  to  in
    the grounds seeking permission.  What the Tribunal said  in  that  case
    was that people who have been admitted on a course of  study  at  a  UK
    institution build up social ties during the period of  study  and  this
    may amount to a private life that deserves respect.  The  Appellant  in
    this case has not been admitted on a course of study.   I  do  not  see
    that that case applies.  In any event again there is nothing to suggest
    that this was put before Judge Aujla with submissions  as  to  why  the
    case would apply.

Notice of Decision

I find that there is no material error of law in the determination of  Judge
Aujla and that decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 26th October 2015

N A Baird
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Baird
