
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/37032/2013
     IA/41212/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12 June 2014                               |On 17th July 2014            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                             RAJ ANILKUMAR PATEL
                             KRUTIBEN RAJ PATEL

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr G Jack, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss C Litchfield, Counsel, instructed by Khans
Solicitors
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of  the
     First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeals  of  two  citizens  of  India
     (hereinafter "the claimants") against decisions of  the  Secretary  of
     State to remove them from the United Kingdom having declined to extend
     their leave as Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) and partner.

  2. I have to say that this appropriately short determination by the First-
     tier Tribunal and clear grounds of appeal by the  Secretary  of  State
     have proved to be a disguise for a surprisingly taxing case and  I  do
     not think there is any entirely satisfactory answer.  For the  reasons
     that I will explain below I decided that I must dismiss the  Secretary
     of State's appeal.

  3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge allowed the appeal against  the  removal
     decision apparently in the belief that the removal decision ought  not
     to have been made at the same time as the other immigration  decision.
     In so doing he clearly overlooked a change in the law in  2013.   Both
     parties agree that the removal decision was made appropriately if  the
     decision to refuse the application was an appropriate decision.

  4. Before me the Secretary of State appeared to be in a  strong  position
     because it seems that the claimants had failed to disclose contractual
     documents that were required to be disclosed when the application  was
     made and, according to the Secretary  of  State,  the  documents  have
     never been disclosed.

  5. The claimants' present representatives argued  contrarily.  They  said
     that the necessary  contractual  documents  were  not  sent  with  the
     application but were sent very soon afterwards and ought to have  been
     considered.  It is common ground that if the documents  were  received
     before a decision  was  made  then  under  principles  of  common  law
     fairness they ought to have been considered.

  6. The Secretary of State has an understandable sense  of  vexation.  She
     has been accused of  being  unfair  because  she  has  not  considered
     documents that she has never found and from her perspective it is hard
     to see what more she should have done.

  7. The first point taken in the grounds of appeal is that the  judge  did
     not make any decision about whether the documents  had  actually  been
     sent, and "sent" in this context must mean "arrived".  In a sense that
     is correct.  There is no sentence in the determination that spells out
     in terms a finding by the judge that the documents were sent  or  that
     they arrived.  However I do not think that is a fair  way  of  reading
     the determination and I remind myself that it  is  trite  law  that  I
     should, if I can, read the determination in a way that makes sense  of
     the findings and sense of the decision.

  8. Paragraph 13 is crucial.  There the judge said:

         "However, I remind myself of the case of  Thakur  (PBS  decision  -
         common law fairness) Bangladesh [2011] UKUT 151  (IAC)  which  says
         that the respondent must act fairly.  If  the  appellant  sent  the
         document, and he says he did and there is no evidence that  he  did
         not, the respondent should have referred to it and  considered  it,
         albeit it was not necessarily going to make any difference.  To not
         do so would not be to act fairly or take into account all  relevant
         matters.  Because of those factors and because of the  consequences
         for the appellants I allow the appeal to the very limited extent of
         remitting the decision to the respondent to look  at  the  material
         that the first appellant said  he  submitted  before  the  date  of
         decision."

  9. It seems to me that although the judge can be  criticised  fairly  for
     omitting to tie down his findings  behind  all  possible  argument  by
     making an extra finding, it is much  more  likely  that  he  meant  in
     paragraph 13 that he was satisfied that the document was sent than  it
     is to think that, having directed himself of the need  for  it  to  be
     sent and then decided to remit the appeal to the  respondent,  he  was
     undecided if it had been sent or not.  That  would  require  something
     close to perversity and I am not satisfied at all that  that  is  what
     happened.

 10. Although the judge directed himself firmly about whether the  document
     had been sent it is much more important to consider whether or not  it
     arrived.  The judge noted at paragraph 8  of  the  determination  that
     "the appellant", as the first claimant was then described, had  posted
     the contract on or about 2 August. The judge accepted that  there  was
     no corroboratory evidence that that is what  the  claimant  had  done.
     This observation follows closely from the judge's manuscript Record of
     Proceedings which I have read.   Post  generally  arrives.   Something
     that is posted probably gets to the destination  and  I  am  satisfied
     that the judge meant that he was satisfied that the documents had been
     posted and they had arrived and they had not  been  processed  by  the
     Secretary of State.

 11. It is  rather  regrettable  that  this  has  to  be  characterised  as
     unfairness on the part of the Secretary of State because there  is  no
     evidence that the Secretary of State ever realised that  the  document
     had arrived. It has not been suggested that the Secretary of State  is
     acting spitefully or perversely, but I can  only  make  sense  of  the
     judge's findings  by  accepting  that  the  judge  believed  the  oral
     evidence before him.

 12. Mr Jack, who is an experienced Presenting Officer, immediately pointed
     out there were various things that could have been done. It would have
     been interesting to have asked the appellant how  the  documents  were
     posted, where precisely they were posted, why  he  did  not  think  it
     important to get any proof of posting,  why  he  did  not  use  Record
     Delivery, why, if he is so concerned with the effect on his wife,  his
     wife did not come with him and give evidence that  the  documents  had
     been posted, or why there was no  follow  up  with  the  Secretary  of
     State's Department to see if in fact they had been received.

 13. All of these  are  things  that  could  have  been  raised  in  cross-
     examination and it appears they were not.  Perhaps  they  should  have
     been.  I note the Secretary of State was represented before the First-
     tier Tribunal by Counsel.  It may be that Counsel was not particularly
     experienced.  I do not know.  It  may  be  that  the  quality  of  the
     evidence given was so transparently honest that questions of that kind
     would have seemed rather pathetic and futile.  I was not there.   What
     is clear is that they were not asked and the judge made  findings  and
     that were not perverse or otherwise not.

 14. It follows therefore, although not with any great enthusiasm, I  think
     the proper way of interpreting the determination is  by  finding  that
     the First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted that  documents  were  sent  by
     post and therefore arrived and should  have  been  considered  by  the
     Secretary of State.

 15. There is not very much that Miss Litchfield can add to this.  It  must
     be the judge's finding they were sent and they arrived and  that  they
     have been lost by the Secretary of State. It follows  therefore  that,
     given the findings, the judge made a correct decision. It required the
     Secretary of State to make a new decision. No doubt the claimants will
     be asked to provide copies of the disputed documents.

 16. I do hope that nobody reading this decision will  get  the  impression
     that it is an easy matter to get round a failure to provide  documents
     on time.  An applicant who omits  documents  from  an  application  by
     mistake would be very well advised to go to a great deal of trouble to
     prove that the documents  were  sent  later  and  had  been  received.
     Similarly if their arrival is disputed at an appeal the  Secretary  of
     State's  representatives  should  be   encouraged   to   cross-examine
     rigorously people who claim to have  sent  documents  that  cannot  be
     traced.

 17. The fact is that I have before me an  appeal  that  has  already  been
     decided and I am persuaded by reading it carefully that the judge made
     permissible findings that he did not explain as well as he might  have
     done. The finding support the conclusion reached by the judge although
     the decision to allow the  appeal  against  a  removal  was  made  for
     entirely the wrong reasons.

15.  It follows therefore that I dismiss the Secretary of State appeal.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 3 July 2014                    |








