
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37144/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 March 2015                              |On 31 March 2015              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                          ERNEST KUDZANAI MUNYANYI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Ernest Kudzanai Munyanyi, was born on 6 January 1981 and
    is a male citizen of Zimbabwe.  By a decision promulgated on 4 December
    2014, the First-tier Tribunal allowed the appellant's appeal in respect
    of the issue of a residence card to him as an  extended  family  member
    (the partner in a durable relationship of Ms Jana Gorina).

 2. The respondent has appealed against that decision on the basis that  it
    is contrary to Ihmedu (OFMs-meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00340 and  the
    provisions of Regulation 17(4) of  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
    2006.  The Secretary of State does not take issue with the findings  of
    fact of First-tier Tribunal (namely, that Ms Gorina and  the  appellant
    are and have been in a durable relationship) but complains rather  that
    the appeal should have been allowed to  the  limited  extent  that  the
    matter be returned to the Secretary of State for further consideration;
    the discretion to issue a residence card to an "extended family member"
    lies solely with  the  Secretary  of  State,  and  not  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 3. I agree with the Secretary of State and explained the position  to  the
    appellant I announced my decision in open court.

Notice of Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 4 December  2014
is set aside.  I have remade the decision.  The appellant's  appeal  against
the respondent's decision dated 6 September 2014 is allowed to  the  limited
extent that the matter is returned to the Secretary  of  State  for  further
consideration.   The  findings  of  fact  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  are
preserved.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                              Date 30 March 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane








