


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37448/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 5 March 2014                             |On: 12 March 2014            |
|                                              |                             |



                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             l'hocine kaci aissa
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms V Laughton, instructed by Wilson Solicitors LLP


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department  against
the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing Mr Aissa's  appeal  against
a decision to remove him from the United Kingdom following  the  refusal  of
his application for indefinite leave  to  remain  on  the  grounds  of  long
residence.  For the  purposes  of  this  decision,  I  shall  refer  to  the
Secretary of State  as  the  respondent  and  Mr  Aissa  as  the  appellant,
reflecting their positions as they were in the appeal before the  First-tier
Tribunal.

The appellant is a citizen of Algeria, born on 4 November 1965.  He  arrived
in the United Kingdom on 1 July  1998  on  a  visitor  visa  valid  for  six
months. On 17 May 2001 he was granted a right of  residence  as  the  family
member of an EEA national until 14 May 2006. On 7 September 2010 he  applied
for permanent  residence  as  a  family  member  of  an  EEA  national.  His
application was refused on 19 January 2011. On  17  July  2012  he  made  an
application for settlement on the basis of 14 years long  residence  in  the
United Kingdom.

The appellant's application was refused on 19 August 2013.  The  respondent,
in refusing the application, noted that he  had  married  his  EEA  national
spouse on 17 July 2000 but had divorced on 27 October 2005  on  the  grounds
that they had lived apart for a continuous period  of  at  least  two  years
immediately preceding the presentation  of  the  divorce  petition.  It  was
noted that he had failed to notify the Secretary of State of the  change  in
his circumstances. With regard to paragraph 276B of the  immigration  rules,
he had not completed 10 years of continuous lawful residence.  Although  the
application had been made on the basis  of  14  years  long  residence,  the
provision to grant indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  that  basis  had  been
removed from the immigration rules on 9 July 2012, prior to the date of  his
application. The respondent went on to  consider  Article  8  of  the  ECHR.
Since the appellant did not have a partner or child in the  United  Kingdom,
he did not meet the requirements in Appendix FM of  the  immigration  rules.
With regard to paragraph 276ADE the respondent noted that the appellant  had
not lived in the United Kingdom for at least 20 years  and  considered  that
he would have  retained  ties  to  Algeria.  There  were  no  compelling  or
compassionate circumstances to justify allowing him to remain in the  United
Kingdom  on  an  exceptional  basis  and  accordingly  his  application  was
refused.

The appellant's grounds of appeal before the First-tier Tribunal were  based
upon his private life under Article 8 of the ECHR.

The appellant's appeal was heard in the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  before
First-tier Tribunal Judge Gillespie.  The  judge  recorded  the  appellant's
evidence. He noted his claim to have experienced discrimination  in  Algeria
on the basis of his Berber ethnic origin. He had travelled to  France  as  a
student in September 1997 and had remained there for a year until June  1998
when he entered the United Kingdom on a visitor  visa.  He  met  his  former
spouse, a German national, in January 1999 and married her in July 2000.  In
late February or early March 2002 he travelled to Algeria for two  weeks  to
visit his family and had not returned to the country since then. He and  his
wife separated in 2004 and divorced in 2005. His parents and  some  siblings
remained in Algeria but he had not  seen  them  since  2002.   He  had  been
continuously employed in the United Kingdom since 2002, working as  a  chef.
He had also undertaken studies in IT and computing  and  in  September  2007
commenced a degree course in food technology but  discontinued  his  studies
when required to pay the full fee as a foreign student. He  had  been  self-
supporting and had paid tax and national insurance contributions.

The judge considered the immigration rules relating  to  private  life,  but
concluded that the appellant could not meet the  requirements  of  paragraph
276ADE as he had been resident in the United Kingdom for less than 20  years
and had retained ties to Algeria. However he considered that the  rules  did
not adequately address all relevant factors appropriate to  the  appellant's
circumstances since they did not provide for  consideration  of  the  nature
and strength of his existing ties or for consideration of a situation  where
there were only very tenuous ties to the country of removal. He  found  that
the appellant therefore had good grounds for seeking protection outside  the
rules and he went on  to  consider  Article  8  in  the  wider  context.  He
considered that the appellant had established a private life in  the  United
Kingdom over a period of 15 years and concluded that the  cumulative  effect
of his circumstances, namely his length of residence, his  tenuous  ties  to
Algeria, his continuous  employment  and  tax  record  and  the  absence  of
enforcement action or intent at evasion or  deception,  was  such  that  the
respondent had failed to show that his removal was  justified  in  terms  of
Article 8(2) of the ECHR. He accordingly allowed the  appeal  on  Article  8
human rights grounds.

The respondent sought permission  to  appeal  that  decision  to  the  Upper
Tribunal on the grounds that the judge had  failed  to  identify  compelling
circumstances not recognised by the immigration  rules  and  had  failed  to
follow the approach in Nagre, R (on  the  application  of)  v  Secretary  of
State for the Home Department [2013] EWHC 720, MF (Nigeria) v  Secretary  of
State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 and Gulshan (Article 8  -
new Rules - correct approach) Pakistan [2013]  UKUT  640.  It  was  asserted
further that the judge had  failed  to  provide  adequate  reasons  why  the
appellant had no ties to Algeria.

Permission to appeal was granted on 31 January 2014.

Appeal before the Upper Tribunal

 The appeal came before me on 5 March  2014.  I  heard  submissions  on  the
error of law.

Ms Isherwood expanded upon the grounds of appeal, submitting that the  judge
had failed to provide  adequate  reasons  for  concluding  that  there  were
arguably good grounds for looking  beyond  the  immigration  rules  and  for
concluding that the appellant's circumstances  were  compelling.  There  had
been inadequate consideration of the Secretary of State's position.

Ms Laughton relied upon her response to the grounds of appeal and  submitted
that the grounds were simply an attempt to appeal the decision on the  facts
and did not demonstrate any legal errors on  the  part  of  the  judge.  The
judge had correctly directed himself on the law and the findings of fact  he
had made were accordingly open to  him.  He  had  directed  himself  to  the
relevant case law and to the appropriate principles in  Nagre,  Gulshan  and
Shahzad (Art 8: legitimate aim)  Pakistan  [2014]  UKUT  85.  He  had  found
arguably good grounds for looking  outside  the  rules  and  had  identified
compelling circumstances in the appellant's case. There was no need for  him
to go on to consider exceptionality as that was not  the  appropriate  test.
The respondent was not alleging perversity.

I enquired of the parties if there was further evidence relied upon  in  the
event that an error of law was found and the  decision  set  aside  and  re-
made. Ms Laughton advised me that there was no  further  evidence  and  that
she would rely on the submissions set  out  in  her  rule  24  response.  Ms
Isherwood made further brief submissions and  Ms  Laughton  responded.  They
were both content for the decision to be  re-made  on  the  basis  of  those
submissions, in the event of the decision being set  aside.  It  was  agreed
that the judge's findings of fact were not challenged.

Consideration and Findings

There can be little dispute that the judge's decision was  a  generous  one.
However the relevant issue is whether or not he erred in law in  making  his
decision and whether the grounds in fact amount  simply  to  a  disagreement
with his generous findings. It is indeed the case that the  judge  carefully
set out the relevant case law and the principles  set  out  in  the  leading
cases of Nagre, MF  (Nigeria)  and  Gulshan.  At  paragraphs  12  to  14  he
considered the immigration rules and the approach of  the  courts  to  those
rules, identifying at paragraph 12 that it was not  appropriate  to  "embark
upon a free-wheeling article 8  analysis  unencumbered  by  the  rules".  He
properly  identified  and  followed  the  approach  endorsed  in  Shazad  at
paragraph 31:

    "Where an area of the rules does not have such  an  express  mechanism,
    the approach in R (Nagre) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) ([29]-[31] in particular and Gulshan (Article 8
    - new Rules -  correct  approach)  [2013]  UKUT  640  (IAC)  should  be
    followed: i.e. after applying the requirements of the  rules,  only  if
    there may be arguably good grounds for granting leave to remain outside
    them is it necessary for Article  8  purposes  to  go  on  to  consider
    whether there are compelling circumstances not sufficiently  recognised
    under them."


In line with that approach, the judge found, at  paragraph  13,  that  there
were arguably good grounds for seeking protection beyond the rules  and,  at
paragraph 14, that there  were  compelling  circumstances  not  sufficiently
recognised under the rules. However, it seems to me that, in  so  doing,  he
fell into legal error by failing to give adequate reasons for  finding  that
those arguably good grounds and compelling circumstances existed.

The reason given  by  the  judge,  at  paragraph  13,  for  concluding  that
arguably good grounds existed for seeking protection outside the rules,  was
that the rules did not provide  for  consideration  of  circumstances  where
there remained only tenuous ties to the country  of  removal.  I  find  such
reasoning to be  unsustainable  for  the  following  reasons.  Firstly,  the
finding itself that  the  appellant's  ties  to  Algeria  were  tenuous  was
plainly inadequately reasoned, given that the appellant's evidence was  that
he had spent the first 32 years of his life in that  country  and  that  his
parents and siblings still lived there. Whilst it was his accepted  evidence
that he had not returned there since a two week visit in 2002  and  had  not
seen his family since then, the evidence as recorded at paragraph 6  and  in
his statement did not suggest that he had had no  contact  with  them  since
that time and was  that  he  was  aware  that  they  still  remained  there.
Secondly, and even if the judge was entitled to consider  such  ties  to  be
tenuous, the  immigration rules, when taken with the  further  clarification
in Ogundimu (Article 8 - new rules)  Nigeria  [2013]  UKUT  60  clearly  did
provide for circumstances of tenuous ties.

Ms Laughton relied upon the Administrative Court's comments at paragraph  33
of its judgment in Nagre in submitting  that  the  judge  was  justified  in
considering that the rules did not cover the appellant's circumstances:
      "The Secretary of State does not contend that the new rules completely
      cover every conceivable case in which a foreign national may have a
      good claim for leave to remain under Article 8. In relation to both
      Section EX.1 (family life) and paragraph 276ADE (private life) it is
      possible to envisage cases where they would not:
      ...ii) In relation to paragraph 276ADE, for example, there may be
      individual cases of adults who have lived in the United Kingdom for
      less than 20 years and who do retain some ties to their country of
      origin, but in relation to whom the ties they have developed and the
      roots they have put down in the United Kingdom manifestly and strongly
      outweigh those ties, so that it would be disproportionate to remove
      them.."
However, as Ms Isherwood pointed out, the evidence before the judge did  not
indicate a situation where the ties  developed  by  the  appellant  and  the
roots he had put  down  in  the  United  Kingdom  "manifestly  and  strongly
outweighed" the limited ties to Algeria. The appellant had  no  family  ties
to the United Kingdom and the only ties identified by  the  judge  were  his
length of residence and his continuous employment.

In the circumstances it seems to me that  the  judge  was  simply  wrong  to
conclude that the appellant's circumstances were not adequately  covered  by
the rules. He was not entitled, on the basis  of  the  inadequate  reasoning
given, to conclude that there were arguably good grounds for granting  leave
to remain outside the rules. As such, he was not entitled to go any  further
in considering Article 8.

However, even if the judge was justified in considering  Article  8  in  its
wider  context  outside  the  rules,  his  reasoning  with  respect  to  the
existence of compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised under  the
rules was plainly inadequate.  No adequate or proper reasons were  given  by
him for concluding that a person who  had  no  family  ties  to  the  United
Kingdom, whose ties to the United Kingdom consisted of little  more  than  a
good employment record and an absence of recourse to public funds and  whose
period of residence in the United Kingdom had  been  largely  unlawful,  had
established that his circumstances were compelling.  The appellant's  length
of residence was clearly a matter covered  by  the  immigration  rules.  The
fact that he may have succeeded under the 14 years long residence rules  had
he submitted  his  application  two  weeks  earlier  was  not  a  matter  of
significant weight given that the applicable rules were those when  he  made
his application and that any such argument  was  tantamount  to  the  "near-
miss" argument rejected by the Court of Appeal in Miah & Ors v Secretary  of
State for the Home Department  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  261.  The  fact  that  the
appellant, as a Berber, had experienced some problems in Algeria was  not  a
matter of weight and the judge found, at paragraph, 18, that  he  would  not
be at risk on that basis.

The  judge,  at  paragraph  16,  appears  to  have  lightly  dismissed   the
appellant's periods of unlawful residence on the basis that he later  sought
to regularise his position and that  there  was  no  intention  to  deceive.
However in so doing he did not take account of the fact that  the  appellant
had continued to enjoy the benefits of his EEA residence at a time  when  he
was no longer entitled to it following his divorce and had failed to  inform
the Secretary of State of his change in circumstances;  that  he  had  since
that time (in addition to the period from January 1999 to  July  2000)  been
living in the United Kingdom without any lawful residence; and that  he  had
been working since then without any entitlement to do so. The  judge  placed
significant weight upon the appellant's  employment  and  payment  of  taxes
but, as Ms  Isherwood  submitted,  he  had  not  established  himself  in  a
permanent job but was undertaking periods of agency  work  and,  as  already
stated, was not entitled to work after 2005. The fact that he  had  not  had
recourse to public funds and was of good  character  was  confirmed  by  the
Upper Tribunal in Nasim and others (Article 8) Pakistan [2014]  UKUT  25  as
not being a matter to be taken as enhancing a person's human rights.

In all of the circumstances I find that the judge failed  to  give  adequate
reasons for concluding that the appellant's  circumstances  were  compelling
and were such that they were not provided for adequately by the  immigration
rules. His findings in that  respect  are  unsustainable  and  his  decision
accordingly has to be set aside.

As stated above, both parties agreed that the decision could be  re-made  on
the evidence already available together with the  submissions  made  in  the
appellant's rule 24 response and before me. For the reasons given  above,  I
consider that the appellant's appeal has to fail. It is  not  disputed  that
he cannot meet the requirements of Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE  of  the
immigration rules.  In  terms  of  the  principles  in  Nagre,  Gulshan  and
Shahzad, there are no arguably good grounds for  granting  leave  to  remain
outside the rules and thus it is not necessary to go on to consider  Article
8 in any wider context. However, and in any event, the appellant has  failed
to establish that there are any compelling circumstances in  his  case.  His
removal from the  United  Kingdom  would  not  be  disproportionate  to  the
legitimate aim of maintaining an effective  immigration  control  and  would
not be in breach of Article 8 of the ECHR.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an  error  on
a point of law. The Secretary of State's appeal is accordingly  allowed  and
the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.  I  re-make  the
decision by dismissing Mr Aissa's appeal on all grounds.






                               Signed
                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
