
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37440/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16th May 2014                              |On 25th June 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             mrs Helen Bon Dilig

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Selhoff, a Solicitor


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department and I shall refer to her as "the claimant."  The  respondent
    is a citizen of the Philippines born on 14th May 1971.
2.   The claimant appeals against the determination of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge A E Walker who in a determination promulgated following a hearing
    at Newport on  24th  February  2014  allowed  the  respondent's  appeal
    against the decision of the claimant to the extent that the judge found
    that the claimant's decision was not in accordance with the law.

3.   Before me today the Presenting Officer advised me, after taking  advice
    that the grounds of application failed to identify any error of law  in
    the determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  He and Mr  Selhoff
    agreed that I  should  prepare  a  short  determination  recording  the
    agreement between the parties.

3.   I am satisfied that the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge A  E
    Walker does not contain any error of law.  The making of  the  previous
    decision involved no error on a point of law and I therefore uphold the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision.
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
