

                                                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                  Appeal Numbers:
IA/37781/2014

                                           IA/37783/2014


                                           IA/37784/2014

                                           IA/37786/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               |       Decision and Reasons       |
|                                   |Promulgated                       |
|On 6 August 2015                   |       On 12 August 2015          |
|                                   |                                  |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            (1) Mr KULWANT SINGH
                             (2) Mrs MANJIT KAUR
                          (3) MASTER ARUNDEEP SINGH
                          (4) MASTER KARNJIT SINGH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr R Sharma, Counsel (instructed by Hanson Young)






                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant (the Secretary of State) appealed with  permission
           granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Heynes  on  16  June  2015
           against the decision and reasons of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
           Colvin who had allowed  the  Respondents'  appeals  against  the
           Appellant's decision dated 6 August 2014 to refuse to grant  the
           Respondents leave  to  remain  under  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
           Immigration Rules and/or under Article 8 ECHR and to remove them
           from  the  United  Kingdom.  The  decision   and   reasons   was
           promulgated on 17 April 2015.


      2.    The Respondents, a family, are nationals of India,  parents  and
           minor children, all born there save for  the  Fourth  Respondent
           who was born in the United Kingdom.  None proved lawful entry to
           the United Kingdom.  Their immigration history  is  set  out  in
           Judge Colvin's decision and reasons.  The present  appeals  were
           against the Removal Directions dated 6 August 2014 issued  under
           section 10 of the Immigration and  Asylum  Act  1999,  following
           refusal of the Respondents' applications made on 6 July 2012 for
           leave to remain on the basis that the First Respondent had lived
           in the United Kingdom for more than 14 years.


      3.    Judge Colvin dismissed  the  long  residence  appeal  under  the
           Immigration Rules and the parents' Article 8 ECHR  private  life
           appeal.  The judge found that the First the Respondent had  been
           in the United Kingdom continuously since  at  least  June  2000,
           i.e., over 14 years and that his  application  was  accepted  to
           have been made on 6 July 2012,  prior  to  the  new  Immigration
           Rules which came into force on 9 July  2012.   The  judge  found
           that the Third and Fourth Respondents were minors who had  lived
           in the United Kingdom for 11 and 10 years respectively.  Working
           on the basis that the information about the correct  version  of
           paragraph 276ADE (1) (iv)  cited  to  her  by  the  Respondent's
           counsel was accurate (see [17] and [18]  of  the  determination)
           the judge found that the minor Respondents' private  life  claim
           succeeded, and that they should  not  be  separated  from  their
           parents, either  under  Appendix  FM  (section  EX.1)  or  under
           Article  8  ECHR,  having  regard  to  section  117B(6)  of  the
           Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002: see  [20]  of  the
           determination.  The appeals were allowed  on  that  basis.   The
           judge appears to  have  rejected  the  submission  made  in  the
           skeleton argument (see paragraph 7) that the First  Respondent's
           appeal succeeded under paragraph 276B of the  Immigration  Rules
           as it stood at the date of his  application:  see  [14]  of  the
           determination.


      4.    Permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  as  sought  by  the
           Appellant (the Secretary of State) was granted by  Judge  Heynes
           because he considered that it was arguable that  the  judge  had
           applied an incorrect version  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv),  and
           that the judge had thus omitted to consider whether  or  not  it
           would not be reasonable to expect  the  children  to  leave  the
           United Kingdom.


      5.    Standard directions were made by  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  the
           appeal was listed for an error  of  law  hearing.   No  rule  24
           notice was filed by the Respondents.




      Late application for permission to cross appeal


      6.    Mr Sharma, who had appeared below, was  now  instructed  by  new
           solicitors on  behalf  of  the  Respondents.   He  informed  the
           tribunal that he had only been re-instructed  in  the  last  few
           days  and  had  not  seen  the  determination  until  them.   He
           submitted that [14] of the determination revealed an obvious and
           arguable error of law over the long  residence  rule,  paragraph
           276B, and that permission to cross appeal should be  granted  to
           the Respondents.


      7.    Mr  Tufan  for  the  Secretary  of  State  did  not  oppose  the
           application and indicated that he agreed that there was at least
           probably a material error of law, which could  be  described  as
           obvious.


      8.    So far as it  were  necessary  to  do  so,  the  Upper  Tribunal
           reconstituted itself as the First-tier Tribunal for the purposes
           of extending time (as the Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge is also  a
           Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal)  and  granting  the
           original Appellants permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.
           The First-tier Tribunal dispensed with all formalities  set  out
           in rule 33 of the Tribunal Procedure  Rules  2014,  pursuant  to
           rules 2, 6 and 36 of those rules.  The  delay  on  the  original
           Appellants' part had not been such as to have  caused  prejudice
           to the Secretary of State,  particularly  as  the  Secretary  of
           State's permission to appeal application had not been determined
           until 16 June 2015 and the Secretary of  State  was  effectively
           already contending that the determination was flawed and  should
           be  set  aside.   The  formal  title  of  the   Upper   Tribunal
           proceedings should remain unchanged.






      Submissions - error of law


      9.    It was convenient to deal with  the  cross  appeal  first.    Mr
           Sharma  for  the  Respondents/Appellants  submitted  that  Singh
           [2015] EWCA Civ 74 which he had cited to Judge Colvin showed  at
           [45] thereof that the pre 9 July 2012 version of paragraph  276B
           of the Immigration Rules applied where a valid  application  had
           been made prior to that cut off date.  Here it was accepted  (as
           the reasons for refusal letter dated 21 August 2014 stated) that
           the original First Appellant had made his 14 year application on
           6 July 2012.  If paragraph 276B were  not  satisfied,  then  the
           Article 8  ECHR  considerations  set  out  in  Appendix  FM  and
           paragraphs 276ADE to 276DH applied.  The judge had been confused
           about that.


      10.   Mr Tufan for the Secretary of State accepted  very  fairly  that
           Judge Colvin had misdirected herself and had failed to apply the
           transitional provisions relevant to the 14 year rule.  There was
           no  challenge  to  Judge  Colvin's  findings  of  fact  and   no
           application to amend the permission to appeal application.   Her
           determination would have to be set aside because of the material
           error of law in question.




      The error of law finding


      11.   At the conclusion of submissions, the  tribunal  indicated  that
           accepted Mr Sharma's submissions and found that  the  judge  had
           fallen into material error of law, as both sides  now  accepted.
           The decision and reasons would  be  set  aside  and  the  appeal
           reheard immediately.




      Discussion and fresh decision



      12.   For clarity the tribunal will now refer to the parties by  their
           designations in the First-tier Tribunal.   No  formal  rehearing
           was needed and the tribunal continued in helpful  dialogue  with
           both advocates. The First Appellant's application was made  just
           prior to    the sweeping changes to the Immigration Rules  which
           came into   force on 9 July 2012, and so fall to  be  considered
           under the old rules, which were as follows:










           Long residence in the United Kingdom

           276A. For the purposes of paragraphs 276B to 276D:
           (a) "continuous residence" means residence in the United Kingdom
           for an unbroken period, and for these purposes  a  period  shall
           not be considered to have been  broken  where  an  applicant  is
           absent from the United Kingdom for a period of 6 months or  less
           at any one time, provided that the  applicant  in  question  has
           existing limited leave to enter or remain upon  their  departure
           and return, but shall be considered to have been broken  if  the
           applicant:
           (i) has been removed under Schedule 2 of the 1971  Act,  section
           10 of the 1999 Act, has been deported or  has  left  the  United
           Kingdom having been refused leave to enter or remain here; or
           (ii) has left the United Kingdom and, on doing so,  evidenced  a
           clear intention not to return; or
           (iii) left the United Kingdom in circumstances in which he could
           have had no reasonable expectation at the time of  leaving  that
           he would lawfully be able to return; or
           (iv) has been convicted of an offence and  was  sentenced  to  a
           period of imprisonment or was directed  to  be  detained  in  an
           institution other than a prison  (including,  in  particular,  a
           hospital or an institution for young offenders),  provided  that
           the sentence in question was not a suspended sentence; or
           (v) has spent a total of more than 18  months  absent  from  the
           United Kingdom during the period in question.
           (b) "lawful  residence"  means  residence  which  is  continuous
           residence pursuant to:
           (i) existing leave to enter or remain; or
           (ii) temporary admission within section 11 of the 1971 Act where
           leave to enter or remain is subsequently granted; or
           (iii) an exemption from immigration control, including where  an
           exemption ceases to apply if it is  immediately  followed  by  a
           grant of leave to enter or remain.
           Requirements for indefinite leave to remain  on  the  ground  of
           long residence in the United Kingdom
           276B. The requirements to be met by an applicant for  indefinite
           leave to remain on the ground of long residence  in  the  United
           Kingdom are that:
           (i) (a) he has had at least 10 years continuous lawful residence
           in the United Kingdom; or
           (b) he has had at least 14 years  continuous  residence  in  the
           United Kingdom, excluding any period spent in the United Kingdom
           following service of notice of liability to removal or notice of
           a decision to remove by way of directions under paragraphs 8  to
           10A, or 12 to 14, of Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act  1971  or
           section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 Act, or  of  a
           notice of intention to deport him from the United Kingdom; and
           (ii) having regard to the public interest there are  no  reasons
           why it would be undesirable for him to be given indefinite leave
           to remain on the ground of long residence, taking  into  account
           his:
           (a) age; and
           (b) strength of connections in the United Kingdom; and
           (c) personal history, including character, conduct, associations
           and employment record; and
           (d) domestic circumstances; and
           (e) previous criminal record and the nature of  any  offence  of
           which the person has been convicted; and
           (f) compassionate circumstances; and
           (g) any representations received on the person's behalf; and
           (iii) the applicant has  sufficient  knowledge  of  the  English
           language and sufficient  knowledge  about  life  in  the  United
           Kingdom, unless he is under the age of 18 or aged 65 or over  at
           the time he makes his application.


      13.   It is plain that paragraph 276B(b)(ii)  contains  a  discretion,
           which should normally first be exercised  by  the  Secretary  of
           State.  There was no challenge to Judge  Colvin's  finding  that
           the First Appellant had lived in the United Kingdom continuously
           for more than 14 years, which finding stands.


      14.   That finding fundamentally changed the position of the remaining
           Appellants, which had not been considered by  the  Secretary  of
           State on the  basis  of  his  entitlement  to  settlement.   The
           relevant  decisions  for  his  family  members  are  accordingly
           defective having been reached on a mistaken view  of  the  facts
           and thus were not in accordance with the law.   The tribunal  so
           finds.


      15.   Mr Sharma drew the tribunal's attention to  a  further  relevant
           development, namely that an application had  been  made  on  the
           Fourth Appellant's behalf for British Citizenship,  pursuant  to
           section 1(4) of the British Nationality Act 1981.   This  matter
           was raised at paragraph 23 of his skeleton argument as submitted
           to the First-tier Tribunal.  The application was acknowledged by
           Home Office  on  19  June  2015.   This  matter  is  of  obvious
           relevance to the new decisions which must be taken, although  it
           was not suggested that the Secretary of State ought to  have  or
           indeed could have considered section 1(4) previously.


      16.   Mr Sharma also mentioned that he reserved  his  position  as  to
           whether or not the judge had materially  erred  in  law  on  the
           issue of whether or not it would not be reasonable to expect the
           children to leave the United Kingdom.


      17.   The tribunal indicated that it was not disposed to hear argument
           on that point, in view of its finding that the First Appellant's
           appeal succeeded on the 14 year rule to the extent that  all  of
           the relevant decisions would  have  to  be  made  again  by  the
           Secretary of State.  The "reasonableness" point  would  be  more
           conveniently examined by the Upper Tribunal when  the  President
           had considered which judge(s) might sit  for  that  purpose.  No
           useful purpose would be served by  examining  the  Secretary  of
           State's appeal further.  It is treated  as  withdrawn  with  the
           tribunal's approval.


      18.   The original Appellants'  appeals  accordingly  succeed  to  the
           limited extent that the Secretary of State's decisions  must  be
           remade.  The Secretary of State may find it of  some  assistance
           to  refer  to  the  original  Appellants'   counsel's   skeleton
           argument,  which  if  possible  will   be   appended   to   this
           determination.




      DECISION


       The making of the previous decision involved the making of  an  error
      on    a point of law.  The tribunal allows the onwards appeals by  the
      original Appellants to the Upper Tribunal,  sets  aside  the  original
      decision and remakes the original decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
      as follows:


       The First Appellant's appeal  is  allowed  to  the  extent  that  the
      decision on      his application dated 6 July 2012 is to  be  made  in
      accordance with Judge  Colvin's finding that he has been in the United
      Kingdom continuously for     14 years.


       The remaining appeals are allowed to  the  extent  that  the  related
      decisions   concerning the First Appellant's family members should  be
      remade so as     to reflect the First  Appellant's  entitlement  under
      paragraph 276B of the  Immigration Rules as at 6 July 2012, as well as
      any other relevant matters   as at the date of the fresh decisions.

      Signed                                 Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell




      TO THE RESPONDENT
      FEE AWARD


      No appeal fees were paid so there can be no fee awards


      Signed                                  Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
