
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37070/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10th March 2016                            |On 15th April 2016            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                             Zeeshan Akhtar Raja
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Miah, Counsel instructed by Lee Valley
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Pakistan born on 31st October  1986.
    The Appellant first arrived in the UK on 27th April 2011  when  he  was
    given leave to enter as a visitor until  30th  August  2013.   However,
    that leave was curtailed as from 19th June 2012.  On 29th August  2013,
    the Appellant applied for  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student.  Such leave was granted until 30th January 2015.  On 5th  July
    2014, the Appellant applied for further leave to remain as  the  spouse
    of the Sponsor, Minal Mistry.  That application  was  refused  for  the
    reasons given in the Respondent's letter of 9th  September  2014.   The
    Appellant appealed, and his appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal Somal (the Judge) sitting at Nottingham on 18th May 2015.  The
    Judge allowed the appeal for the reasons given in her Decision  of  the
    same date.  The Respondent sought leave to appeal that decision, and on
    14th September 2015 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The original application was refused under the provisions  of  Appendix
    FM and paragraph 276ADE of the  Statement  of  Changes  in  Immigration
    Rules HC 395.  This was because it was believed that the Appellant  had
    submitted a false document  in  the  nature  of  a  fraudulent  English
    language certificate in the course of a previous application for  leave
    to remain.  The Appellant had used a proxy test taker in respect  of  a
    test taken on 20th August 2013.  That being  the  case,  the  Appellant
    failed to satisfy the suitability requirement given in S-LTR.2.2(a)  of
    Appendix FM.

 4. The Judge allowed the appeal  because  having  considered  the  generic
    evidence of Peter Millington and  Rebecca  Collings  submitted  by  the
    Respondent, and a printout of  an  ETS  search,  the  Judge  found  the
    Appellant to be credible and believed his denial that  he  had  used  a
    proxy test taker.

 5. At the hearing, Mr Mills submitted that in reaching this conclusion the
    Judge had erred in law.  The evidence produced by the Respondent at the
    hearing had not been the best, but the Judge had failed to engage  with
    it and had given insufficient reasons for preferring  the  evidence  of
    the Appellant.  The Respondent had not been represented at the  hearing
    before the Judge, but it was typical of the Judge to deal with cases of
    this nature in that  way.   In  this  respect,  Mr  Mills  produced  an
    unreported Decision under appeal number  IA/49165/2014  from  which  it
    could be said that the Judge used a template in deciding cases of  this
    nature, indicating that she had  not  given  proper  attention  to  the
    evidence.  The Judge had not explained  why  she  had  found  that  the
    Respondent had not proved her allegation to the  required  standard  of
    proof.  The refusal letter had  given  a  lengthy  explanation  of  the
    process whereby the ETS test  certificate  had  been  invalidated.   At
    paragraph 15 of the decision, the Judge had shown that she had  applied
    a higher standard of proof than that required by the decision in  Re  B
    (Children) [2008] UKHL  35.   That  decision  was  that  there  was  no
    heightened standard of proof in deception cases.

 6. In response, Mr Miah argued that there had been no such error  of  law.
    The fact that the  Judge  had  appeared  to  use  a  template  did  not
    necessarily mean that she had  not  engaged  with  the  evidence.   The
    template was just an expedient way of  explaining  her  decision.   The
    previous decision of the Judge relied upon by Mr Mills  was  unreported
    and should not be considered as it was prejudicial.

 7. As regards the standard of proof, Mr Miah said that the decision in  Re
    B was in a case about care proceedings and therefore had no application
    to the present  appeal.   The  Judge  had  correctly  relied  upon  the
    decision in RP (Proof of forgery) Nigeria [2006] UKAIT 00086.

 8. Finally, Mr Miah argued that the Judge had come to a conclusion open to
    her upon the evidence before her and that the  grounds  of  application
    were  no  more  than  a  disagreement  with  that  decision.   It   was
    significant that the Appellant had given evidence  at  the  hearing  in
    English.

 9. I do find an error of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  Judge  which  I
    therefore set aside.  It is unfortunate that the Judge appears to use a
    template to decide cases of this nature as that  gives  the  impression
    that she has not dealt fully with the evidence even if that is not  the
    case.  However, that is not the error of law which I find.  My decision
    is that the Judge erred in law  by  placing  upon  the  Respondent  the
    burden of proving that deception was used by the Appellant "to  a  high
    degree of proof".  The applicable standard is that of  the  balance  of
    probabilities, and as emphatically pointed out in Re B  there  is  only
    one civil standard of proof which is  that  "the  fact  in  issue  more
    probably occurred than not".  The required  standard  of  proof  is  no
    higher than that.  I prefer the decision  in  Re  B  because  it  is  a
    decision of the then House of Lords, and is  later  in  time  than  the
    decision in RP.   As  Re  B  makes  clear,  there  is  no  spectrum  of
    probability as referred to in RP, and therefore  no  higher  degree  of
    proof than that of the balance of probabilities.

10. For these reasons I set aside the decision of the Judge.  I decide that
    that decision be remade in the First-tier Tribunal in  accordance  with
    paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statements.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

The decision is to be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for anonymity and  I  find  no
reason to do so.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
