
[pic]


Upper Tribunal    Appeal Number: IA/37027/2013
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 30 April 2014                                |On 12 May 2014             |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                            Abiodun Abayomi Bello
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Saunders, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr T Ojo instructed by Graceland solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision of
      the First-tier Tribunal allowing the  claimant's  appeal  against  her
      decision to refuse him settlement outside the Immigration Rules HC 395
      (as amended) on Article 8 ECHR private and family life  grounds.   The
      claimant is a Nigerian citizen who has  been  in  the  United  Kingdom
      since 13 September 2002:  on  various  occasions  thereafter,  he  was
      granted leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a student, a  spouse,
      and a Tier 4 Migrant dependant, but he has not had extant leave  since
      31 May 2012.





   2. There were three subsequent applications:  the first, on 30 May  2012,
      was rejected for non-payment of fees.  An  application  for  leave  to
      remain in the United Kingdom as a spouse on 3 August 2012 was rejected
      for the same reason.  On 26 October 2012, the  claimant  submitted  an
      application for indefinite leave to remain on the basis of  10  years'
      residence, which was also rejected.  The  present  application,  again
      for indefinite leave to remain on long residence  grounds  (10  years)
      was made on 19 November 2012, and was considered  and  rejected  under
      the new Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE and also under Article 8 ECHR
      outside the Rules.

Background

   3. The claimant and his wife have three  children,  the  eldest  born  in
      Nigeria in 2001, and two further children born in 2005 and 2011 in the
      United Kingdom.  The claimant was 26 years old when  he  came  to  the
      United Kingdom.  The claimant's wife joined him in the United  Kingdom
      April 2003, initially as a  student.   The  family  have  returned  to
      Nigeria on approximately four occasions in the  period  of  almost  11
      years in the United Kingdom, most recently in September 2010.





   4. All members of the family are Nigerian citizens:  there are no citizen
      children.  The wife is not settled in the United  Kingdom  and  is  no
      longer either studying or working; she became  ill  during  her  third
      pregnancy in 2011 and has been unable to work since then  because  she
      has high blood pressure.  The children have spent, respectively, 11, 9
      and 3 years living with their parents in the United Kingdom.

First-tier Tribunal determination

   5. This is not a 'sole responsibility' case and, save for the question of
      paragraph EX-1, the basis of the claimant's application is  one  which
      could not succeed within the Rules.


   6. First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford found that the claimant could not bring
      himself within the Rules but allowed the appeal because of the  length
      of time for which his children had been in the  United  Kingdom.   She
      found that the requirements of EX.1 were therefore  met  and  at  [23]
      that 'the [claimant] ... should have been granted leave to  remain  in
      the United Kingdom on that basis  without  further  reference  to  any
      other Rules'.

   7. The First-tier Tribunal accepted that in relation to Article 8 outside
      the Rules, the claimant could not show sufficient private life to make
      removal disproportionate and that medical treatment was available  for
      the claimant's wife's hypertension in Nigeria. The judge  nevertheless
      concluded that because two of the children had spent more  than  seven
      years in the United Kingdom, it was unreasonable to expect the  family
      to relocate to Nigeria and that there were compassionate circumstances
      sufficient to enable the claim to succeed outside the Rules,  even  if
      EX.1 were not determinative in their favour.




Basis of appeal


   8. The Secretary of State appealed.  She  contended  that  there  was  no
      consideration of s.55 Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006  in
      the  determination;  that  nevertheless  the  best  interests  of  the
      children  were  to  be  wherever  their  parents  were  living;   that
      insufficient weight had been given to the Nigerian citizenship of  all
      members of the family; that there was insufficient evidence to support
      a finding that the children  would  not  be  able  to  reintegrate  in
      Nigeria. She relied upon the decision of the Supreme Court in  Zoumbas
      v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 74.


   9. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the  reasons  given
      in the First-tier Tribunal were arguably inadequate in  terms  of  the
      best interests  of  the  children  and  the  reasonableness  of  their
      relocation, and ran counter to recent case law.


Upper Tribunal hearing


  10. At the hearing before me, Mr Saunders relied on the grounds of  appeal
      and the perceived inadequacy of the reasons in the First-tier Tribunal
      determination.  The family were all Nigerian nationals with family and
      cultural connections to Nigeria, which had been maintained.  It was in
      the best interests of the children to be with their  parents,  whether
      in Nigeria or the United Kingdom, and to  be  together  as  a  family.
      There was no evidence from the children before the  Tribunal  and  the
      claimant's wife was a former student who was now unable to study.  The
      claimant himself had not had leave to remain for almost two years.  In
      approaching  reasonableness  under  EX.1,  the  Tribunal  should  have
      considered the Nigerian cultural factors.


  11. For the claimant, Mr Ojo argued that the  determination  was  properly
      reasoned and that the relevant rules and case law had  been  correctly
      applied.  He would rely upon the guidance given by the Court of Appeal
      in MF (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2013]
      EWCA Civ 1192 and by Mr Justice Sales in the Administrative  Court  in
      Nagre, R (on the application of) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin).  The decision which the judge made
      had been open to her and there was no error of law therein.


  12. The family had been in the United Kingdom for more than 11  years  and
      the children, for more than nine years.  The situation of the  parents
      had not  been  precarious  until  the  money  ran  out  in  2011/2012.
      Paragraph 277A of the Rules, which dealt with the position  of  single
      parents with  sole  responsibility  unlawfully  discriminated  against
      those in stable two-parent families.  He  accepted  that  he  had  not
      filed a rule 24 reply asserting that  the  claimant  was  entitled  to
      succeed on discrimination grounds on that basis.


  13. Mr Ojo argued  that  the  claimant  and  his  family  had  no  adverse
      immigration history, criminal records  or  recourse  to  public  funds
      which,  he  suggested,  made  them  unique  and  exceptional.    Their
      financial problems were not of their own  making:   the  claimant  had
      tried to go into business, invested all his money and the business had
      then collapsed.  He did have permission to work at the material  time.
      The wife had been ill since her last pregnancy  three  years  earlier,
      beginning with a  diagnosis  of  pre-eclampsia  during  pregnancy  and
      continuing with high blood pressure up to the present day.  Her health
      was continuing to deteriorate.  The claimant's parents had  died,  but
      the wife's parents were still in Nigeria.   Their  circumstances  were
      exceptional and the Tribunal should  consider  the  whole  issue.  The
      Upper Tribunal should uphold the determination and  end  the  family's
      problems.


  14. In relation to the children's best interests, while  they  undoubtedly
      lay in living with their parents, the Tribunal should have  regard  to
      the difficulties which the middle  child  had  experienced  simply  in
      changing schools.  There was a letter from his head  teacher  to  that
      effect.   He sought to introduce  a  number  of  unreported  decisions
      (without having made any application  to  do  so  under  the  Practice
      Direction), to consider  like  cases  should  be  treated  alike,  and
      dismiss the appeal.


  15. In reply, Mr Saunders asked me to exclude the unreported decisions and
      to consider that the claimant had spent two  thirds  of  his  life  in
      Nigeria, to which he and the rest of the family could adapt on return.
       Moving children in these circumstances was not sufficient to meet the
      'reasonableness' test in EX.1 or disproportionate outside the Rules on
      Article 8 grounds.


Discussion


  16. The 'sole responsibility' discrimination argument which Mr Ojo  sought
      to raise at the hearing was not the subject of  a  rule  24  Reply  on
      behalf of the claimant.  Mr Saunders for the Secretary  of  State  did
      not rely on paragraph 277A.  I do not consider that  I  am  seised  of
      this argument.


  17. As regards paragraph EX.1, the First-tier Tribunal  plainly  erred  in
      consider that it stood alone and was determinative of the  appeal:  in
      Sabir (Appendix FM - EX.1 not free standing) (Pakistan) [2014] UKUT 63
      (IAC) , the Upper Tribunal held that:


         "It is plain from the architecture of the Rules as regards partners
         that EX.1 is "parasitic" on the relevant Rule  within  Appendix  FM
         that otherwise grants leave to remain. If EX.1 was intended to be a
         free- standing element some mechanism of identification would  have
         been used. The structure of the Rules as presently drafted requires
         it to be a component part of the leave granting Rule. This  is  now
         made plain by the respondent's guidance dated October 2013."

  18. In this case, the question whether it is 'reasonable'  to  expect  the
      claimant's children  to  return  to  Nigeria  with  their  parents  is
      considered in paragraphs 19-21  of  the  determination.   The  reasons
      challenge  to  that  element  of   the   decision   is   well-founded,
      particularly as they take no account of a number of visits  which  the
      family has apparently made to Nigeria in  the  years  they  have  been
      here.  The claimant does not  have  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
      Kingdom and his wife is no longer either working or  studying.   There
      is care for her hypertension available in Nigeria, as  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge accepted.  There is nothing  exceptional  in  requiring
      children to accompany their parents returning to the country of origin
      and, as  stated  in  the  Supreme  Court's  decision  in  Zoumbas,  at
      paragraph 24, non-citizen children do not  enjoy  the  same  protected
      status as British citizen children:


         "24. There is no irrationality in the conclusion that it was in the
         children's best interests to go with their parents to the  Republic
         of Congo. No doubt it would have been possible to have stated that,
         other things being equal, it was  in  the  best  interests  of  the
         children that they and their parents stayed in the  United  Kingdom
         so that  they  could  obtain  such  benefits  as  health  care  and
         education which the decision-maker recognised might be of a  higher
         standard than would be available in the  Congo.  But  other  things
         were not equal. They were not British citizens. They had  no  right
         to future education and health care in this country. ..."

  19. For all of the above reasons,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  First-tier
      Tribunal made a material error of law and  I  proceed  to  remake  the
      decision.  I do not consider it unreasonable or in breach of s.55 best
      interests for these children to accompany their  parents  to  Nigeria.
      Accordingly, the children cannot bring themselves within EX.1,  which,
      in any event, does not stand alone and is not  determinative  of  this
      appeal.  There are no exceptional compassionate  circumstances  which,
      following Nagre, would mean that the appeal should be allowed  outside
      the Immigration Rules.

  20. The appeal is dismissed on all grounds.




Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law. I set aside the  decision.  I  re-make
the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.



Date                       Signed
                                    Judith Gleeson
                                    Judge of the Upper Tribunal


