
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
IA/37789/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 12th May 2016                         | On 31st May 2016                   |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                            MISS CLAUDIA ANDREWS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms D Ofei-Kwatia, Counsel instructed by Malik Law
Chambers


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Secretary of State in relation to a Decision and Reasons of the  First-
    tier  Tribunal,  Judge  Griffith,  promulgated  on  29th  October  2015
    following a hearing at Taylor House  on  15th October  2015.   By  his
    Decision Judge Griffith allowed the Appellant's appeal on human  rights
    grounds under paragraph  276ADE(vi)  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    Secretary of State sought permission to appeal.  Firstly it is asserted
    that the judge erred in his assessment of paragraph 276ADE(vi)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  The judge had  sought  to  apply  the  guidance  in
    Ogundimu (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 00060 (IAC) to his
    assessment.  The Secretary of State submits that  that  case  concerned
    the  previous  wording  of  paragraph  276ADE(vi)  which  required   an
    applicant to show lack of ties to the country  of  return  whereas  the
    current wording of paragraph 276ADE(vi) provides  that  there  must  be
    very significant obstacles to the Appellant's  integration  on  return.
    Secondly it is asserted that when considering whether  there  would  be
    very significant obstacles to the Appellant's  integration,  the  judge
    should have considered the guidance in Appendix FM 1.0 family life  (as
    a partner or parent) and private life: ten year routes.   The  relevant
    parts of that guidance is then set out in the grounds.

 2. Before me Ms Pal relied on the grounds and Ms Ofei-Kwatia  argued  that
    the judge had not erred as asserted.  The guidance referred to  in  the
    grounds was guidance for caseworkers not for a judge and the judge  had
    not relied upon Ogundimu inappropriately.  The judge had recognised  at
    paragraph 44 of the Decision that  Ogundimu  referred  to  the  earlier
    wording of paragraph 276ADE(vi) but was nevertheless relevant.

 3. I agree with Ms Ofei-Kwatia  that  the  guidance  relied  upon  by  the
    Secretary of State  in  the  grounds  is  just  that;  guidance  for  a
    caseworker and is not binding upon the judge.   Particularly,  when  it
    was not referred to or relied upon before the First-tier Judge.

 4. However, I do accept that the judge has erred  in  his  application  of
    276ADE(vi).  Paragraph 276ADE is the  Immigration  Rule  governing  the
    requirements to be met by an applicant  for  leave  to  remain  on  the
    grounds of private life in the UK.  Prior to 28th July 2014  paragraph
    276ADE(vi) provided that at the date of the application  the  applicant
    is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously in the  UK  for  less
    than twenty years (discounting any period of imprisonment) but  has  no
    ties (including social, cultural or family) with a country to which  he
    would have to go if required to leave the UK.

 5. Since 28th July 2014 that paragraph has provided that an applicant must
    at the date of the application be aged 18 years  or  above,  has  lived
    continuously in the UK for less  than  twenty  years  (discounting  any
    period of imprisonment) but there would be very  significant  obstacles
    to the applicant's integration into the country to which he would  have
    to go if required to leave the UK.

 6. At paragraph 44 of the Decision and Reasons the judge said this:-

         "I have considered whether the Appellant can bring  herself  within
         paragraph 276ADE(vi) as she is over the age of  18  and  has  lived
         continuously in the UK for less than twenty  years;  the  issue  is
         whether  there  would  be  very  significant   obstacles   to   her
         integration into Ghana.  Although based on the previous wording  of
         paragraph 276ADE(vi) which referred to an applicant having no  ties
         including social and cultural or family with the country  to  which
         they would have to go, I have looked for assistance to the case  of
         Ogundimu (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT.   I  consider
         that the issue of 'very significant obstacles' is  related  to  the
         absence or otherwise of real ties that an applicant has to  his  or
         her country.  In Ogundimu the  Tribunal  said  that  ties  involves
         there being 'a  continued  connection  to  life  in  that  country;
         something that ties a claimant to his or her country of origin' and
         something more than 'remote and abstract links'.  The Tribunal also
         stated that consideration of whether a  person  has  no  ties  must
         involve a rounded assessment of all the relevant circumstances  and
         is not to be limited to social, cultural and family circumstances."



 7. I find that in linking very significant obstacles to a lack of ties the
    judge has erred.  The change to the wording of the Rule was done for  a
    reason.  There can be no doubt that it has "raised the bar" and made it
    more difficult for an applicant to succeed.  The previous wording would
    not appear to involve any forward-looking  assessment  as  to  what  is
    likely to be the situation upon return, rather it is simply looking  at
    ties.  It cannot be equivalent.  By way of an  example,  it  could  not
    possibly be said that a person, or indeed a family,  with  no  previous
    ties whatsoever to another country, say the USA or Australia, would  be
    unable to integrate there notwithstanding the lack of  ties.   On  that
    basis I find that the First-tier Tribunal Judge made an error  of  law.
    Given that that was the basis upon which the appeal  was  allowed,  the
    error was clearly material.  I therefore indicated  that  having  found
    the error of law I was going to set aside the Decision.  It was  agreed
    that the facts in this case are  uncontroversial,  it  was  simply  the
    assessment of those facts against the law that was wanting.

 8. I indicated my intention to redecide the case,  there  having  been  no
    application under Rule 15(2A) to permit new or further evidence  to  be
    admitted in accordance with  the  directions  sent  out  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal prior to the hearing.

 9. Ms Ofei-Kwatia expressed herself in difficulties as the  Appellant  was
    not present.  I indicated that it was  my  intention  to  redecide  the
    appeal and I would allow her time to take instructions to  see  if  she
    could secure the Appellant's attendance  but  in  the  absence  of  any
    application to admit further evidence I would  be  proceeding  with  or
    without the Appellant.  After over an  hour  Ms  Ofei-Kwatia  indicated
    that she had spoken to those instructing her and had been told that  as
    the Appellant's grandmother had  had  a  knee  operation  and  she  was
    looking after her  she  would  be  unable  to  attend  that  day.   She
    indicated that she needed to take instructions from the  Appellant  and
    sought an adjournment.  I again referred to the directions sent out  by
    the Upper  Tribunal  to  the  solicitors  which  at  paragraph  5  make
    absolutely clear that in order for further evidence of any  description
    to be admitted a Rule 15(2A) application  must  be  made  and  also  to
    paragraph 4 of the directions which states:-

         "There is a presumption that, in the event of the Tribunal deciding
         that the Decision of the FTT is to be set  aside  is  erroneous  in
         law, the remaking of the Decision  will  take  place  at  the  same
         hearing.  The fresh Decision will normally be based on the evidence
         before the FTT and any further evidence admitted (see  [5]  below),
         together with the parties' arguments.  The parties must be prepared
         accordingly in every case."

10. There had been neither a Rule 15 application nor  any  indication  from
    the Appellant's representatives that there  was  good  reason  why  the
    matter should not  be  redecided  and  I  indicated  that  I  would  be
    redeciding the case and would hear submissions.  As Ms Ofei-Kwatia  had
    not been provided with the necessary papers to prepare she was provided
    with the court's copy of the Appellant's bundle before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to assist in her preparation and  was  allowed  two  hours  in
    which to prepare.

11. The court resumed at 2pm to hear submissions.

12. The factual scenario of this case is that the Appellant is a citizen of
    Ghana born on 17th July 1989 and therefore now aged 26.  She is  single
    with no dependants.

13. She came to the UK on 17th September 2002, aged 13 under  the  auspices
    of a multi-entry visit visa.  She did not return at the expiry  of  the
    six months' leave and has overstayed ever since.  The  date  of  expiry
    would have been mid-February 2003.

14. On 7th December 2005 the Appellant  applied  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain as the grandchild of Wilhelmina Mensa Taylor, a British citizen.
     That application was refused and she was served with an IS.151A as  an
    overstayer on 11th December 2006.  She appealed that Decision  but  the
    appeal was dismissed on 28th February 2007.

15. On 13th September 2007 the Appellant applied for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain outside the Rules on compassionate  grounds  and  then  on  23rd
    January 2012 she applied for leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of  her
    private and family life under the ten year  route.   The  Secretary  of
    State considered the application for indefinite leave to remain outside
    the Rules on compassionate grounds as further submissions following the
    refusal Decision of 28th November 2006.

16. On 29th January 2013 the Appellant applied for leave to remain  on  the
    basis of her private and family life under the ten  year  route.   That
    application was refused without a right of appeal.

17. On 27th June 2014 she was refused permission to proceed with a judicial
    review and on 29th July 2014 was served with IS.75 asking  for  reasons
    why she should be allowed to remain in the UK and on 21st August 2014 a
    Statement of Additional Grounds was received.  Following the  Statement
    of Additional Grounds the Secretary of State issued a Decision  on  4th
    September 2014 refusing her application.

18. The Secretary of State noted that she could not meet  the  requirements
    of Appendix  FM  as  either  a  partner  or  parent  in  light  of  her
    circumstances.  With regard to her private life the Secretary of  State
    considered the application under paragraph 276ADE  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  It was noted that she had not lived in the UK for twenty years,
    was not under the age of 18 and nor was she below 25.  It was  accepted
    however that she had come to the UK at the age of 13 and  had  remained
    for eleven years,  spending  her  teenage  years  in  the  UK  and  had
    completed a degree.  It was not accepted however that  there  would  be
    very significant obstacles to her reintegration into  Ghana.   Contrary
    to what was stated in the additional grounds, namely that she  came  to
    the UK with the intention of starting a new  life,  the  Appellant  had
    actually come to the UK as a visitor and remained without  leave  since
    its expiry.  Whilst the  Secretary  of  State  accepted  that  she  had
    established a private life, she noted that that had been formed in  the
    knowledge she had no legal right to remain.

19. The Secretary of State had  not  accepted  that  she  had  severed  all
    connections  with  Ghana.   It  has  been  previously  noted   in   the
    determination of February 2007 that her parents remained in  Ghana  and
    lived in a "comfortable house".  In the absence of any evidence to  the
    contrary her parents remain in Ghana  although  she  has  not  returned
    there since her arrival in the UK.  The  Secretary  of  State  did  not
    accept that she had no contact with  her  parents.   The  Secretary  of
    State similarly believed her parents would have contributed financially
    to her life in the UK and there was no evidence that  her  grandparents
    in the UK had supported her financially  themselves.   With  regard  to
    friendships the Appellant had formed in the UK, the Secretary of  State
    considered that they  could  be  maintained  through  modern  forms  of
    communication. The Secretary of State also noted that the Appellant had
    connections with the Ghana UK-Based Achievement Foundation and  it  was
    considered that liaising with Ghanaian nationals in the UK  represented
    another tie to her home country.

20. The Secretary of State noted that she had been educated in  the  UK  to
    degree level despite having no legal right to remain.   That  education
    however would  stand  her  in  good  stead  when  it  came  to  finding
    employment in Ghana.

21. The Secretary of State considered whether the  application  raised  any
    exceptional circumstances taking into account her relationship with her
    grandmother; it being accepted that she lived with her  and  that  they
    enjoyed a close relationship.  However, whilst it was accepted that the
    Appellant provided assistance to her grandmother  who  had  orthopaedic
    problems, there was  no  reason  why  that  care  had  to  be  provided
    exclusively by the Appellant and that her  grandmother,  as  a  British
    citizen, would be able to access care from  Social  Services.   It  was
    also noted that the Appellant had an aunt and cousins  in  the  UK  who
    could offer support to her grandmother.

22. The Secretary of  State  did  not  accept  that  there  would  be  real
    difficulties for the Appellant on return to  Ghana  particularly  since
    she had been educated to degree level and had family there.

23. The First-tier Tribunal heard evidence from both the Appellant and  two
    of her friends.  Her grandmother had been unable to attend due  to  her
    ill health.  The Appellant had provided a witness statement.   In  that
    witness statement the Appellant stated at paragraph 3 that she believed
    she had a legitimate expectation of  being  granted  further  leave  to
    remain in the UK on the basis of the Immigration Rules and  Article  8.
    Describing her family and private life  the  Appellant  said  that  she
    lives with her grandmother who was born in 1938 and who  is  a  British
    citizen and a pensioner; that she has lived with  her  ever  since  she
    arrived in the UK and that her grandmother has provided  financial  and
    emotional support.  She said that she looks after her grandmother on  a
    day-to-day basis, making her food and giving her medicines.   She  also
    books and attends hospital appointments with her and assists her in the
    management of the house including the payment of bills.  She said  that
    her grandmother had been reliant on her since  her  grandfather  passed
    away in 2009.

24. The Appellant says that she arrived in  the  UK  during  her  formative
    years and had been resident here ever since.  She started her education
    in year nine and has now completed a degree in political sciences  from
    Brunel University.  She considers the UK to be her home.

25. She says she has slowly eroded all her ties to her  country  of  origin
    and has formed relationships with friends and people in  the  UK.   She
    says  she  is  hard-working  and  bears  all  the  potential  to  be  a
    responsible citizen in the future and asks for her case to  be  decided
    with compassion.

26. She says she has fully integrated into British culture and the  way  of
    life and considers the UK  as  her  country.   She  says  that  she  is
    accommodated independently and without support from the State  and  she
    lives in her own accommodation in London.  She says  that  she  has  no
    doubt that she would face extreme hardship  if  she  were  returned  to
    Ghana.  She acknowledges that her parents are in Ghana but says she has
    no job there, has no accommodation there and has no  livelihood  there.
    She specifically says at paragraph 10 of her statement that she had  an
    expectation that she would be  permanently  settled  in  the  UK  after
    having lived here for over twelve years and she believes that anyone in
    her position would think the same.  She  says  it  would  be  cruel  to
    expect her to return to a country that she has now no connections  with
    being happily settled in the UK.  She repeats  again  at  paragraph  12
    that she has a legitimate expectation of being granted leave to remain.
     At paragraph 15 the Appellant says she has  no  relatives  capable  of
    financially supporting her  in  Ghana.   She  says  that  although  her
    parents and siblings are in Ghana she is no longer in contact with them
    and  has  formed  new  associations  in  the  UK.   She  considers  her
    grandmother and uncle in the UK as her only family.

27. She says that she currently does not have the  right  to  work  and  so
    undertakes only voluntary work but if given permission  to  remain  she
    would work.  She says at paragraph 18 that she  respects  this  country
    and is a law abiding citizen.

28. In her submissions Ms Pal relied on the Letter  of  Refusal  dated  4th
    September 2014 and the  Appellant's  immigration  history  set  out  at
    paragraph 5.  She referred to the fact that the Appellant  had  arrived
    on a visit visa and remained ever  since  making  various  applications
    having had previous appeals dismissed.   She  has  been  an  overstayer
    since 2003.  The  Letter  of  Refusal  sets  out  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM, none of which can assist the  Appellant.   The  only  Rule
    that could possibly apply to this Appellant  was  paragraph  276ADE(vi)
    and  the  question  to  be  satisfied  is  that  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to her integration into Ghana.  She  referred  to
    the various relevant paragraphs of the refusal letter and  argued  that
    the Appellant's relationship with her grandmother could  be  maintained
    via modern means of communication.  There are no significant  obstacles
    to her integration into Ghana because she speaks  the  language,  lived
    there for thirteen years, her parents and siblings are there and her UK
    degree will assist her to obtain employment.  So  far  as  there  being
    exceptional circumstances outside the Rules to consider the only matter
    that could possibly assist is the fact that she gives assistance to her
    grandmother.  However, her grandmother  can  access  care  from  Social
    Services and the Appellant's presence is not required.  She argued that
    the Appellant had not established very significant  obstacles  and  had
    not demonstrated any circumstances outside  the  Rules  to  consider  a
    freestanding Article 8 application.  However, if one was to consider  a
    freestanding Article 8 application then I would be required to consider
    Section 117B of the 2002 Act.   All  of  the  private  life  which  the
    Appellant relies upon should be given  little  weight  as  it  was  all
    acquired while she has been here unlawfully.  Not just in a  precarious
    position but unlawfully.  Furthermore, she has been in  the  UK  for  a
    considerable time utilising services such as healthcare  and  education
    that she was not entitled to.  Had she remained in Ghana and sought  to
    study in the UK she would  have  been  required  to  pay  international
    tuition fees and so she has gained significant benefit from her time in
    the UK that she was not entitled to.  She invited  me  to  dismiss  the
    appeal.

29. In  her  submissions  Ms  Ofei-Kwatia  argued  there  were  significant
    obstacles such as to satisfy paragraph 276ADE(vi).  She referred me  to
    the First-tier Judge's decision and the findings of fact  which  I  had
    preserved.  There was the matter of her length of residence in the UK -
    thirteen years.  There was the matter of her social and  cultural  ties
    to the UK and lack of ties to Ghana.   Despite  her  parents  being  in
    Ghana there is no reliable evidence that her parents would assist  her.
    She argued that having entered the UK at the age of  13  the  Appellant
    has been here now  for  fourteen  years  continuously.   She  has  been
    building a private life from the age of 13 onwards  and  has  developed
    from childhood to adulthood in the UK.  The unit that she looks to  for
    support has always been her  grandparents  and  her  grandmother  alone
    since her grandfather's death.  She is not living an  independent  life
    but resides with her grandmother and her grandmother relies on her  for
    her daily care.  She argues it would be impossible for her to integrate
    into Ghana as she has nothing there, nowhere to live and no job and  on
    that basis does satisfy the requirements of paragraph 276ADE (vi).  She
    argues on the basis of the Statement  of  Changes  to  the  Immigration
    Rules which brought in the change of wording  to  paragraph  276ADE(vi)
    that the "very significant obstacles" test does equate to an absence of
    ties.

30. She submitted that if I were to find that the Appellant  did  not  meet
    the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(vi)  then  there  were  compelling
    circumstances demanding  an  assessment  under  the  ECHR  which  would
    include weighing up what the Appellant has now in the UK  against  what
    she would have in Ghana.  She did not seek  to  argue  that  there  was
    family life in the UK but she had a very substantial private life which
    includes her relationship with her grandmother.

31. She pointed out that for the first five years that the Appellant was in
    the UK she was still a minor and once she  attained  her  majority  she
    started making applications to regularise her stay and there have  been
    various applications since 2007 to that effect.  I thus cannot be  said
    that she has remained "under the radar".  She referred me to  the  fact
    that when the Appellant put forward the Statement of Additional Grounds
    in July 2014 she was only some three and a half  months  outside  being
    under  25  for  the  purpose  of  paragraph  276ADE  and   whilst   she
    acknowledged there was "no such thing as a near miss" this was  one  of
    the factors which should weigh into the balance  when  looking  at  the
    scenario as a whole.  She referred to the numerous letters from friends
    and family in the bundle all indicating very strong ties to the UK  and
    also to letters from the charity that she  works  for  on  a  voluntary
    basis.

32. She acknowledged there was no evidence about finances and how  she  was
    supported but there was certainly no evidence that she has claimed  any
    benefits.  She speaks English and certainly at the present time  is  no
    burden on the UK and as a graduate it is more likely than not that  she
    will not be a burden  in  the  future.   She  argued  that  the  public
    interest in maintaining immigration  control  was  overtaken  by  other
    factors as she had outlined in this case.

My Findings

33. I find this case to be very  straightforward.   It  is  true  that  the
    Appellant cannot be blamed for being an overstayer during the  time  of
    her minority and  it  is  also  true  that  she  has  been  seeking  to
    regularise her position since she attained majority.  However, the fact
    remains that this young lady, apart from  the  initial  period  of  six
    months after her arrival has never had any right to be  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  It seems plain from the contents of  her  statement  and  her
    repeated assertion that she should be  allowed  to  remain  and  has  a
    "reasonable expectation" that she would be able to, that she never  had
    any intention of returning to  Ghana  and  her  family  never  had  any
    intention that she should do so either.   There  has  been  a  previous
    finding, unchallenged, that she has no family life in the UK  and  that
    the relationship that she has with her grandmother,  whilst  close,  is
    not one  of  mutual  dependency.   Her  grandmother  I  have  no  doubt
    appreciates  the  care   and   assistance   she   receives   from   her
    granddaughter.  However,  as  has  been  submitted  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State, such assistance and care would be available to  her
    through Social Services and the health services of the United  Kingdom.
    She also has other family members  in  the  United  Kingdom  who  could
    assist her.  Furthermore, whilst the Appellant might be  offering  help
    and assistance it is also the  case  that  she  has  been  a  full-time
    student at university and throughout that period there will have been a
    limit to the amount of  assistance  she  could  give  her  grandmother.
    Similarly, she has acted as a volunteer which would also take her  away
    from home.

34. The Appellant  is  clearly  an  intelligent  young  woman  having  been
    educated up to degree level and this would stand her in extremely  good
    stead on return to Ghana.

35. Whilst it is true that the Appellant has not been to Ghana since age 13
    (of course she could not do so because she had no leave  to  remain  in
    the UK and if she went she would have been unable to return) that  does
    not mean all ties have been severed.  Her family members are there  and
    although the Appellant says she has not had a lot of contact with  them
    there is no evidence that they would abandon her upon return.  She  has
    maintained links with the Ghanaian culture and other Ghanaian people in
    the UK and did live there for the first thirteen years of her life.

36. The Appellant's numerous pleas that she has an expectation to  be  able
    to remain in the UK are misplaced.

37. For the reasons I found an error of  law  indicated  above,  I  do  not
    accept that the wording of paragraph 276ADE(vi) as it is now equates to
    the previous wording.   What  is  required  now  is  a  forward-looking
    assessment namely what is likely  to  be  the  situation  when  she  is
    returned.  The Appellant will be returning  as  a  young,  intelligent,
    highly educated young woman who has family in Ghana, where  she  speaks
    the language and where she will be able to find herself employment.

38. The fact that she has integrated in  the  UK  has  no  bearing  on  her
    ability to integrate into Ghana.  That is historic not forward-looking.



39. The Appellant falls a long way short of establishing  very  significant
    obstacles to integration into Ghana.

40. I am urged to consider Article 8 outside  the  Rules.   I  can  see  no
    compelling circumstances requiring me to do so not already envisaged by
    the Rules.  She cannot meet the Rules  for  either  family  or  private
    life.

41. However, if I am wrong she still does not succeed under Article 8.   If
    I was to consider Article 8  then  the  case  would  clearly  be  about
    proportionality and in  assessing  proportionality  I  am  required  by
    Section 117 of the 2002 Act to take a number of factors  into  account.
    Section 117 makes clear that the maintenance of immigration control  is
    in the public interest.  That  equates  to  a  statement  that  persons
    permitted to enter or remain in the UK should be expected to  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules and this Appellant does not.

42. Whilst the Appellant  speaks  the  language,  I  am  provided  with  no
    information as to the financial circumstances and am  therefore  unable
    to make a finding that she is financially independent.

43. The most significant factor so far as Section 117B is concerned is that
    this Appellant has at no time, save for six months, had  any  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.  It is not just that  her  situation  was
    precarious but rather it was unlawful.  She  has  had  access  to  both
    education and healthcare and enjoyed life in the United  Kingdom,  none
    of which she was entitled to.  For all these reasons an  assessment  of
    proportionality under Article 8  of  the  ECHR  would  not  assist  the
    Appellant as her claim in that regard also falls to be dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  allowed.   The
decision of First-tier Tribunal is set aside and I redecide the  appeal  and
dismiss the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision  to
refuse her leave to remain.

The First-tier Tribunal made no anonymity direction.  None was  applied  for
in the Upper Tribunal and I can see no justification for making  one  and  I
do not do so.



Signed        Date 27th May 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
