

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/37411/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham        |Sent to parties on:          |
|On 2 February 2016                            |On 12 April 2016             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L MURRAY

                                   Between

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        SAIBUDEEN BIN MOHAMMED SALIH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Wild, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The Respondent in this appeal was the Appellant before the  First-tier
      Tribunal and the Appellant was the Respondent. For ease  of  reference
      in this decision I refer to the Respondent as  the  Claimant  and  the
      Appellant as the Secretary of State. The Claimant  is  a  national  of
      Malaysia. On  23  June  2014  he  applied  for  a  residence  card  as
      confirmation of a right  to  reside  in  the  UK  under  the  European
      Economic Area Regulations 2006 (as amended) ("the  EEA  Regulations").
      His application was refused as the Secretary of State  concluded  that
      he had provided insufficient evidence  to  demonstrate  that  his  EEA
      family member was a qualified person  for  the  purposes  of  the  EEA
      Regulations.


   2. The Claimant appealed against that decision and his appeal was allowed
      by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lagunju in a decision promulgated  on  15
      April 2015. The Secretary of State sought permission  to  appeal  that
      decision and permission  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Heynes on the ground that it was arguable that the First-tier Tribunal
      failed to give adequate reasons that the sponsor had given a  credible
      account of her employment in the light of  unclear  and  contradictory
      evidence.


   3. The grounds for permission to appeal assert that  First-tier  Tribunal
      had recorded that the sponsor's evidence regarding  her  upcoming  job
      was unclear, that  there  were  discrepancies  and  that  the  sponsor
      changed her evidence and divulged that her job offer was from her  own
      brother only under cross-examination. Although the First-tier Tribunal
      had recorded that the details of the job offer  were  unclear  and  at
      times inconsistent and that the details of her knowledge  of  the  job
      were left to her husband, the First-tier Tribunal found the job  offer
      credible. It is argued that in the light of these adverse findings the
      sponsor's account of the job offer was not credible, not a  conclusion
      which the First-tier Tribunal could reasonably have come  to  and  was
      inadequately reasoned.


The Hearing
   4. Mr Mills said it was a fairly straight forward challenge. The Claimant
      had limited documentary evidence of  employment.  The  Respondent  had
      attempted to make phone calls to the employer  as  documented  in  the
      Reasons for Refusal Letter ("RFRL")  but  these  were  fruitless.  The
      sponsor was no longer employed but had a new job starting  in  another
      month  or  so.  The  evidence  regarding  that  job  was  unclear  and
      inconsistent. The employment was provided by  sponsor's  brother.  The
      Presenting Officer made the point  that  this  brought  into  question
      whether it was a genuine offer. The Judge accepted that  the  evidence
      was inconsistent. She did not give adequate reasons for the conclusion
      that the employment was genuine. At the time of  hearing  the  sponsor
      was not working and the argument was made by the Respondent that there
      was no evidence that the sponsor  had  registered  as  unemployed.  To
      retain her status she  had  to  register  as  a  jobseeker.  That  was
      overlooked. It was an obvious point.


   5. The Claimant said that the sponsor  had  never  registered  as  a  job
      seeker. The sponsor was about to start to her job on 2  February  2015
      so she did not have payslips. That was  why  she  did  not  have  more
      details of that job and that it was about to start. He only  gave  her
      the letter on the day she was attending the tribunal.  The  offer  was
      genuine.  She was genuinely working now  and  did  what  she  said  at
      court. They did not lie and she was working now at the same  employer.



Error of Law
   6. I concluded that there was a material error of law in the decision  of
      the First-tier Tribunal for the following reasons.  The  Claimant  was
      required to demonstrate that his EEA sponsor was  a  qualified  person
      for the purposes of the EEA Regulations. The material question  turned
      on whether a job offer was genuine. The First-tier Tribunal  noted  at
      paragraph 13 of the decision that the sponsor's evidence regarding her
      upcoming job was unclear. The Judge records that the  sponsor  claimed
      that she only became aware of the job offer on the day of the  hearing
      and later changed her evidence and claimed she received the letter and
      discovered the job two days before  the  hearing.  The  Judge  further
      records at paragraph 13 that only when probed did she accept that  the
      job offer was from her own brother which was  a  fact  she  failed  to
      mention when she initially referred to the job and her new employer.


   7. Notwithstanding the contradictions in  the  evidence,  the  First-tier
      Tribunal found at paragraph 15:


      "Although the details provided by the  sponsor  were  unclear  and  at
      times inconsistent, I accept her account that her knowledge of the job
      was limited because she had left all the details to  her  husband  and
      the appellant. I note however that it was clear from her evidence that
      securing the new job solves her childcare concerns. I therefore accept
      that the sponsor's account of the job offer is credible."


   8. I consider that the finding of the First-tier Tribunal  that  the  job
      offer was credible was inadequately reasoned as it fails to adequately
      reconcile the clear contradictions in the evidence. The  finding  that
      her knowledge of the job was limited because she had left the  details
      to others does not adequately explain the contradictions  in  her  own
      evidence in relation to when she became aware of the  job  offer.  The
      error is material because it cannot be said  that  the  outcome  would
      have been the same were the finding adequately reasoned.


   The re-hearing
   9. The parties agreed that the matter  could  be  re-heard  at  the  same
      hearing as contemplated by the directions sent to the parties with the
      notice of hearing.


  10. The Claimant had submitted a bundle of  documents  under  cover  of  a
      letter dated 22 January 2016 including the sponsor's payslips and bank
      statements for the period February to  December  2015.    The  sponsor
      confirmed that the employment continued.

  11. Mr Mills had nothing he wanted to ask and submitted that there was  no
      specified evidence requirement. He submitted that it was a matter from
      me as to whether the evidence satisfied the burden of  proof.  In  the
      light of the evidence regarding the EEA national sponsor's  employment
      I indicated that I would allow the appeal.


  12. The sole issue in this appeal is whether the Claimant's EEA sponsor is
      a qualified person for  the  purposes  of  Regulation  6  of  the  EEA
      Regulations. The relevant date for the consideration of  the  evidence
      is the date of the hearing. At the date of the initial hearing  before
      the First-tier Tribunal the Claimant relied on a job offer as proof of
      the required status. However, the Claimant has now adduced evidence in
      the form of the sponsor's contract of employment with  Mohamed  Sabeer
      Zinna Trading as Isobel London, payslips for the period February  2015
      to December 2015 and bank  statements  for  the  same  period  showing
      salary payments in the same amount as shown  on  the  payslips.  I  am
      satisfied on this evidence that the Claimant has discharged the burden
      of showing on the balance of probabilities that the EEA sponsor  is  a
      worker and therefore a qualified person. The appeal  should  therefore
      be allowed.


  13. I therefore set the decision aside and remake it in those terms.


  14. There was no application for anonymity and no direction is appropriate
      on the evidence.


Conclusions:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                             Date



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray


