
IAC-FH-CK-V2
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37728/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 29 April 2015                         |On 10 June 2015                     |
|Prepared 29 April 2015                   |                                    |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                            Mr Kome Denis Ngwese
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Mahmud, Counsel instructed by Law & Lawyers
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of Cameroon, date of birth 10  October  1988,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision dated 15 September  2014  to
    refuse  a  residence  card  with  reference  to  Regulation  2  of  the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006   (the   EEA
    Regulations) on the basis that the Appellant had  failed  to  establish
    that there was a genuine marriage and it was positively asserted by the
    Secretary of State that the marriage was a sham marriage.

2.   An appeal against that decision was considered on the papers  submitted
    by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  S  P  J  Buchanan,  who  in  a  decision
    promulgated on or about 16 December 2014 concluded that the  Respondent
    had shown that there was not a genuine marriage  which  was  subsisting
    and it is clear that the judge assessed  the  evidence  on  the  papers
    provided and made reference to statements  submitted  as  part  of  the
    appeal by the Appellant's representatives Law & Lawyers Solicitors  and
    concluded on the evidence that it was not a genuine marriage.

3.   The difficulty the judge faced necessarily, when  there  was  not  live
    evidence to be  heard  and  assessed  and  potentially  tested  by  the
    Respondent, was how to form a view on the material provided.

4.   On one hand the judge had received through the Respondent's bundle  the
    evidence which showed the Appellant claiming that he and his wife lived
    together and that she cohabited with him at  13  [  -  ],  Basingstoke.
    Similar information as to their cohabitation at  the  present  time  of
    marriage was given at that address.  The  Appellant's  wife's  payslips
    were addressed to that address and her bank statements  provided  again
    had the same address of 13 [ - ] in Basingstoke.

5.   In addition the judge was provided with information which  recited  the
    fact that an interview had been set up for the Appellant and  his  wife
    but that scheduled on 13 June 2014 did not  attend  and  there  was  no
    explanation on the day for non-attendance.  Subsequently, albeit it  is
    now claimed that it was a misunderstanding, it is plain  that  about  a
    month after the intended interview  the  point  was  being  taken  that
    either they had not attended because they had a row  ('breakdown')  and
    were not getting on with one another or alternatively it is  said  that
    there was a 'breakdown of a motor vehicle' rather than a  breakdown  of
    the relationship.

6.   On the same hand the judge had  also  had  information  concerning  the
    Immigration  Officer's  visit  to  13  [  -  ]  and  the   outcome   of
    conversations held with Ms Miranda Melle, who was a half-sister of  the
    Appellant.  She confirmed her attendance of the marriage  although  she
    did not know where.  She knew the Appellant's wife solely by a name  of
    affection used rather than her surname or anything else and it was said
    that those matters and the outcome of that interview gave rise  to  the
    real concern that there was not a genuine marriage.  It  was  therefore
    by  choice  that  the  Appellant,  alive  to   those   issues   raised,
    nevertheless pressed ahead with having a determination  on  the  papers
    and to some extent the consequent difficulties faced by the  judge  are
    born of the Appellant's choice but I do not  criticise  him  for  that.
    The judge went through the evidence provided including  the  statements
    of the Appellant, his wife and his half-sister  and  the  circumstances
    explaining why they were not living together, that  is,  the  Appellant
    and his wife, back at 13 [ - ]  and  suggesting  the  costs  of  living
    together in London would be beyond her means; given that his  wife  was
    the sole worker in the family.

7.   The judge noted all these matters and assessed that evidence.   Despite
    the vigorous submissions of Mr Mahmud of Counsel the fact of the matter
    is that on the face of it the judge's reasons are adequate in terms  of
    law and they are sufficient in terms  of  the  reasons  why  the  judge
    rejected the contrary evidence which had been provided  to  that  which
    was before the judge.  It may well be that had the Appellant attended a
    hearing with his wife and the evidence had been given that a  different
    view might well have been reached.  I do not speculate.  The problem is
    it was not such a hearing and in the circumstances the judge was driven
    to do the best he could with the evidence he got.  I bear in  mind  the
    self-evident and largely, but not completely,  unexplained  differences
    in the presentation of the case as an application to the Respondent and
    as presented through the appeal process.  It  could  be,  for  example,
    that the Appellant and his wife entered into an arrangement  which  has
    now crystallised into one which is genuine and subsisting.  That is but
    one possibility which could never be tested.

8.   Having carefully considered the submissions made it seems  to  me  that
    the fact of the matter is that the criticisms,  for  example  that  the
    judge has not properly reasoned why they are  not  living  together  in
    London, have some substance but the judge was obliged to  look  at  the
    evidence as a whole and  to  make  the  best  efforts  to  assess  that
    evidence.

9.   In the circumstances it seems to me that whilst I might not have  taken
    the points the judge did that does not disclose on the face  of  it  an
    error of law but people may differ.  The Tribunal has been reminded  by
    the Court of Appeal that it is not open to us to  set  aside  decisions
    because we as judges might not have reached the same conclusions.

10.  For the above reasons I am satisfied that  the  Original  Tribunal  did
    not make any material error of law and nothing indicated shows any real
    likelihood that any other Tribunal would have been likely to reach  any
    different conclusion.  It simply remains  for  the  Appellant  and  his
    representatives to assess if they press this matter again by a  further
    application.

11.  For the avoidance of doubt, I was provided with a  medical  certificate
    to possibly explain the absence of the Appellant's wife supporting  the
    Appellant at the hearing of this matter.  The medical material does not
    say that she is unfit to attend this hearing and to be present with the
    Appellant.  However, it seems to me that it would not be right to  draw
    any adverse conclusion from her absence and in  any  event,  had  there
    been an error of law it would have been appropriate to have  a  resumed
    hearing to remake the decision and  that  would  have  enabled  her  to
    attend.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is dismissed under the EEA Regulations 2006.

ANONYMITY

No anonymity order is necessary.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
