
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/37891/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 September 2015                 |On 15 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

                               Mr Joseph GALEH
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Jeshani, counsel, instructed by Aston Brooke
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                       ERROR OF LAW DECISION & REASONS

1.    The Respondent is a national of Ghana, born on  12.1.66.   He  arrived
in the UK on 5.10.04 with a student visa  and  was  last  granted  leave  to
remain until 30.7.12 also as a student.  On 27.7.12 he applied for leave  to
remain in the UK on the basis of his private  life.   This  application  was
refused on 22.8.13.  The hearing  of  his  appeal  came  before  First  Tier
Tribunal Judge Wylie for  hearing  on  6  January  2015.   The  Respondent's
counsel sought an adjournment to enable the Secretary of  State  to  conduct
checks, given that the Respondent had on 24.12.14 lodged additional  grounds
of appeal asserting that he had been lawfully and continuously  resident  in
the UK for more than 10 years and thus qualified under paragraph  276B/276A1
of the Immigration Rules.

2.    The case was put  back  in  order  that  the  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer  could  take  instructions,  but  in  the  event  she  opposed   the
adjournment request and the appeal proceeded.  The Respondent  had  not  yet
undertaken the Life in the UK test although he had a  date  of  20.1.15  but
the Home Office had retained his passport. Aside from that it was  contended
that he satisfied the requirements for  Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain.   The
Judge heard evidence from the Respondent. He then proceeded to  dismiss  the
appeal on the basis  of  his  private  life  but  found  at  [20]  that  the
Respondent had been continuously resident in  the  United  Kingdom  for  ten
years from 5.10.04 and that he was entitled to an extension  of  stay  under
paragraph 276A1 [21].  The Judge went on to find that  the  requirements  of
paragraph 276B(i)(ii) and (v) are met [23] and allowed the appeal under  the
immigration rules.

3.    The Secretary of State applied for permission  to  appeal  on  6.3.15.
The grounds in support of the application asserted that the Judge had  erred
materially in law in that: (i) at the point of  application  the  Respondent
was some way off achieving  10  years  continuous  residence  and  has  only
achieved such through 3C and (ii) in allowing  the  appeal  under  paragraph
276A2 the  Judge  failed  to  properly  consider  paragraph  276B(ii)  which
requires  the  SSHD  to  exercise  discretion  in  relation  to  the  public
interest, this involves carrying out background checks and as  the  original
application was not made in respect of paragraph 276B the SSHD had not  been
able to carry out the necessary  checks  in  order  to  consider  exercising
discretion.  Therefore,  the  Judge  erred  in  exercising  discretion  when
allowing  the  appeal  under  paragraph  276A2:   Ukus   (discretion:   when
reviewable) [2012] UKUT 00307. It was submitted that  the  correct  approach
would have been for the Judge to find that the decision was not  lawful  and
to have then left the matter  of  discretion  to  the  SSHD.  Permission  to
appeal was granted by First Tier Tribunal Judge Lambert in general terms.

4.    At the hearing before me, Mr Clarke made submissions in line with  the
grounds of appeal and provided a copy of the decision in  Ukus  (discretion:
when reviewable) [2012] UKUT 00307. Mr Jeshani then provided a copy  of  his
rule 24 response and sought to defend the  Judge's  decision  to  allow  the
appeal outright.

5.    I then gave my decision, which is that the First Tier  Tribunal  Judge
erred materially in law in allowing the appeal under the Immigration  Rules,
given that the SSHD had  not  had  the  opportunity  to  consider  the  long
residence application under paragraph 276A2 and 276B, because it  only  came
into being during the currency of the appeal process. It is clear from  Ukus
(discretion: when reviewable) [2012] UKUT 00307 that  the  correct  approach
when discretion has not been exercised  by  the  decision  maker,  that  the
Tribunal's jurisdiction on appeal is limited to a decision that the  failure
renders the decision "not in  accordance  with  the  law."  The  First  Tier
Tribunal Judge did consider the documentary and oral evidence in  coming  to
his decision that the requirement of paragraph 276B(i) (ii) and (v) are  met
but in so doing acted outwith his jurisdiction in that it is  a  matter  for
the SSHD to consider whether "having regard to  the  public  interest  there
are no reasons why it would be undesirable for him to  be  given  indefinite
leave to remain on the ground of long residence."

6.    For the avoidance of  doubt,  I  do  not  consider  there  to  be  any
substance in the first of the SSHD's  grounds  of  appeal  as  to  when  the
application for  long  residence  was  made,  given  that  the  Home  Office
guidance on long residence at page 28 is clear that: "A person may  complete
10 years continuous lawful residence whilst they are  awaiting  the  outcome
of an appeal and submit an application on this basis. Under sections 3C  and
3D, it is not possible to submit  a  new  application  while  an  appeal  is
outstanding. However,  the  applicant  can  submit  further  grounds  to  be
considered at appeal."

7.    The findings of fact  by  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge  were  not
impugned by the Secretary of State in  her  application  for  permission  to
appeal. Therefore, whilst the First Tier Tribunal Judge erred materially  in
law in allowing the appeal outright, I substitute a  decision  allowing  the
appeal on the basis that the decision was not in  accordance  with  the  law
and the appeal is consequently remitted back to the Secretary  of  State  to
consider the exercise of  her  discretion  in  respect  of  the  Appellant's
continuous residence for 10 years, with  reference  to  paragraph  276B  (i)
(ii) and (v) of the Immigration Rules.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

14 September 2015
