

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                     Appeal
Number IA/37765/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House
                       Determination Promulgated
On 10th July 2014
                          On 16th July 2014
Prepared 15th July 2014

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                                SATISH DAMAI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant: Mr C Howells (Counsel instructed by N C Brothers & Co,
Solicitors)
For the Respondent: Ms L Kenny (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant is a national of Nepal and entered the UK as student in
   January 2008. His mother came to the UK with ILR on the 15th of March
   2012. Since then they have lived together and it was accepted by the
   Secretary of State that they had re-established family life together in
   the UK. The Appellant applied for entry as the dependent under the policy
   relating to Foreign and Commonwealth HM Forces.

2. The Secretary of State rejected the application deciding that the
   Appellant was not dependent on his mother and that he had not shown more
   than the usual emotional ties. The case was considered on the basis of
   submissions, the evidence was accepted. The appeal was allowed with the
   Judge finding that had he been allowed to the Appellant's father would
   have settled in the UK on retirement from the British army. That would
   carry significant weight and there were no negative considerations so far
   as the Appellant's immigration history was concerned.

3. In seeking permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal the Secretary of
   State submitted that the Judge had misdirected itself in law. That a
   Gurkha would have settled in the UK at a time when his now adult child
   could have joined him was a strong but not determinative factor. The
   Judge had not paid sufficient regard to the factors raised by the
   Secretary of State relating to the time he had lived apart from his
   mother, had family in Nepal who could assist him and was dependent on his
   mother by virtue of his visa. Permission was granted by First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Grimmettt on the 13th of May 2014.

4. The submissions are set out in the Record of Proceedings and it is not
   proposed to repeat them here. In summary for the Secretary of State it
   was submitted that there was nothing exceptional about the Appellant's
   circumstances and reliance was placed on Ghishing (family life - adults -
   Gurkha policy) [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC). For the Appellant it was
   submitted that the appeal was unfocussed and the findings made had not
   been challenged and amounted to an argument that the article 8 findings
   were unreasonable, reliance was placed on Ghishing and others
   (Gurkhas/BOCs: historic wrong: weight) [2013] UKUT 000567 (IAC). The
   second Ghishing case came about following the case of R (Gurung) v Home
   Secretary (CA) [2013] 1 WLR 2546.

5. It is clear from Ghishing [2013] that where it is found that article 8
   is engaged, a finding in this appeal not challenged by the Secretary of
   State, and but for the historic wrong the Appellant would have settled in
   the UK long ago, another finding not challenged by the Secretary of
   State, that would normally determine the outcome of the article 8
   proportionality assessment in the Appellant's favour. If the Secretary of
   State can point to negative factors over and above the public interest in
   maintaining immigration control they would be given appropriate weight, a
   bad immigration history or criminal record could outweigh "the powerful
   factors bearing on the Appellant's side of the balance."

6. Although the time scales were different the Appellant in the Ghishing
   case had come as a student and was followed by his parents some years
   later. Clearly arrival in that order is not a bar to success under the
   policy if article 8 is engaged on the basis of the family life that is
   then established and the other conditions are met.

7. In short the submissions of the Secretary of State amount to a
   disagreement with findings properly made and open to the Judge on the
   undisputed facts of the case. Applying the rationale in the cases cited
   above it is clear that the Judge was entitled to make the findings set
   out and to reach the conclusion that applying the cases and policy to the
   facts the Appellant succeeded. The determination properly read contains
   no error of law.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.

The fee award made by the First-tier Tribunal remains.

Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 16th July 2014

