

                                    [pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: IA/37670/2013
      IA/43502/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Determination Promulgated             |
|On December 23, 2014                  |On December 29, 2014                  |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MRS KUMUTHINI AKILIAN
                              MR KANDIAH AKILAN
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Walker (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms Jegarajaj, Counsel, instructed by Jacobs & Co
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Whereas the original respondent is the appealing party, I shall, in the
    interests of convenience and consistency, replicate the nomenclature of
    the decision at first instance.

 2. The appellants, born  September  23,  1977  and  April  18,  1978,  are
    citizens of Sri Lanka. The second-named appellant  entered  the  United
    Kingdom in September 2006 and the first-named appellant joined  him  as
    his dependant in February 2007. Their leave was extended as student and
    dependant until December 31, 2009. Applications were  made  for  asylum
    but these were refused and then two applications  for  residence  cards
    under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 were made  with  the  most
    recent being submitted on December 27, 2012. These were refused by  the
    respondent on September 3, 2013 and  the  appellants  appealed  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal under Section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 and  Regulation  26  of  the  2006  Regulations  on
    September 13, 2003 and on October 8,  2014  Judge  of  the  First  Tier
    Tribunal Cooper (hereinafter referred to as  the  "FtTJ")  heard  their
    appeals and in determination promulgated on October 23, 2014 he allowed
    their appeals on the limited basis that they be remitted  back  to  the
    respondent to consider exercising her discretion under Regulation 17(4)
    of the 2006 Regulations.

 3. The respondent lodged grounds of appeal on September  6,  2014  and  on
    November 19,  2014  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Lambert  gave
    permission to appeal finding there were arguable grounds that the  FtTJ
    had erred.

    ERROR OF LAW SUBMISSIONS

 4. Mr Walker relied on the grounds of appeal save he accepted the  sponsor
    was a Danish national and had been exercising treaty rights here  since
    2000. He submitted the first-named appellant had neither been a  member
    of the EEA national's family household prior to coming  to  the  United
    Kingdom nor had been maintained in Sri Lanka. He accepted she was now a
    member of the sponsor's household and was being maintained. With regard
    to the second-named appellant he submitted there was no basis  for  his
    appeal to succeed  because  he  was  not  a  member  of  the  sponsor's
    household as he married the first-named appellant about ten days before
    he came to the United Kingdom.

 5. Ms Jegarajaj relied on the FtTJ's determination  and  the  decision  of
    Dauhoo (EEA Regulations-Reg 8(2)) UKUT 79 (IAC). She submitted the FtTJ
    made findings of maintenance and support for the first-named  appellant
    in  both  Sri  Lanka  and  the  United  Kingdom.  The   findings   were
    unchallenged and it was accepted that  the  first-named  appellant  was
    part of the sponsor's household in the United Kingdom and that she  was
    also supported here. The FtTJ accepted that the  financial  support  in
    Sri Lanka did not need to be immediately prior to  her  coming  to  the
    United Kingdom. There was no  merit  in  the  respondent's  appeal.  As
    regards the second named-appellant his appeal was always contingent  on
    his wife's appeal and there was no error in asking  the  respondent  to
    exercise his discretion in both appeals at the same time because if the
    wife's appeal was allowed his would be also.

 6. Mr Walker conceded that there had  been  no  challenge  to  the  FtTJ's
    findings and that there  was  no  requirement  to  be  a  member  of  a
    household. He further accepted the FtTJ's finding  that  there  was  no
    need for immediate prior financial dependency.

    ERROR OF LAW ASSESSMENT

 7. I considered the Tribunal decision of Dauhoo,  as  did  the  FtTJ.  The
    FtTJ's findings are unchallenged. It was her interpretation of the  law
    that brought this matter before me.

 8. The Tribunal in Dauhoo made clear that an appellant can succeed if they
    can show prior dependency and present dependency  or  prior  dependency
    and present membership of a household.

 9. This had been accepted by the FtTJ  and  nothing  Mr  Walker  submitted
    changed those findings. The FtTJ found she had been maintained  in  Sri
    Lanka and it was not disputed she was either maintained or was part  of
    the EEA national's household here.

10. There was no material error in the FtTJ's findings in respect of either
    appellant. The second-named appellant's decision is wholly dependent on
    the outcome of his wife's decision. If  the  respondent  exercises  her
    discretion in her favour then he will in his.

11. I therefore dismiss the appeal.

Decision

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not disclose  an  error  in
    law. The original decision shall stand.

13. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended)  an  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    such order was made in the First-tier and I see no reason to make  such
    an order now.


Signed:     Dated: December 29, 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



TO THE RESPONDENT

I leave the fee award as it was.


Signed:     Dated: December 29, 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
