
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/37845/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 8th July 2016                   |On 19th July 2016                  |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MAAZ UGHRADAR
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr T Gaisford (Counsel) Instructed by Farani Javed
Taylor, solictiors

DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  in
order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as  they  were  in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Freer,  promulgated  on  20  May  2015
which allowed the  Appellant's  appeal  under  Article  8  of  the  European
Convention on Human Rights.

Background


3. The Appellant was born in 1984 and is a national of India.

4. The appellant entered the UK on 25 May 2004 for a family  visit.  He  has
remained in the UK since then. On both 27 October 2010 and 5 April 2012  the
appellant applied for leave to remain in  the  UK.  Both  applications  were
refused by the respondent. On 22 January 2014  the  respondent  served  form
ISI 151A on the appellant.

5. On 15 September 2014  the  respondent  refused  the  appellant's  renewed
claim for leave to remain in the UK on article 8 ECHR grounds,  focusing  on
paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the rules.


The Judge's Decision

6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Freer ("the  Judge")  allowed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 23  May  2016  Judge  Shimmin
gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

      6. It is arguable that the judge has misapplied the burden  of  proof,
      particularly at paragraph 53.


      7. It is arguable that the judge has made  an  error  of  law  in  the
      approach to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) in respect of the very significant
      obstacles the appellant might encounter on return to India.


      8. I grant permission on the above grounds.

The Hearing

7. (a) Mr Walker moved the grounds of appeal for the respondent.  There  are
two grounds of appeal; the first is that at [53] of the decision  the  Judge
reversed the burden of proof. It is argued that it is for the  appellant  to
establish that there are very significant obstacles to his reintegration  in
Indian society before he can benefit from  section  276  ADE(1)(vi)  of  the
immigration rules

(b) The second ground of appeal is that at  [54]  the  Judge  sets  out  the
factors which he finds amount to very significant obstacles.  It  is  argued
that the Judge takes too narrow a view  of  the  medical  evidence  and,  in
effect, strays into a comparison of medical treatments  available  in  India
with those available in the UK.

(c) Mr Walker told me that the decision  contains  material  errors  of  law
because an incorrect approach is taken to paragraph 276  ADE(1)(vi)  of  the
rules. He urged me to set the decision aside.

8. (a) Mr Gaisford, counsel for the appellant, told  me  that  the  decision
does not contain any errors of law, material or otherwise.  He  adopted  the
terms of appellant's rule 24 response. He  then  took  me  to  [53]  of  the
decision and told me that the Judge has not reversed  the  burden  of  proof
there, instead (at [53]) the Judge levels the criticism at the  respondent's
reasons for refusal letter. He urged me not to look at  [53]  in  isolation,
but to consider the entire decision as a whole.

(b) Mr Gaisford told me that the Judge manifestly applied the  correct  test
in considering paragraph 276 ADE(1)(vi) of the rules. He  told  me  that  at
[50] the Judge sets out clear findings to support his conclusion that  there
are very significant obstacles to  reintegration  into  Indian  society.  He
took me to [46] of the decision, where the Judge  clearly  understands  this
case  does  not  proceed  on  an  argument  that  the  appellant's   medical
conditions engage the 1950 convention. He told  me  that  the  Judge's  fact
finding is beyond criticism  &  that  the  Judge  clearly  directed  himself
correctly in law.

(c) Mr Gaisford referred  to  the  bundle  of  evidence  produced  for  this
hearing, and relied on the respondent's own guidance. He then  asked  me  to
dismiss the appeal and allow the Judge's decision to stand.

Analysis

9. Although the Judge litters the decision references to articles 3, 5  &  8
of the 1950  convention,  the  Judge's  unambiguous  decision  is  that  the
appellant succeeds under the immigration rules. A fair reading the  decision
makes it clear that the Judge sets to one side  consideration  of  the  1950
convention out-with the  immigration  rules,  and  reminds  himself  that  a
comparison of available medical treatment is an irrelevant consideration.

10. At [14] the Judge  clearly  states  "the  burden  of  proof  is  on  the
appellant...". The Judge then goes on to set out the respondent's  decision,
and the appellant's position at appeal, before setting out his  findings  of
fact between [36] and [59]. It is clear that the Judge's findings are  based
on  the  evidence  placed  before  him.  At  [53]  the  Judge   is   perhaps
unnecessarily critical of the logic employed  in  the  reasons  for  refusal
letter, but that criticism does not amount to a reversal of  the  burden  of
proof. At [50] the judge makes 11 separate findings of fact drawn  from  the
evidence placed before him.

11. A fair reading of the decision makes  it  clear  that  having  correctly
reminded himself of the burden  of  proof  the  Judge  makes  evidence-based
findings of fact which direct him to  his  conclusion.  The  respondent  has
taken [53] out of context, and perhaps  even  misinterpreted  what  is  said
there. The Judge manifestly applies the correct burden of proof.

12. The second ground of appeal is that the Judge's approach  to  the  "very
significant obstacles" test amounts to a misdirection in law.  There  is  no
merit in that ground of appeal. At [50] the Judge makes  clear  findings  of
fact before  concluding  that  those  evidence-based  findings,  when  taken
cumulatively,  create  very  significant  obstacles  to  reintegration  into
Indian society.

13. That is a conclusion which was open to the Judge on  the  basis  of  the
evidence placed before him & on the facts as he found them to  be.  In  this
case there is no criticism of the Judge's fact-finding exercise. In  reality
the criticism the respondent brings amounts to an attack on what  the  Judge
does with the facts as he found them to be. It is manifestly clear from  the
decision that the Judge takes correct guidance  in  law  before  reaching  a
conclusion which was well within the range of  reasonable  conclusions  open
to the Judge.

14. In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 85  (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that (i) Although there is  a  legal  duty  to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

15. There is no flaw in the Judge's fact finding. The correct  test  in  law
is applied. The conclusion which he reached is  well  within  the  range  of
conclusions reasonably open to  the  Judge.  In  reality,  the  respondent's
appeal amounts to little more than a disagreement with  the  way  the  Judge
has applied the facts as he found them to be. The appellant might  not  like
the conclusion that the Judge has  come  to,  but  that  conclusion  is  the
result of the correctly applied legal equation. There is nothing wrong  with
the Judge's fact  finding  exercise.  The  correct  test  in  law  has  been
applied. The decision does not contain a material error of law.

16.   The Judge's decision, when read as a whole,  sets  out  findings  that
are sustainable and sufficiently detailed and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

17.   No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

18.   The appeal is dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.


Signed                                                              Date 14
July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

