

                                             [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/37877/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Determination Promulgated|
|On June 20, 2014                |On June 23, 2014         |
|                                |                         |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       MISS MICHAELINE MARIE NATIVIDAD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Saunders (Home Office Presenting
      Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr Jeshani, Counsel, instructed by Aston
      Brook Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Although this is an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department I will refer below to the parties as they were identified at
    the First-tier Hearing namely the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department will from hereon be referred to as the respondent  and  Miss
    Michaeline Marie Natividad as the appellant.
 2. The appellant, born October 10, 1970, is a citizen of the  Philippines.
    She entered the United Kingdom as a student  with  a  visa  valid  from
    October 22, 2007 until December 31, 2009. She extended that leave as  a
    Tier 4 (General)  student  from  August  4,  2011  but  her  leave  was
    curtailed until August 23, 2013. The appellant  applied  for  leave  to
    remain based on her family and private life on August 8, 2013.

 3. The respondent refused her application on September 6, 2013.

 4. On September 16, 2013 the appellant appealed under section 82(1) of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  claiming  the  respondent
    should have exercised her discretion differently and that the  decision
    was incompatible with the appellant's rights as set out in the ECHR.

 5. The matter was listed before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Trevaskis
    (hereinafter referred to as "the FtTJ") on March  19,  2014  and  in  a
    determination promulgated on March 31, 2014 he allowed the appeal under
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

 6. The respondent appealed that decision on April 10, 2014. Permission  to
    appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Froom on May 13,
    2014 who found it was arguable that the FtTJ had erred by  misdirecting
    himself as to the meaning of "no ties" as set out  in  Ogundimu  [2013]
    UKUT 60 (IAC).

 7. The matter was listed  before  me  on  the  above  date  and  both  the
    appellant and her sponsor were in attendance.

    SUBMISSIONS


 8. Mr Saunders submitted the FtTJ had erred in  his  approach  because  he
    failed to properly take into account the fact the appellant  had  lived
    in the Philippines for 38 years and had lived on her own  between  2005
    and 2008. The FtTJ also failed to attach any weight  to  the  fact  the
    appellant would be perfectly familiar with the way of life  there.  The
    FtTJ failed to properly consider these factors when considering whether
    the appellant had any ties to the Philippines and by  only  considering
    the factors he did the FtTJ had materially erred.


 9. Mr Jeshani relied on paragraphs [6] to [8] of his Rule 24 response.  He
    submitted the FtTJ did take account of all the relevant matters and his
    approach could not be faulted. Even if the FtTJ had not demonstrated he
    had considered all matters he submitted that the error was not material
    as the FtTJ recognised that the appellant's ties had  shifted  and  had
    had full regard to the current situation in the Philippines.

    ERROR OF LAW ASSESSMENT

10. Whilst the FtTJ stated in paragraph [5] of his  determination  that  he
    had taken into account all of the evidence sadly his assessment of  the
    evidence and findings does not support this statement.

11. His findings are contained between paragraphs  [26]  and  [32]  in  his
    determination. He noted at paragraph [26] the appellant  was  38  years
    old when she came to the United Kingdom and  he  commented  that  since
    being here she has been educated and been assimilated into her mother's
    sister's family. At paragraph [27] he accepted  her  claims  about  the
    conditions in the Philippines and he noted the appellant's parents went
    to live in America in 2005 leaving the appellant alone  in  the  family
    home until she came to the United Kingdom in 2008.  At  paragraph  [28]
    the FtTJ accepted she had no family, no home or any  job  opportunities
    in he Philippines. At paragraph [31] he concluded that as  she  had  no
    family ties or  a  house  she  would  find  it  difficult  to  make  an
    independent life there.

12. Tne FtTJ erred because:

     a. He failed to take into account in paragraph [31] that the appellant
        had spent over 85% of her life in the Philippines and had  actually
        lived alone for up to  four  years  before  coming  to  the  United
        Kingdom.


     b. He failed to take into account she only came here when she  was  38
        years old  and  would  have  developed  many  social  ties  in  the
        Philippines prior to her arrival in the United Kingdom.

13. The Tribunal in Ogundimu between paragraphs [120] and [125] set out the
    correct approach. Whilst the FtTJ reminded himself of the decision I am
    satisfied he did not apply the correct test.

14.  I  therefore  set  aside  the  FtTJ's  decision  and  I  advised   the
    representatives I intended to  remake  the  decision  on  the  evidence
    currently before me.

15. I invited the representatives to make final submissions firstly on both
    paragraph 276ADE and Appendix FM (if appropriate) and secondly  on  the
    approach I should take to considering this application outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules.




    SUBMISSIONS

16. Mr Saunders submitted the appellant could not demonstrate  she  had  no
    ties in the Philippines because "no ties" did not just mean  no  family
    ties but no friends or cultural ties as well. He further submitted that
    the appellant could not meet Appendix FM. He stated that there  was  no
    arguable case for considering this  case  outside  of  the  Immigration
    Rules. In respect of private life he submitted the same arguments being
    relied on for article 8 were properly covered by paragraph 276ADE. With
    regard to family life the appellant was a grown woman  and  whilst  she
    was currently financially dependent on her  aunt  and  uncle  that  was
    because of her immigration status. She may provide some support but her
    financial and emotional ties did not  mean  she  had  family  life.  He
    submitted there was no reason to consider this appeal  outside  of  the
    Rules.


17. Mr Jeshani  adopted  his  skeleton  argument  along  with  his  earlier
    submissions  on  why  there  had  been  no  error.  He  submitted   the
    appellant's appeal should be allowed  under  paragraph  276ADE  HC  395
    because of the life, or lack of a life, facing  the  appellant  in  the
    Philippines compared to what she had  here.  Alternatively,  he  argued
    that the appellant had a "good arguable case" in respect  of  both  her
    family and private life. She had a  dependency  that  went  beyond  the
    normal emotional ties and her closest family was now her aunt and uncle
    because she could not go and  live  with  her  parents  and  sister  in
    America. She had no one to  return  to  in  the  Philippines.  She  was
    continuing to study here and there were various letters of support. She
    was contributing both financially and emotionally to the United Kingdom
    and he submitted refusing her application would be disproportionate  as
    there was no  real  public  interest  in  removing  someone,  like  the
    appellant, who contributed so much.

    ASSESSMENT AND FINDINGS

18. The appellant has applied to remain in the United Kingdom under  either
    paragraph 276ADE or Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.


19. There appeared to be no dispute that the appellant could not  meet  any
    of the requirements of Appendix FM as she had no partner  and/or  child
    living in the United Kingdom. Mr Jeshani did not seek to argue anything
    to the contrary.

20. The respondent considered her application with reference  to  paragraph
    276ADE HC 395. The appellant's case  was  considered  under  subsection
    (vi) of paragraph 276ADE namely "she is aged 18  years  or  above,  has
    lived continuously in the UK for less than 20  years  (discounting  any
    period of imprisonment) but has no ties (including social, cultural  or
    family) with the country to which he would have to go  if  required  to
    leave the UK."

21. Both parties agreed that the decision of Ogundimu should be applied  as
    the Tribunal had provided guidance on the correct approach to be taken.
    The Tribunal found-

         "120. In approaching our consideration of the meaning of this  rule
         we remind ourselves of the  guidance  given  by  Lord  Hoffmann  in
         Odelola v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009]  1  WLR
         1230:


             "[4] Like any other question of construction, this [whether  a
             rule change applies to all undetermined applications  or  only
             to subsequent applications] depends upon the language  of  the
             rule, construed against the relevant background. That involves
             a consideration of the immigration rules as a  whole  and  the
             function which they serve in the administration of immigration
             policy."


         121. In Mahad v ECO [2009] UKSC 16, Lord  Brown,  when  considering
         the question of construction of  the  Immigration  Rules,  said  as
         follows:


             "[10]  The  rules  are  not  to  be  construed  with  all  the
             strictness applicable to the construction of a  statute  or  a
             statutory instrument  but,  instead,  sensibly  according  the
             natural and ordinary meaning of the  words  used,  recognising
             that  they  are  statements  of  the  Secretary   of   State's
             administrative  policy.  The  respondent's   counsel   readily
             accepted that what she  meant  in  her  written  case  by  the
             proposition "the  question  of  interpretation  is...what  the
             Secretary of State intended his policy to  be"  was  that  the
             court's task is to discover from words used in the Rules  what
             the Secretary of State must be taken to  have  intended...that
             intention is to be discerned  objectively  from  the  language
             used,  not   divined   by   reference   to   supposed   policy
             considerations.  Still  less  is  the  Secretary  of   State's
             intention to be discovered from the  Immigration  Directorates
             Instructions"


         122. We take note of the fact that the use of the phrase  "no  ties
         (including social, cultural or family) with the country to which he
         would have to go if required to leave the UK" is not  exclusive  to
         paragraph 399A of the Rules; it is also used in paragraph 276  ADE,
         in the context of the requirements to met by an applicant for leave
         to remain based on private life in the  United  Kingdom  when  such
         person has lived in the United Kingdom for less than 20 years.


         123. The natural and ordinary meaning of the word  'ties'  imports,
         we think, a concept involving something more than merely remote and
         abstract links to the country of proposed deportation  or  removal.
         It involves there being a continued  connection  to  life  in  that
         country; something that ties a claimant to his or  her  country  of
         origin. If this were not the case  then  it  would  appear  that  a
         person's nationality of the country of proposed  deportation  could
         of itself lead to a failure to meet the requirements of  the  rule.
         This would render the application of the rule,  given  the  context
         within which it operates, entirely meaningless.


         124. We recognise that the text under the rules is an exacting one.
         Consideration of whether a person has 'no  ties'  to  such  country
         must involve a rounded assessment of all the relevant circumstances
         and  is  not  to  be  limited  to  'social,  cultural  and  family'
         circumstances. Nevertheless, we are satisfied  that  the  appellant
         has no ties with Nigeria. He is a  stranger  to  the  country,  the
         people, and the way of life. His father may have ties but they  are
         not ties of the appellant or any ties that could result in  support
         to the appellant in the event of his return there.  Unsurprisingly,
         given the length of the appellant's residence here, all of his ties
         are with the United Kingdom.  Consequently  the  appellant  has  so
         little connection with Nigeria so as to mean that the  consequences
         for him in establishing private life there at the age of 28,  after
         22 years residence in the United Kingdom, would  be  'unjustifiably
         harsh'.


         125. Whilst  each  case  turns  on  its  own  facts,  circumstances
         relevant to the assessment of whether a  person  has  ties  to  the
         country to which they would have to go if  they  were  required  to
         leave the United Kingdom must include, but are not limited to:  the
         length of time a person has spent in the country to which he  would
         have to go if he were required to leave the United Kingdom, the age
         that the person left that country, the exposure that person has had
         to the cultural norms of that country, whether that  person  speaks
         the language of the country, the extent of the  family and  friends
         that person has in the country to which he  is  being  deported  or
         removed and the quality of the relationships that person  has  with
         those friends and family members."

22. Paragraphs [123] to [125] of Ogundimu are of particular  importance  as
    these highlight the matters that a Tribunal should have regard to.


23. Applying that guidance to this appeal I have to  consider  whether  the
    appellant's circumstances bring her within subsection (vi).

24. I find the following points important:-

     a. The appellant lived with her parents in the Philippines for thirty-
        five years until they went to live in the United States of  America
        in 2005 with her sister.


     b. The appellant continued to live in the Philippines until  she  came
        to the United Kingdom in 2008.

     c. The appellant would have developed a large network  of  friends  in
        the Philippines based on the fact she lived there for 38 years.

     d. The appellant cannot join her parents in America because of her age
        and American immigration laws.

     e. Due to the typhoon and subsequent devastation the appellant has  no
        home and her family no longer live there.

     f. Since being in the United Kingdom the  appellant  attended  college
        until her leave  was  curtailed.  She  chose  not  to  appeal  that
        curtailment but instead lodged an application to  remain  based  on
        private life.

     g. Her aunt and uncle have sponsored her studies and consider  her  to
        be their own child. She lives with them and the appellant wishes to
        remain here to care  for  them  as  they  are  growing  older.  The
        appellant feels a sense of  responsibility  towards  her  aunt  and
        uncle. Her aunt now suffers from osteoarthritis and she  relies  on
        the appellant to run errands and do odd  jobs  for  her.  There  is
        medical evidence to support the aunt's condition.

     h. The appellant works as a care worker and provides a service to  the
        community.

     i. The appellant has a large network of friends in the United Kingdom.



     j. There are few jobs in the Philippines because of  the  devastation.
        She believes that many criminals have escaped and  the  country  is
        unsafe.

25. Having spent 38 years in her country of birth and 6 years in the United
    Kingdom I cannot accept the appellant has no connection  to  Philippine
    life. I accept that as she has been here for the last six years she has
    established some ties to this country but that does not  mean  she  has
    lost connection to the Philippines.


26. In Ogundimu the applicant had been in the United Kingdom since the  age
    of six and had spent 22 years living here. That is in stark contrast to
    this appellant who has spent only six years of her  life  here  and  38
    years in the Philippines. It cannot be said she has lost touch with the
    Philippines, which contrasts with the applicant in Ogundimu. Ultimately
    the assessment has to have regard to -

     a. The length of time a person has spent in the country  to  which  he
        would have to go if he were required to leave the  United  Kingdom.
        In the case of this appellant that is 38 years.


     b. The age that the person left that country. In this  case  she  left
        when she was 38.

     c. The exposure that person has had to  the  cultural  norms  of  that
        country. 38 years in  a  country  suggests  she  has  had  a  large
        exposure to the cultural norms of the country.

     d. Whether that person speaks the language of the country. There is no
        suggestion the appellant  has  any  language  difficulties  in  the
        Philippines.

     e. The extent of the family and friends that person has in the country
        to which she is being removed. This is  the  appellant's  strongest
        point when assessing her ties  because  she  has  no  known  family
        living there. However,  having  lived  there  for  38  years  I  am
        satisfied she would have developed a large network of friends.

     f. The quality of the relationships that person has with those friends
        and family members. It has been difficult to  assess  this  because
        the appellant has claimed she has no ties to the Philippines.

27. If qualifying under subsection (vi) were based on whether a person  had
    family in the  country  of  return  then  this  appeal  would  succeed.
    Unfortunately for the appellant the  test  is  considerably  wider  and
    applying the tests set out above I am not satisfied the  appellant  has
    met the requirement of the Rule.


28. I therefore find that the appellant cannot satisfy either  Appendix  FM
    or Paragraph 276ADE HC 395.

29. However, I must also consider whether the appellant's  case  should  be
    considered outside of the Immigration Rules.

30. In R (on the application of Onkarsingh Nagre) 2013 EWHC 720 Sales J  at
    paragraphs [42] and [43] said


             "The approach explained in the Strasbourg  case-law  indicates
             that ... consideration of  whether  there  are  insurmountable
             obstacles  to  the  claimant's  resident  spouse  or   partner
             relocating to the claimant's country  of  origin  to  continue
             their  family  life  there   will   be   a   highly   material
             consideration. This is not to say that  the  question  whether
             there are insurmountable obstacles to relocation  will  always
             be decisive.... Therefore, it cannot be  said  that  in  every
             case consideration of the test  in  Section  EX.1  of  whether
             there  are  insurmountable  obstacles   to   relocation   will
             necessarily exhaust consideration of proportionality, even  in
             the type of precarious  family  life  case  with  which  these
             proceedings are concerned.


             I agree with the statement by the Upper Tribunal in Izuazu  in
             the latter part of paragraph [56], that the  Strasbourg  case-
             law does not treat the test  of  insurmountable  obstacles  to
             relocation as a minimum requirement to  be  established  in  a
             precarious family life case before it can  be  concluded  that
             removal of the claimant is disproportionate; the case-law only
             treats it as a material factor to be taken into account.


             Nonetheless, I consider  that  the  Strasbourg  guidance  does
             indicate that in a precarious family life case,  where  it  is
             only in "exceptional" or "the most exceptional"  circumstances
             that removal of the non-national family member will constitute
             a violation  of  Article  8,  the  absence  of  insurmountable
             obstacles to  relocation  of  other  family  members  to  that
             member's own country of origin to continue their  family  life
             there  is  likely  to  indicate  that  the  removal  will   be
             proportionate for the purposes of Article 8".

31. Mr Jeshani has also brought to my attention a recent  decision  of  MMM
    (AP) v The Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  COSH  43.
    This decision does no more than re-affirm that approach the court  took
    in Nagre namely the appellant has to show there is a good arguable case
    tin order to have his case considered outside of the Rules.


32. I am satisfied that in respect of the appellant's  private  life  claim
    that consideration of the claim under paragraph 276ADE does  take  into
    account all of the issues that I  am  being  asked  to  consider  under
    article 8. The appellant came as a mature student with  no  expectation
    to be allowed to stay. Her Tier 4 leave was curtailed  and  instead  of
    challenging that decision she chose to apply  under  the  private  life
    route. All  of  the  matters  that  would  be  considered  fell  to  be
    considered under the Ogundimu test. I do not therefore find there is  a
    good arguable case on private life grounds to consider the case outside
    of the Rules.

33. With regard to family life the appellant could not raise a claim  under
    Appendix FM because she was neither married nor with a partner and  she
    did not have a child. Her age also excluded her from any possible claim
    under Appendix FM.

34. The appellant has argued family life with her aunt and  uncle  and  has
    ought to argue both an emotional and financial dependency. However,  in
    order for me to consider the case outside of the Rules there must be  a
    good arguable with a realistic prospect of success.

35. I have to have regard to the fact she is neither a minor nor her aunt's
    child but is an adult living in her aunt's house.

36. In Kugathas v SSHD (2003) INLR 170 the Court of Appeal  said  that,  in
    order to establish family life, it is necessary to show that there is a
    real committed or effective support or relationship between the  family
    members and the normal emotional ties between a mother and an adult son
    would not, without more, be enough. In Etti-Adegbola v SSHD (2009) EWCA
    Civ 1319 the Court of Appeal concentrated on the last part of that test
    and confirmed that the Tribunal had applied the right test  in  finding
    that a family's behaviour was "no way exceptional or beyond the  norm".
    In JB (India) and Others v ECO, Bombay (2009) EWCA Civ 234 the Court of
    Appeal reiterated that the approach in Kugathas must be applied to  the
    question of whether family life for the purposes of Article 8  subsists
    between parents and adult children. In ZB (Pakistan) v SSHD  2009  EWCA
    Civ 834 the Court of Appeal said that  when  considering  whether,  for
    Article 8 purposes, family life existed  between  a  parent  and  adult
    children, account must be taken of the parent's need for  the  children
    and the totality of the family relationships must be  considered.   The
    question of whether there was a family life was not  answered  properly
    by considering each one to one relationship in turn and in isolation.


37. It is against this background that  I  must  consider  the  appellant's
    current situation. When she came to the United Kingdom she did not come
    to look after her aunt or  uncle  but  she  came  to  study.  Her  aunt
    sponsored her but it was her choice to come and study here and  it  was
    her aunt's choice to sponsor her. It was not out of necessity she  came
    to the United Kingdom. Her situation has now changed because  her  aunt
    needs some support and it is this support  that  the  appellant  argues
    takes her case outside of Kugathas and the other cases.

38. The evidence presented does not suggest the appellant's uncle is unable
    to look after his wife. It is understandable that  both  the  aunt  and
    uncle want her to stay because according to the aunt they  have  become
    so attached to her. Paragraph  [9]  of  the  aunt's  statement  perhaps
    paints the real picture in this case because the aunt states "It  would
    be a real shame if this would not continue. Instead my  husband  and  I
    would end up sad and lonely."

39. The appellant is not a person who has just become an adult. She  is  in
    her forties and her dependency is only because  she  has  no  permanent
    immigration status.

40. Although I accept her situation could be considered outside of Appendix
    FM I am not satisfied there is family life, as defined by article ECHR,
    after considering the evidence and the authorities surrounding an adult
    family matrix.

41. I therefore find that as there is no family life as required by  Razgar
    then her appeal under ECHR would fail and there is no basis for  me  to
    consider the case outside of the Rules.

42. In summary, I find there is no  good  arguable  case  to  consider  the
    appellant's private life claim outside of the Rules and whilst there is
    an argument to consider family life outside of Appendix  FM  I  am  not
    persuaded there is  a  realistic  prospect  of  success  (See  test  in
    paragraph [37] of MMM).


    DECISION


43. There is a material error of law.


44. I set aside the  original  decision  and  I  substitute  the  following
    decision:-

     a. I dismiss the appeal under the Immigration Rules.


45. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order has been made and no request for an order was submitted to me.


Signed:                                 Dated:





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT

I reverse the fee award made by the First-tier Tribunal.

Signed:                                 Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
