
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37954/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice,|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Belfast                              |On 5 January 2016                    |
|On 30 November 2015                  |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              ALINA IAROSHYNSKA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnyez, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M Gavin, Solicitor


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of State.  However,
    for convenience I refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  Thus, the appellant is a citizen of Ukraine born  on  2
    February 1969.

 2. On 15 July 2014 she applied for a residence card as the  spouse  of  an
    EEA national.  The respondent refused the application on the basis that
    it had not been established that  the  appellant's  husband,  a  Polish
    national, is exercising Treaty rights.   In  essence,  the  appellant's
    husband ceased work in 2009 having been made redundant.  The respondent
    was not satisfied that he could show that he was actively seeking  work
    and has a genuine chance of being engaged in employment.

 3. The appellant's appeal against that  decision  came  before  Designated
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Murray on 26 May 2015. In the light of
    the matters  described  below,  I  announced  to  the  parties  at  the
    conclusion of the hearing that I had decided to set aside the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal and  remit  the  matter  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for further hearing.

 4. All that is clear is that the  First-tier  Judge  allowed  the  appeal.
    However, it appears that three determinations relating to  the  hearing
    before Judge Murray were promulgated.  The first clue to an anomaly  in
    the promulgation of her decision  is  apparent  from  the  respondent's
    grounds of appeal before me which at [1] describe the determination  as
    an "amended" determination.  There is however, nothing on the  face  of
    the determination to indicate that it is an amended decision.

 5. At the hearing Ms Gavin explained that when the  judge's  determination
    was received it was noted that there was an error as to  the  recording
    of who the legal  representatives  before  her  were.   The  judge  had
    recorded the representatives as the Law  Centre  of  Northern  Ireland,
    whereas in fact the representative was Francis Hanna & Co, Solicitors.

 6. A further determination was  sent  to  the  solicitors  correcting  the
    representation but in fact altering the substance of the determination.
     In the first determination that was sent out the  judge's  conclusions
    were stated as being, in summary, that  the  sponsor,  the  appellant's
    husband and the EEA national, does not have a genuine chance  of  being
    engaged in employment in the UK.  Accordingly, she  concluded  that  he
    was not exercising Treaty rights and could not meet regulation 6(7)  of
    the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006  ("the  EEA
    Regulations") (despite stating in an earlier paragraph that he  was  in
    fact a jobseeker).

 7. In that determination she  did  however  find  that  the  appellant  is
    entitled to a derivative right of residence under  reg.  15A(4),  being
    the primary carer of the children of an EEA national.

 8. However,  a  second  determination  was  received  by  the  appellant's
    representatives.  Whereas  the  first  determination  consisted  of  42
    paragraphs, the second consisted of only 40 paragraphs.  In the  second
    determination the judge made no mention of the appellant being entitled
    to a derivative right of residence but concluded that the appellant  is
    a jobseeker and "has retained a right to reside within the  meaning  of
    Article 14(4)(b) of the Citizens Directive".  She then  concluded  that
    the appellant "has a right of residence in  the  United  Kingdom  under
    Regulation 14(2)".  On the face  of  it,  the  two  determinations  are
    inconsistent.

 9. I was informed that yet another determination was sent  which  was  the
    same in  content  as  the  first  determination.   However,  all  three
    determinations bear the same date of promulgation, being 2  July  2015.
    Notices were sent by the First-tier Tribunal in respect of  the  second
    and third determinations with a stamp stating "Amended Notice disregard
    all previous notices".

10. To add to the confusion, it appears that there are two sets of  grounds
    advanced by the respondent.  The grounds before me are dated 11  August
    2015, whereas the grant of permission relates to grounds  described  as
    being dated 7 July 2014.  That is clearly a  mistake  as  to  the  year
    since the judge heard the appeal on 26 May 2015.  The grounds which are
    referred to by the judge who granted permission were not before me.  It
    is clear however, that Mr Diwnyez was working from a different  set  of
    grounds of appeal from those that are on the Tribunal file.

11. It is not apparent, at least on the face of any of the  determinations,
    that the judge purported to exercise the power under  rule  31  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules  2014  to  correct  a  mistake  or  accidental  slip  or
    omission.  It is similarly not apparent that  the  judge  purported  to
    exercise any power under rule 32, setting aside her original  decision,
    even if she had the power to do so under rule 32.

12. Were I asked to express a concluded  view  as  to  the  merits  of  the
    respondent's grounds, I would have to say that it  is  not  immediately
    apparent which grounds relate to which determination.

13. It is however, sufficient for me to conclude that by  the  promulgation
    of two decisions which are on the face of them inconsistent as to their
    conclusions in terms of the reasons for allowing the appeal,  there  is
    an error of law in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal.   The  two
    seemingly inconsistent determinations at the very least  indicate  that
    the judge had not made up her mind as to the basis on which the  appeal
    should be allowed.

14. Both parties agreed that in the circumstances there is an error of  law
    in the decision(s) of the First-tier Tribunal requiring it  to  be  set
    aside.  I too am satisfied that that is the case.

15. Accordingly, I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.   The
    appropriate course is for the appeal to be remitted to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be heard de novo before a judge other than Designated First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Murray, with no findings of fact preserved.

    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  That decision  is  set  aside  and  the  appeal  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing de novo.




    Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek      23/12/15
