
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ia376782014
                                                                 ia376832014
                                                                 ia376882014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham   |Determination & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 20th April 2016                       |On 13th June 2016                   |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                      ms Mee Eng ling (first appellant)
                  master Kah Heng chong (second appellant)
                   master Kah Wai chong (third appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Manjit Gill, QC
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Lagunju, promulgated on 9th January 2015, following a hearing  at
    Birmingham, Sheldon Court on 4th December 2014.  In the  determination,
    the  judge  allowed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellants,  whereupon   the
    Respondent Secretary of State applied for, and was granted,  permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants comprise a mother and her two children.  The mother, the
    principal Appellant, was born on 7th June 1958.  The second  Appellant,
    the eldest child, was born on 15th October 1995.  The third  Appellant,
    the second child, was born on 3rd March  1997.   All  are  citizens  of
    Malaysia.  The second and third Appellants are both males.  All  appeal
    against the  decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  7th  September  2014
    refusing their application for leave to remain in the UK on  the  basis
    of a claim under Article 8 of the ECHR.

The Appellants' Claim

 3. The first Appellant, the principal Appellant, was born and grew  up  in
    Malaysia.  In around 1994 she left Malaysia and  moved  to  Switzerland
    with her husband.  Her two sons, the second and third  Appellants  were
    then born in Switzerland in 1995 and 1997.  The husband's business then
    failed and the family relocated to Malaysia in 2003.   At  this  point,
    there appears to have been a negative  impact  on  the  children.   The
    family remained in Malaysia for approximately two years and  the  first
    Appellant then applied for herself and her two children to come to  the
    UK as dependants of her husband who was in the UK on  a  student  visa.
    Unfortunately the marriage then broke down in 2008.  Until  that  time,
    the Appellants had been in the UK lawfully.   The  Appellants  did  not
    return once their leave had expired but remained in the UK  unlawfully.
    Eventually, the first Appellant made an application for leave to remain
    outside the Rules in July 2010.  These applications, although  made  on
    29th July 2010, were not decided until 7th September 2014, nearly  four
    years thereafter.  It is unquestionable that there has been  inordinate
    delay in the making of the decision  by  the  Respondent  Secretary  of
    State.  This is despite numerous letters having been written,  judicial
    review applications made, and promises in consent  orders,  to  make  a
    decision speedily, followed by  withdrawals  of  decisions  before  the
    First-tier  Tribunal,  including  at  hearing,   thereby   leading   to
    unedifying state of affairs.  Unfortunately, this is  the  backdrop  to
    this appeal.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge considered the appeal on the basis of  paragraph  278ADE,  as
    this provision had been considered by the Secretary of State, and  then
    looked at Article 8 ECHR.  It was observed that the principal Appellant
    was neither in a relationship with Mr Norman, a British citizen  living
    in the UK, even though she  had  overstayed  in  the  UK  herself  (see
    paragraph  17).   The  judge  reminded  herself  that  the  test  under
    paragraph 276ADE is that the Appellants would  face  "very  significant
    obstacles"  to  integration  back  into  Malaysian  society,  and  then
    consider the facts appertaining to this  appeal.   The  judge  observed
    that after the principal Appellant had moved with her estranged husband
    to Switzerland just to help him set up a business there,

         "It is  clear  that  the  first  Appellant  settled  into  life  in
         Switzerland and put down roots there.  She had  two  children,  put
         them in education and it is likely that  they  believed  that  they
         would live there for a considerable length of  time,  thus  leaving
         their  life  in  Malaysia  behind  and  starting  a  new  life   in
         Switzerland" (paragraph 26).

    The determination records how the principal Appellant,

         "Gave up her  life  and  cut  all  ties  to  their  home  countries
         expecting that they would not return.  After spending nine years in
         Switzerland I find that she could not have had any significant ties
         to Malaysia when she returned in 2003.  I consider  also  that  her
         connection in Malaysia has become even more remote  after  spending
         almost ten years in the UK.  I find that she is  unlikely  to  have
         retained any connection to  life  in  Malaysia  and  that  includes
         speaking the language" (paragraph 29).

    Thereafter considerable attention was paid by the judge to the issue of
    reintegration  and  "integration  back  into  life  in  Malaysia   very
    difficult" (see paragraphs 30 to 32).

 5. The judge also had regard to the  fact  that  there  was  a  subsisting
    relationship with Mr Norman and observed that, "I find this very  close
    friendship and help and support of  abundance  normal  over  the  years
    including providing her with a  house  and  a  car,  is  what  in  part
    solidifies the first Appellant's ties to the UK and would make  further
    integration in Malaysia difficult" (paragraph 36).

 6. It  was,  however,  in  part,  in  respect  of  the  second  and  third
    Appellants, the two sons of the principal  Appellant,  that  the  judge
    emphasised the very significant  obstacles  that  they  would  face  in
    reintegrating into Malaysian society.  Noting that "there would be very
    significant obstacles to their integration in Malaysia " (see paragraph
    42) the judge observed how the second Appellant:

         "Had great difficulty on leaving Switzerland in 2003  and  adapting
         to life back in Malaysia; ......... degree of psychological  trauma
         as a result of the move.  Apparently he found it difficult to speak
         Malay and found schooling very difficult" (paragraph 43).

 7. There was also a report prepared by Dr Latif dated 2nd  May  2012  that
    the judge had regard to (see paragraph 44).  The second  Appellant  was
    now age 19 but the applications to the Home Office had been  made  when
    he was still a minor "and the delay they  have  had  to  endure  whilst
    waiting for the reconsideration of their applications has moved  things
    along somewhat" (see paragraph 45).  The judge was  wise  to  note  the
    fact that there was "the  need  to  promote  the  welfare,  safety  and
    security of minor children" with respect to both these boys  (paragraph
    46).

 8. The second Appellant had gone on to  excel  at  his  GCSE  and  A-level
    results and was undertaking a bachelors degree in mathematics at King's
    College London and the third Appellant had also done exceptionally well
    in his GCSE results, and was predicted A grades in  his  A-levels  (see
    paragraph 47).  In addition they were involved in badminton  and  music
    and other extracurricular activities.  The judge went on to  note  that
    the boys were deprived of a relationship with their father at  a  young
    age "thus they have already experienced a great deal  of  upheaval  and
    instability in their lives" (paragraph 49).

 9. The conclusion reached by the judge was that, "the fact that  they  now
    feel happy and  settled,  their  educational  achievements  and  future
    aspirations, their assimilation is to Mr Norman's life and  his  family
    suggests that integration at this stage  would  prove  very  difficult"
    (paragraph 50).  This was not least because:

         "The only home they have known for the last nine years would create
         significant obstacles to their integration in Malaysia.  They would
         have to deal with a new language,  culture,  different  educational
         system, loss of attachment from the UK including Mr Norman and  his
         family, from the friendships they have formed and  cultivated  over
         the years and  instability  caused  by  the  move,  all  of  which,
         according to the expert report, is likely to have detrimental long-
         term effects on their wellbeing ...." (paragraph 50).

10. Accordingly, the judge had little difficulty in observing that  Article
    8 was engaged, and applying the decision in Shahszad [2014] UKUT 00085,
    the judge concluded that there would be a disproportionate interference
    with their Article 8 rights for all the reasons that had been given  in
    the preceding paragraphs.

11. At the time of the decision by the First-tier Tribunal Judge the  third
    Appellant was still a minor and the judge has observed that, "it  would
    be disproportionate to expect him once again to give up the life he has
    established here, considering the long-term effects it may have on  his
    future" (paragraph 54).   The  judge  did  not  end  the  determination
    without having due regard to Section 117B of the Immigration  Act  2014
    and noting that the three Appellants spoke English and would not  be  a
    financial burden on the UK given the support they had  from  Mr  Norman
    (see paragraph 55).

12. The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

13. The grounds of application state that the judge allowed the  appeal  of
    the principal Appellant and her two sons age 19 and  17  on  Article  8
    grounds.  The Appellants had entered as dependants of a Tier 4  Migrant
    but following the breakdown of the marriage the principal Appellant and
    her two sons remained unlawfully.   Their  applications  for  leave  to
    remain were subsequently made on the basis of a new relationship.   The
    judge had found that the requirements of the new Rules had not been met
    and that the relationship  was  a  fabrication  although  there  was  a
    friendship  between  the  parties.   She  concluded  however  that  the
    Appellants would experience significant  obstacles  to  integration  in
    Malaysia.  However,  the  judge's  conclusions  on  reintegration  were
    misconceived.  A period of  disruption  would  exist  in  any  case  of
    removal.  The matter had to be examined holistically.  The judge failed
    to have any regard to the pursuance of the family/private life  in  the
    UK at a time when her status was precarious.  Indeed they had no  leave
    at all.  Section 117 had been insufficiently considered.

14. On 20th May 2015, permission to appeal was given by the Upper Tribunal,
    after the First-tier Tribunal below had declined to give permission.

15. A Rule 24 response by the Appellants' representatives maintains that if
    the  Respondent  succeeds  in  establishing  error  of  law,  then  the
    Appellants would submit that the judge had erred in concluding that the
    relationship between the principal Appellant and Mr Norman could not be
    classified as "partners".  This was because on the judge's own findings
    and on the evidence before her,  there  was  no  reasonable  basis  for
    concluding that the principal Appellant and Mr Norman were  not  in  an
    intimate relationship.  This was clear from what was said by the  judge
    at paragraphs 34 to 35 in any event.   Moreover,  the  judge  was  sent
    further additional documents very shortly after  the  hearing  and  the
    judge failed to have regard to them.   Finally,  the  Appellants  would
    rely upon the compelling evidence which was before the  learned  judge,
    such as the evidence of the principal Appellant that she had been  sold
    as a child and the impact of this on the removal of her sons with her.

Submissions

16. At the  hearing  before  Ms  Pettersen,  appearing  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent Secretary of State, submitted that the judge  did  have  the
    report of Dr Latif (at paragraph 44)  referring  to  the  psychological
    difficulties  experienced  by  the   boys,   but   such   anxiety   and
    psychological  ill-health  did  not  mean  that  the  boys  would  have
    difficulty in reintegrating in Malaysian society.  The application  was
    made in 2010 outside of the Immigration Rules, and refused in 2011, but
    then this refusal was withdrawn in 2012.   The  skeleton  argument  now
    argues that because it was withdrawn it must have been in error.   This
    did not follow.  The principal Appellant and her  children  had  for  a
    number of years been unlawfully in the  UK.   They  could  not  succeed
    under paragraph 276ADE.  Under Article 8 they could not have  succeeded
    if regard had properly been had to  the  fact  that  their  immigration
    status  here was "precarious".

17. For his part, Mr Gill submitted that the essence of the appeal  by  the
    Respondent Secretary of State was that the judge had  misconceived  the
    Rules.   However,  the  judge  had  placed  the  requirement  of  "very
    significant  obstacles"  right  at  the  forefront  of  her  mind  when
    considering the position under the Rules.  This was clear from the  use
    of precisely  this  formula  at  paragraph  23  of  the  determination.
    Thereafter, from paragraphs 24, onwards, and particularly at paragraphs
    30 to 33, the judge was looking at different  ways  of  how  this  test
    could not  be  met  and  using  an  interplay  of  different  words  to
    demonstrate  how  reintegration  would  indeed  be  difficult  for  the
    Appellants, such that the "very significant obstacles" test  could  not
    be satisfied.  At the end of  that  consideration  the  judge  referred
    again to "very significant obstacles to their integration in  Malaysia"
    (at paragraph 42).  Therefore, it was clear that this was nothing  more
    than a disagreement with the judge's findings.  It was true that  along
    the way  the  judge  had  used  language  such  as  "significant  ties"
    (paragraph  29)  or  "significant  obstacles"   (paragraph   37),   but
    essentially she used  reintegration,  and  the  judge  here  was  clear
    (paragraph 30) that this would not reasonably be possible.  The  second
    and third Appellants  have  suffered  psychologically  and  Dr  Latif's
    report was powerful in this effect.

18. To sum up, Mr Gill submitted that the following was the situation here.
     The first Appellant had left Malaysia about  twenty  years  ago.   And
    there had only been a short return of one or two years.   She  did  not
    speak Malay language.  She had no family and no connections left there.
     On the other hand, she had strong significant ties  to  the  UK.   Her
    history in Malaysia had been a difficult and  traumatic  one  as  well.
    The judge took this into account and made a decision that was  open  to
    her.  As far as the second and third Appellants  were  concerned,  they
    had both been born outside Malaysia.  They had  only  spent  about  two
    years of their life there.  They  have  lived  European  lives  and  in
    particular  British  lives.   That  the  third  Appellant   had   great
    difficulties  in  Malaysia  and  suffered  psychological  trauma   (see
    paragraph 43).  They  had no familiarity with the Malay  language  (see
    paragraph 43).  The judge accepted the findings  of  the  psychological
    report (see Appellants' bundle page 2 to 5).  That the boys are anxious
    about returning to Malaysia and that it is likely that their  emotional
    and  behavioural  responses  would  change  and   that   their   future
    development, education and family life and future careers would also be
    disrupted.  The judge correctly took into account the need  to  promote
    the welfare, safety and security of minor children (see  paragraph  46)
    in considering paragraph 276ADE.  She noted that there  is  no  bright-
    line to be drawn between those were under 18 and those who are  just  a
    little over 18 (see paragraph 45).  She took into account the interests
    of both Appellants (see paragraph 51).  No complaint is made about  any
    of these findings.  Indeed, the specific factual findings have not been
    questioned.  The only argument is that the Respondent states  that  the
    overall conclusion about the judge was wrong and that the  requirements
    of paragraph 276ADE are not met.  This is simply a dispute of fact.

19. Finally, as far as Section 117B  was  concerned  this  did  not  modify
    Article 8 jurisprudence in any sense.  The way in which  Article  8  is
    interpreted and applied is as has been set out as long ago as the  case
    of Huang and EB (Kosovo).  Furthermore, Section 117B(6) makes it  clear
    that the public interest does not require the first Appellant's removal
    because the third Appellant is a  qualifying  child  and  Section  117B
    defines a "qualifying child" as a person who has lived in the UK for  a
    continuous period of seven years.  Whilst  it  was  accepted  that  the
    children could not be removed  then  it  followed  that  the  principal
    Appellant also could not be removed.  There was simply no error of  law
    here.  This amounted to just a disagreement with the judge's  findings.



No Error of Law

20. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  This is  a  case
    which has had a torturous history.   The applications were made as long
    ago as 29th July 2010.  There has been  considerable  delay  and  legal
    wranglings with consent orders made and not complied  with  for  speedy
    decisions, and eventually the matter has  come  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  who  has  made  a  decision  in  a  manner  that  is   clear,
    comprehensive, and legally correct.   The  judge  considered  paragraph
    276ADE and had in mind the fact that the Appellants had  to  show  that
    there would be "very significant obstacles" to their  integration  into
    Malaysian society.   The  judge  gave  ample  reasons  in  the  ensuing
    paragraphs for why this was the case relying also upon the report of Dr
    Latif.  That conclusion is not one that was unreasonable or  could  not
    have been open to the judge given the factual background to this appeal
    with  the  principal  Appellants  having  lived   European   lives   in
    Switzerland, and for the last ten years in the United Kingdom.  On  the
    other hand, they have severed their ties  to  Malaysian  society.   The
    judge had to take into account the need to promote the welfare, safety,
    and security of the minor children and did so (see  paragraph  46)  and
    was correct in holding that  there  was  no  bright-line  to  be  drawn
    between those who are under 18 and those who are over 18.

21. Second, as far as Article 8 was concerned, although the  family  became
    overstayers, this happened due to circumstances beyond the  control  of
    the second and third Appellants and the children could not be penalised
    for  this:  (see  ZH  Tanzania).   It  also  is  significant  that  the
    jurisprudence concerning the Secretary of State's delay in  making  the
    decisions remains relevant and the delay here has been  inordinate  and
    unjustifiable.  That significantly weakens the public interest  in  the
    removal of overstayers and this has been judicially  recognised  in  EB
    (Kosovo).  This is a case where the second  and  the  third  Appellants
    have lived outside Malaysia nearly all of  their  lives;  they  do  not
    speak or read or write the Malay language; and they have  grown  up  in
    the British cultural context,  and  have  done  exceptionally  well  in
    British society.  Further, they have a close and supportive family  and
    the support of Mr Norman, for the provision of a house and  a  car  was
    well-recognised by the judge.  As against this, they have nothing to go
    back to in Malaysia.

22. Accordingly, this amounts to nothing more than a disagreement with  the
    judge's findings and there is no error of law.

Notice of Decision

23. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

24. No anonymity order is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 11th June 2016
