
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/37048/2014
                                                               IA/37049/2014
                                                               IA/37051/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 5 March 2015                      |On 21 April 2015                     |
|Prepared on 20 March 2015            |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                    O. O.
                                    E. I.
                                    L. I.
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Dewison, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Hanan, Corban Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The First Respondent,  her  son  the  Second  Respondent,  and  her
         daughter the Third Respondent, are citizens of  Nigeria.  Both  her
         children were born in the UK, at a time when their  mother  was  an
         overstayer. It is accepted that their father is also a  citizen  of
         Nigeria, who has  no  immigration  status  in  the  UK.  The  First
         Respondent says she believes he  is  presently  living  in  Nigeria
         having voluntarily returned there  at  his  own  expense  to  avoid
         deportation following service of a term of  imprisonment,  although
         there is no documentary evidence to that effect.

      2. The First Respondent first came to  the  UK  as  a  visitor  on  10
         February 2003. She did not obtain a variation of her  leave  before
         its expiry. Subsequently she made an application  for  a  grant  of
         leave to remain on the basis of the Article 3 and Article 8  rights
         of herself  and  her  children  on  14  September  2012,  but  that
         application was refused on 3 September 2013, and was not appealed.

      3. The First Respondent then made a further application for indefinite
         leave to remain that was refused on 18 August  2014,  when  removal
         decisions were also made  in  relation  to  both  herself  and  her
         children.

    The appeals

      4. The appeals of the Respondents against the immigration decisions of
         18 August 2014 were heard on  17  November  2014,  when  they  were
         allowed under the Immigration Rules in a Determination  promulgated
         on 24 November 2014 by First Tier Tribunal Judge Hands.

      5. By a decision of First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge  M  Davies  dated  13
         January  2015  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  granted  the   Appellant
         permission to appeal on the basis it was  arguable  the  Judge  had
         erred in her approach to the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

      6. The Respondents have filed no Rule 24  response  to  the  grant  of
         permission.

      7. Thus the matter comes before me.

    The appeals under the Immigration Rules

      8. It was not in dispute before the First Tier Tribunal that the First
         Respondent was convicted of fraud by  false  representation  on  25
         March 2010, and in consequence sentenced to a term  of  six  months
         imprisonment suspended  for  a  period  of  two  years.  The  First
         Respondent accepts that she used "someone else's national insurance
         number".  It  is  clear  in  my  judgement  that  she  was   caught
         dishonestly using a false identity.

      9. In consequence the Appellant refused the application of  the  First
         Respondent by reference to paragraph 276ADE and  to  paragraphs  S-
         LTR.1.6. and R-LTRPT.1.1(a-d), 2.2.-2.4., and 3.1.-3.2. of Appendix
         FM.

     10. The Judge's Determination makes no reference to the provision,  but
         it was not disputed before me that the First Respondent  could  not
         meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE. She had not lived in the
         UK for at least 20 years. Thus, since no other route  was  open  to
         her, in order to succeed in her application for a  grant  of  leave
         under the Immigration Rules, the First Respondent  needed  to  show
         that she met the requirements of Appendix FM. Given her  long  term
         status as an overstayer, she could only meet the requirements of R-
         LTRPT. 2.2.(d) and 3.2. if she could satisfy the test  set  out  in
         paragraph EX.1.(a)(ii).

             "It would not be reasonable to expect the child to  leave  the
             UK"

     11. In  addition  the  First  Respondent  would  need  to  satisfy  the
         requirements  of  paragraphs  S-LTR.1.1-1.7.  The   Appellant   had
         concluded that she did not satisfy paragraph S-LTR.1.6. because  of
         her conviction. Paragraph S-LTR.1.6. is in the following terms;

             "The presence of the applicant in the UK is not  conducive  to
             the public good because their conduct  (including  convictions
             which do not fall within paragraphs S-LTR.1.3-1.5)  character,
             associations, or other reasons, make it undesirable  to  allow
             them to remain in the UK."

     12. The Judge's only reference to this provision was at the  conclusion
         of her Determination, as follows [29];

             "... The Appellant's conduct has not been such that it amounts
             to being not conducive to the public good. I  accept  she  has
             remained in this country illegally for many years. She was not
             "in hiding" per se as she was enrolled with the  NHS  and  her
             children  were  enrolled  in  education.  She  does  not  have
             associations that make it undesirable for her to  remain.  She
             has not displayed a course of conduct that is not conducive to
             the public good by working for a short period  with  a  forged
             document, and in any event the courts  have  dealt  with  that
             matter. The Appellant is now well  aware  of  her  duties  and
             responsibilities, not only to her children but to  the  public
             good of the UK. I am satisfied that S-LTR.1.6 does not apply."

     13. This approach to the material facts was in  my  judgement  patently
         flawed. The First Respondent did not seek to  establish  before  me
         that  the  conviction  was  one  that   was   "spent"   under   the
         Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974, although that was an argument
         apparently advanced at the hearing in the First  Tier  Tribunal  by
         the solicitor then appearing, and accepted by the  Judge  [28].  It
         was not however an argument that was dealt  with  in  the  skeleton
         argument produced in advance of the hearing, or supported by a copy
         of the Act, or any policy document issued by the Appellant. Nor was
         it an argument that was supported with the information  that  would
         have been required to calculate the date upon which the  conviction
         would become spent under the Act. Neither the  date  of  conviction
         nor sentence were provided in the written evidence,  and  thus  the
         date of expiry of the four year period after the conclusion of  the
         sentence period, could not be calculated. More importantly perhaps,
         no consideration was given to the fact that for the purposes of the
         Immigration Acts, such a conviction never becomes  "spent"  because
         of the exception provisions.

     14. It follows that the Judge materially erred in law in  allowing  the
         appeals under the Immigration Rules, and that her decision to  that
         effect must be set aside, and remade so as to dismiss  the  appeals
         under the Immigration Rules.

     15. That being so, the parties invited me to proceed to deal  with  the
         Article 8 appeals outside the Immigration Rules. Both  were  agreed
         that I would not need to hear further oral evidence in order to  do
         so.

     16. It is plain that the decision to remove the Respondents to  Nigeria
         cannot pose  an  interference  in  the  "family  life"  they  enjoy
         together, since they would be removed together. There is  on  their
         own evidence no "family life" enjoyed at present with the  man  who
         has historically filled the role of partner/husband/father, because
         it is their case that he is currently living in Nigeria.  Thus  the
         appeals can only be considered on Article 8 grounds  on  the  basis
         that the removal decisions constitute interference in the  "private
         lives" of the Respondents. I accept that they would do so.

     17. I note the guidance to be found in  the  decision  of  the  Supreme
         Court  in  Patel  [2013]  UKSC  72.  The  following  statements  of
         principle are relevant;

             "... a near-miss under the rules cannot provide substance to a
             human rights case which is otherwise lacking in merit" [56].

             "It is important to remember that article 8 is not  a  general
             dispensing power. It is to be distinguished from the Secretary
             of State's discretion to allow leave  to  remain  outside  the
             rules, which may be unrelated to any  protected  human  right.
             The merits of a decision not to depart from the rules are  not
             reviewable on appeal: section 86(6). One may  sympathise  with
             Sedley  LJ's  call  in  Pankina  for  "common  sense"  in  the
             application of the rules to graduates who have  been  studying
             in the UK for some years (see para 47  above).  However,  such
             considerations do not by themselves provide grounds of  appeal
             under article 8, which is concerned  with  private  or  family
             life, not education as such. The opportunity for  a  promising
             student to  complete  his  course  in  this  country,  however
             desirable in general terms, is not in itself a right protected
             under article 8." [57]

     18. There  is  no  need  to  repeat  the  immigration  history  of  the
         Respondents. The First Respondent has been an overstayer since  the
         expiry of her visitor's visa, and the Second and Third  Respondents
         have never had leave to remain. They were conceived and  born  when
         their mother was an overstayer, and the  only  evidence  concerning
         their father, also a citizen of Nigeria, points to his also  having
         been without leave to remain when they were born.

     19. On the Judge's findings the Respondents do have an extended  family
         in Nigeria, whether or not they are currently  in  regular  contact
         with them. The Judge accepted that the father  of  the  Second  and
         Third Respondents no longer wished to pursue  a  relationship  with
         the Respondents. I see no reason to disturb that finding, but  even
         if that be the case there was no evidence, and no finding, that  he
         wished any of them harm, or that he would fail to  assist  them  in
         the event of their return. Nor  was  there  any  evidence,  or  any
         finding, that the members of  the  extended  maternal  or  paternal
         families wished any of them harm, or would fail to assist  them  in
         the event of their return. The evidence simply does not permit such
         findings.

     20. As the Judge accepted, upon  a  voluntary  return  the  Respondents
         would have the benefit of the current  financial  support  package.
         They cannot be heard to argue that they would be destitute  because
         they would refuse to return  voluntarily,  and  so  would  fail  to
         benefit from it.

     21. The Second and Third Respondents have benefited from  education  at
         public expense in the UK, and they are now aged ten and seven years
         old. The Judge accepted that they did  not  know  Nigeria,  but  in
         Nigeria they would be taught in English.

     22. Following the guidance to be found in EV (Philippines) [2014]  EWCA
         Civ 874, to which the Judge made no reference,  the  assessment  of
         the best interests of these children must be made  in  the  context
         that they and their parents are Nigerian nationals with no right to
         remain in the UK. I am satisfied that if their father  has  already
         left the UK, and if their mother is to be removed from the  UK,  it
         is entirely reasonable to expect them to  accompany  their  mother.
         The Judge's finding to the contrary cannot stand,  because  it  was
         not made in either the correct factual context, or in the light  of
         the applicable  jurisprudence.  The  children  have  no  right,  or
         legitimate expectation, to education at public expense in  the  UK,
         and their best interests are plainly  served  by  growing  up  with
         their mother. Indeed upon return to Nigeria  they  would  have  the
         additional benefit of the ability to grow up  within  the  extended
         family that remain in that country.

     23. There is no suggestion that the children would  face  any  lack  of
         safety in the event of return to Nigeria, and the evidence does not
         suggest that they would lack any opportunity  there.  There  is  no
         evidential basis upon which I could assume that the education  they
         could obtain in Nigeria would be better or worse  than  that  which
         they would obtain at public expense in the UK.

     24. Moreover the two  children  have  had  no  right  to  free  medical
         treatment, or to free  education,  yet  the  First  Respondent  had
         contrived to obtain both, and has not disclosed how  she  has  done
         so. She has never had any right to obtain  lawful  employment,  and
         yet for over ten  years,  and  without  disclosing  any  legitimate
         source of  income,  she  has  somehow  supported  herself  and  her
         children. The First Respondent had been convicted of an offence  of
         deception, arising out of her use of a false  identity,  for  which
         she was sentenced to a term of imprisonment. Whilst that  term  had
         been suspended for a term of two years, it  demonstrated  that  her
         proven offending behaviour crossed the  custody  threshold  despite
         her personal circumstances. No doubt her role as  a  single  mother
         had weighed heavily in the balance with the sentencing  judge.  Had
         she been subject to a  term  of  immediate  imprisonment,  her  two
         children would have been forced into local authority care.

     25. For these reasons it is  plain  in  my  judgement  that  the  views
         expressed by the Judge upon whether it is reasonable to expect  the
         children to leave the UK with their mother for a  life  in  Nigeria
         cannot stand - they were not made in the correct  factual  context,
         or after having regard to the correct jurisprudence.

     26. Since I am remaking the decision after 28 July  2014  I  must  have
         regard to ss117A-D of the 2002 Act. I  must  (in  particular)  have
         regard to the considerations listed in s117B to  the  2002  Act  in
         considering whether  an  interference  with  a  person's  right  to
         respect for private life is justified under Article 8(2).

     27. I note that the maintenance of effective immigration controls is in
         the public interest; s117B(1).

     28. I note that the Respondents speak English fluently,  but  they  are
         not financially independent; s117B(2)(3).

     29. I note that little weight should  be  given  to  a  "private  life"
         established by a person when their immigration status is precarious
         or they are in the UK unlawfully; s117B(4)(5). I am satisfied  that
         at  all  material  times  the  Respondents  have  been  in  the  UK
         unlawfully.

     30. I note that the Second Respondent is a "qualifying child", and that
         the  Third  Respondent  is  only  a  few   days   short   of   that
         qualification. Thus I must consider the test set out in s117B(6) of
         whether it would be reasonable to expect the children to leave  the
         UK. I can see no distinction between that test, and the  one  posed
         by EV which I have answered above.

    Conclusions

     31. In my  consideration  of  the  Article  8  appeal  pursued  by  the
         Appellant I have to determine the following separate questions:

           . Is there an interference with the right to respect for private
             life  (which  includes  the  right  to  physical   and   moral
             integrity) and family life?

           . If so will such interference have consequences of such gravity
             as to potentially engage Article 8?

           . Is that interference in accordance with the law?

           . Does that interference have legitimate aims?

           . Is the interference proportionate in a democratic  society  to
             the legitimate aim to be achieved?

     32. This is an appeal that turns upon the issue of the  proportionality
         of the decision to remove. I note the guidance to be found upon the
         proper approach to a "private life" case in the decisions of  Patel
         [2013] UKSC 72, and  Nasim  [2014]  UKUT  25.  I  note  the  public
         interest in removal; the following passage in Nasim  sets  out  the
         relevant principles;

             "14.      Whilst the concept of a "family life"  is  generally
                  speaking readily identifiable, the concept of  a  "private
                  life" for the purposes of Article  8  is  inherently  less
                  clear. At one end of the "continuum" stands the concept of
                  moral   and   physical   integrity   or   "physical    and
                  psychological integrity" (as categorised by the  ECtHR  in
                  eg Pretty v United Kingdom (2002) 35 EHRR 1) as to  which,
                  in  extreme  instances,  even  the  state's  interest   in
                  removing  foreign  criminals  might   not   constitute   a
                  proportionate response. However, as  one  moves  down  the
                  continuum, one encounters aspects of private  life  which,
                  even if engaging Article  8(1)  (if  not  alone,  then  in
                  combination with other factors) are so  far  removed  from
                  the "core" of Article 8 as to  be  readily  defeasible  by
                  state interests, such as the importance of  maintaining  a
                  credible and coherent system of immigration control.

             15. At this point on the continuum the essential  elements  of
                  the  private   life   relied   upon   will   normally   be
                  transposable, in the sense of being capable of replication
                  in their essential respects, following a  person's  return
                  to their home country. Thus, in headnote 3 of MM  (Tier  1
                  PSW; Art 8; private life) Zimbabwe [2009]  UKAIT  0037  we
                  find that:-

                      "3. When determining the issue of proportionality ...
                      it will always be important to evaluate the extent of
                      the individual's social ties and relationships in the
                      UK. However, a student here on a temporary basis  has
                      no expectation of a  right  to  remain  in  order  to
                      further these ties and relationships if the  criteria
                      of the points-based system are  not  met.  Also,  the
                      character of an individual's  "private  life"  relied
                      upon is ordinarily by its very nature of a type which
                      can be formed  elsewhere,  albeit  through  different
                      social ties, after the individual is removed from the
                      UK."

             16. As was  stated  in  the  earlier  case  of  MG  (assessing
                  interference with  private  life)  Serbia  and  Montenegro
                  [2005] UKAIT 00113:-

                      "A person's job and precise programme of studies  may
                      be different in the country to  which  he  is  to  be
                      returned and his network  of  friendships  and  other
                      acquaintances is likely to be different too, but  his
                      private life will continue  in  respect  of  all  its
                      essential elements."

              17. The difference between these types of "private life"  case
                  and a case founded on family life is instructive.  As  was
                  noted in MM, the relationships involved in a  family  life
                  are more likely to be unique, so as  to  be  incapable  of
                  being replicated once  an  individual  leaves  the  United
                  Kingdom, leaving behind, for example, his or her spouse or
                  minor child.

              18. In R (on the application of the Countryside Alliance) v AG
                  and others [2007] UKHL 52, Lord Bingham, having  described
                  the concept of private life in  Article  8  as  "elusive",
                  said that:

                      "... the purpose of the article is in my view  clear.
                      It is to protect the individual against intrusion  by
                      agents of the state, unless for good reason, into the
                      private sphere within which individuals expect to  be
                      left alone to conduct their personal affairs and live
                      their personal lives as they choose" [10].

             19. It is important to bear in mind that  the  "good  reason",
                  which the state must  invoke  is  not  a  fixity.  British
                  citizens may enjoy  friendships,  employment  and  studies
                  that are in all  essential  respects  the  same  as  those
                  enjoyed by persons here who are subject to such  controls.
                  The fact that the government cannot arbitrarily  interfere
                  with  a  British  citizen's  enjoyment  of  those  things,
                  replicable though they may  be,  and  that,  in  practice,
                  interference is likely to  be  justified  only  by  strong
                  reasons, such as  imprisonment  for  a  criminal  offence,
                  cannot be used to restrict  the  government's  ability  to
                  rely on the  enforcement  of  immigration  controls  as  a
                  reason for interfering with  friendships,  employment  and
                  studies enjoyed by a person who is subject to  immigration
                  controls.

             20. We therefore agree with Mr Jarvis that [57] of  Patel  and
                  Others is a significant exhortation from the Supreme Court
                  to re-focus attention on the nature and purpose of Article
                  8 and, in particular, to recognise its limited utility  to
                  an individual where one has  moved  along  the  continuum,
                  from that Article's core area of  operation  towards  what
                  might be described as its fuzzy penumbra.  The  limitation
                  arises, both from what will at that point normally be  the
                  tangential  effect  on  the  individual  of  the  proposed
                  interference and from the  fact  that,  unless  there  are
                  particular  reasons  to  reduce  the  public  interest  of
                  enforcing  immigration  controls,   that   interest   will
                  consequently  prevail  in  striking  the   proportionality
                  balance (even assuming that stage is reached).

             21. In conclusion on this first general matter, we  find  that
                  the  nature  of  the  right  asserted  by  each   of   the
                  appellants, based on their desire, as former students,  to
                  undertake a  period  of  post-study  work  in  the  United
                  Kingdom, lies at the outer reaches of cases  requiring  an
                  affirmative answer to the  second  of  the  five  "Razgar"
                  questions and that, even if  such  an  affirmative  answer
                  needs to be given, the issue of proportionality is  to  be
                  resolved  decisively  in  favour  of  the  respondent,  by
                  reference to her functions as the guardian of  the  system
                  of immigration controls, entrusted to her by Parliament."

     33. To the extent that the Respondents rely upon their desire  for  the
         children to undertake their education in the UK at public  expense,
         the following passage in Nasim is applicable;

             "25.      A  further  seam  running  through  the  appellant's
                  submissions was that, during  their  time  in  the  United
                  Kingdom, they had been  law-abiding,  had  not  relied  on
                  public funds and had contributed  to  the  United  Kingdom
                  economy by paying their students' fees. Their aim was  now
                  to contribute to that economy by working.

             26. We do not consider that this set of submissions takes  the
                  appellants'  cases  anywhere.  It  cannot  rationally   be
                  contended that their  Article  8  rights  have  been  made
                  stronger  merely  because,  during  their  time  in   this
                  country, they have not sought public funds, have refrained
                  from committing criminal offences and have paid  the  fees
                  required in order to undertake their courses. Similarly, a
                  desire to undertake paid employment in the United  Kingdom
                  is not, as such, a matter  that  can  enhance  a  person's
                  right to remain here in reliance on Article 8.

             27. The only significance of not having  criminal  convictions
                  and not having relied on public funds is to  preclude  the
                  respondent from pointing to any public interest in respect
                  of the appellants'  removal,  over  and  above  the  basic
                  importance of maintaining a firm and  coherent  system  of
                  immigration control. However, for reasons we have  already
                  enunciated, as  a  general  matter  that  public  interest
                  factor is, in the circumstances of these cases, more  than
                  adequate to render removal proportionate."

     34. To sum up then, the appeals do not rely upon the core  concepts  of
         moral and physical integrity. In my judgement the  evidence  relied
         upon does not establish that there are any compelling compassionate
         circumstances that mean the decision to remove the  Respondents  to
         Nigeria, leads to an unjustifiably harsh outcome.

    DECISION

         The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was  promulgated
         on 24 November 2014 did involve the making of an error  of  law  in
         the decision to allow the appeal under the  Immigration  Rules  and
         that decision is set aside and remade.

         The appeals under the Immigration Rules are dismissed.

         The appeals are dismissed on Article 8 grounds.

    Direction regarding anonymity  -  Rule  14  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008

         Unless and until the Tribunal directs otherwise the Respondents are
         granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
         indirectly identify  any  member  of  the  family.  This  direction
         applies both to the Appellant and to the  Respondents.  Failure  to
         comply with this direction could lead to proceedings being  brought
         for contempt of court.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes
Dated 20 March 2015
