
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37640/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination given orally   |
|                                              |and promulgated              |
|On 24 July 2014                               |On 30 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE LEWIS
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        Miss Caroline Wawira Ndambiri

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Saifolahi, Counsel

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State  has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Abebrese  who  allowed  the
    appeal by the respondent (whom we  shall  refer  to  as  the  claimant)
    against a decision refusing her leave to remain.

 2. The facts briefly stated are that the claimant is a national  of  Kenya
    where she was born on 16 December 1980.   She  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 14 June 2009 with entry clearance as a  points-based  system
    migrant with leave to remain until October 2010 which was then extended
    until 8 October 2012.

 3. On 30 September 2012 she made  an  application  for  further  leave  to
    remain as the un- married partner  of  a  British  national,  Mr  Simon
    Greenwood. The application disclosed that the claimant and Mr Greenwood
    were expecting their child to be born in the week commencing 23 October
    2012.  K was born on 26 October 2012 and is a  British  national.   The
    couple became engaged on 14 February 2013.

 4. The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal was that Mr  Greenwood  has
    been endeavouring to conclude divorce proceedings from  his  wife  from
    whom he separated in October 2009.  She had been uncooperative  but  it
    is now understood that a decree nisi has been granted.

 5. The Secretary of State made no reference to these matters when she made
    her decision on 18 September 2013.  That decision was a refusal to vary
    leave to remain and to remove the claimant.  The reason  was  that  the
    claimant had not met the requirements of the  Rules,  because  she  had
    lived with her partner for only eight  months  prior  to  the  date  of
    application whereas, for the purposes of this appeal, a  partner  means
    "living in a relationship  with  someone  akin  to  marriage  or  civil
    partnership or at least two years prior to  the  date  of  application"
    (GEN.1.2 (iv) of Appendix FM).

 6. The judge allowed the appeal under the  Immigration  Rules  because  he
    considered there were "omissions in the Secretary of  State's  decision
    to be significant  in  determining  the  outcome  of  the  appeal  with
    particular reference to insurmountable obstacles".  He also  considered
    that there had not been proper consideration by the Secretary of  State
    of s.55 of the 2009 Act.  Furthermore, he observed that  the  Secretary
    of State's representative had not cross-examined the claimant's partner
    as to his relationship with his son  and  whether  he  would  be  in  a
    position to relocate to Kenya.

 7. The Secretary of State has challenged this decision on the  basis  that
    the judge had not established what the insurmountable obstacles were to
    family life continuing  in  Kenya.   Furthermore,  the  judge  had  not
    explained how the claimant had satisfied the requirements of the Rules.
     Her contention is that the proper course would have been for the  case
    to be remitted to the Secretary of State for reconsideration.

 8. The claimant's solicitors filed a Rule 24 response arguing that in fact
    the First-tier Tribunal had considered numerous factors as to the issue
    of insurmountable obstacles and had made positive credibility findings.

 9. Ms Saifolahi and Ms Isherwood agreed that the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal was infected by error of law.  We consider that they were
    correct to do so.  The judge materially erred in failing to make  clear
    findings on the evidence and  he  failed  to  give  any  comprehensible
    reasons for allowing the appeal under the Immigration  Rules.   He  did
    not say in his determination which rule had been satisfied and on  what
    basis.  This error is material as it goes to the heart of the  decision
    which we therefore set aside as we have been invited to do.

10. By way of disposal of this matter on behalf of the Secretary  of  State
    Ms Isherwood has indicated that the decision under appeal is withdrawn.
     For the claimant Ms Saifolahi does not wish to pursue  any  appeal  in
    the Upper Tribunal.

11. By way of conclusion we allow the appeal by the Secretary of State  and
    set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  We  do  not  remake
    the  decision  as  the  immigration  decision  under  appeal  has  been
    withdrawn. There is no longer  any  appeal  pending  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal.




Signed
                                                          Date 25 July 2014

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson


