
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/37957/2013
                                                               IA/41164/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 27 October 2015                   |On 4 November 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                          carl anthony poorman (1)
                        caleisa gwendolyn poorman (2)
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Clarke, instructed by Fadiga & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. There was no request or need to direct anonymity in the proceedings  in
    the First-tier Tribunal and there is no need to  do  so  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.



Background

 2. The appellants are father and daughter.  Both are citizens of  Jamaica,
    born respectively on 31 March 1985 and 18 December 2009.   They  appeal
    the immigration decisions of 3 September 2013 to remove them  following
    refusal of their human rights claims.

 3. The first appellant has three children in  the  UK  born  to  different
    mothers, one of whom is the  second  appellant.   The  first  appellant
    claims to have genuine and subsisting parental relationships  with  all
    three children but his claim to be permitted to remain  in  the  UK  is
    based in essence on his relationship with his  son  Raekwon  who  is  a
    British citizen.  The second appellant's  human  rights  claim  depends
    primarily on the assessment of the first appellants' relationship  with
    his son.

 4. The two appellants have a lengthy appeal history.  Their  appeals  were
    originally allowed on 22 March 2014 by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Majid
    but the Home Office successfully appealed to the Upper Tribunal against
    those decisions resulting in  the  appeals  being  remitted  for  fresh
    decisions.  The remitted appeals were dismissed by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge K Miller on 29 December 2014, and it is against that decision the
    appellants were granted permission to appeal.

Legal error

 5. Having considered the written and oral arguments  of  both  parties,  I
    decided that Judge Miller's decision errs  in  law  for  the  following
    reasons.

 6. I find that paragraph 32 of  the  decision  and  reasons  statement  is
    unsound because Judge Miller failed to have regard to all the  evidence
    that had  been  provided  regarding  funds  transferred  by  the  first
    appellant to Raekwon.  The judge refers to seeing  only  nine  receipts
    when in fact 30 were provided.  It  is  perhaps  unfortunate  that  the
    solicitors who prepared the bundles of documents did not  put  all  the
    receipts in the same place or provide a schedule of payments but it  is
    clear that the receipts were all available to Judge Miller to consider.
     The failure to consider all the evidence was material to  the  judge's
    findings because they showed that  payments  were  made  more  or  less
    consistently from 2008 and not merely  connected  with  pending  appeal
    hearings as he found.

 7. Furthermore, the judge's findings in relation  to  these  payments  are
    unsound because he considered that the payments were not  made  by  the
    first appellant himself but by the brother of the first  appellant  who
    used the first appellant  as  a  conduit  for  such  payments.   It  is
    difficult to sustain this finding because although the first  appellant
    admitted to  receiving  financial  support  from  his  brother,  at  no
    juncture has the first appellant or his brother ever suggested  that  a
    portion of the financial support provided was to be  used  to  maintain
    Raekwon.  The evidence merely established that  the  first  appellant's
    brother gave financial support for the first appellant to  use  however
    he wished.  As there was no evidential basis for the inferences  drawn,
    the reliance on those inferences further undermines the findings made.

 8.  In  addition,  it  is  questionable  whether  Judge  Miller  correctly
    identified the payments  made  into  the  child's  savings  account  as
    maintenance.   There  was  evidence  that  the  first   appellant   had
    contributed to Raekwon's upkeep by buying shoes and school  uniform  as
    well as helping out in other  ways  but  this  was  separate  from  the
    deposits to the savings account.  This confusion  undermines  not  only
    the findings in paragraph 32  but  also  those  in  paragraph  39.   In
    paragraph 39, Judge Miller inferred from his earlier findings regarding
    maintenance payments to Raekwon that the first appellant had failed  to
    establish that he had a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship.
    In light of the confusion and the errors  in  assessing  the  evidence,
    that finding was not open to the judge and amount to legal error.

 9. There is one other area where I find legal  error.   At  paragraph  29,
    Judge Miller described the evidence he had as "poor and  outdated"  and
    drew negative inferences from the fact that no new  evidence  had  been
    provided despite  the  appellants  having  access  to  reputable  legal
    advice.  I find this to be  an  illogical  approach  to  the  evidence.
    First, if there was no change in  the  appellants'  circumstances  then
    there was no need to provide further evidence.  Secondly, if the  judge
    had such doubts they should have been put to the appellants to rebut or
    time given to  provide  additional  evidence.   Thirdly,  even  if  the
    allegation might have been appropriate to the relationship between  the
    first appellant and his son, Theo, it was not  open  to  the  judge  to
    reject all of the available evidence.  Fourthly, the judge should  have
    had regard to the appeal history and recognised that the  evidence  had
    been provided in accordance with the original directions and no further
    directions had been issued.

Remaking the decision in relation to the first appellant

10. Having  found  that  Judge  Miller's  decision  and  reasons  statement
    contained legal errors I decided that it  should  be  set  aside.   The
    parties accepted that given the passage of time it was  appropriate  to
    set aside all the findings made, even  those  relating  to  the  second
    appellant and the first appellant's other son, Theo.

11. Being aware that the first appellant, Raekwon,  his  mother  and  other
    family members had attended the Upper Tribunal, and  being  aware  that
    the appellants had provided an up to date bundle of  documents  as  per
    the Upper Tribunal's directions that if an error of law  was  found  it
    intended to proceed immediately to  remake  the  decision,  and  having
    given additional time to Mr Avery to prepare  for  the  rehearing,  the
    parties agreed that it was appropriate to  rehear  the  appeal  in  the
    Upper Tribunal without further delay.

12. Mr Avery relies on the reasons for refusal letter of 30 August 2013 and
    the other documents in the Home Office bundle together with an  extract
    from the Immigration Instructions about whether there is a genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship (section 11.2.1).  The appellants rely
    on the documents submitted to the First-tier  and  Upper  Tribunals  in
    three bundles (cover letters of 21 February 2014, 27 November 2014  and
    23 October 2015) and one additional documents submitted on 24  February
    2014. At the hearing I heard from the first appellant, his son  Raekwon
    and Raekwon's mother, Ms Suzi Pululu.

13. In case it is of any relevance, when I heard from Raekwon,  bearing  in
    mind he is only 12 years old, I  took  into  account  the  Presidential
    Guidance relating to vulnerable  witnesses  and  ensured  that  he  was
    comfortable giving  evidence  and  that  he  knew  why  he  was  giving
    evidence.  His  father  sat  next  to  him  whilst  he  gave  evidence,
    including whilst he was cross examined.  I am grateful to Mr Avery  for
    respecting Raekwon's age and asking age appropriate questions  so  that
    full evidence could be obtained.  In light of the  responses  given  by
    Raekwon, I am satisfied that he was able  to  give  his  best  evidence
    despite the circumstances of  being  in  one  of  the  formal  basement
    hearing rooms in Field House.

14. The parties agreed that the primary finding I had to make  was  whether
    the first appellant had a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
    with Raekwon.   If  I  so  found,  then  it  followed  that  either  by
    application of paragraph EX.1 of appendix FM to the  immigration  rules
    (which would be reached via the parental route provisions of section R-
    LTRPT) or by application of s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act,  the  appeal  of
    the first appellant would succeed because it would not be reasonable to
    expect Raekwon to leave the UK as he is a British citizen whose primary
    carer is also a British citizen because to expect him to leave  the  UK
    would be to deprive  him  of  his  rights  as  a  citizen  and  of  the
    continuation of his care arrangements.

15. It is not necessary for me to set out all of the evidence given by  the
    first appellant, his son or his son's mother.  The first appellant  and
    his son's mother adopted the witness statements they  had  prepared  in
    advance of the hearing.  Raekwon wrote a letter for me  which  he  read
    out as part of his evidence.  The evidence of these three witnesses  is
    so highly consistent that I have no doubt that the first appellant  has
    played and continues to play an important role in Raekwon's upbringing.
     It is evident that he has not always had an easy relationship with  Ms
    Pululu but that in recent years that relationship has improved  because
    Ms Pululu has recognised that regular contact between her son  and  the
    first appellant is beneficial to her son's development.  The  closeness
    of the first appellant's relationship to Raekwon was not  only  evident
    in the evidence given by them both but by their interaction during  the
    hearing. The  evidence,  when  taken  as  a  whole,  leads  me  to  the
    conclusion that the first appellant is making "an  active  contribution
    to the child's life."

16. In reaching this conclusion, as I have indicated, I have had regard  to
    the written and oral evidence provided.  The documentary evidence shows
    that the first appellant has  contributed  financially  to  Raekwon  as
    discussed  above.   The  new  evidence  verifies  that  has  continued.
    Although, as Mr Avery submitted, the financial support is  minimal,  it
    helps establish that the first appellant has been involved in his son's
    life for a number of years.

17. I have also taken  into  consideration  Mr  Avery's  submissions  which
    highlighted factors that might  weigh  against  the  relationship.   He
    reminded me that Raekwon did not live with the first appellant and that
    the relationship had been rocky.  He also indicated that there was some
    possible exaggeration in the first appellant's  accounts,  particularly
    those at the earlier hearings.  He also identified that  there  was  no
    guarantee that the current arrangements might not fall apart.

18. Although I  acknowledge  these  criticisms,  I  have  to  consider  the
    relationship as at the date of hearing.  I have no reason to find  that
    Ms Pululu exaggerated her evidence of the first appellant's involvement
    with  Raekwon  and  the  genuineness   of   that   relationship.    The
    relationship was also clearly demonstrated in Raekwon's  own  testimony
    in which he not only described his regular meetings with his father but
    also why his  father's  presence  was  important  to  him.   Ms  Pululu
    explained that she had changed and that she had sought to  improve  her
    relationship with the first appellant because of the important role  he
    played in Raekwon's life.   This  indicated  to  me  that  the  current
    arrangements are more permanent than previous arrangements.

19. Because I find that the first appellant has a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental  relationship  with  Raekwon  and  because  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect Raekwon to leave the UK I am  satisfied  that  the
    provisions of paragraph EX.1 are met and therefore the first  appellant
    succeeds under the provisions of section R-LTRPT of appendix FM.

20. In the alternative, I find that there is family life between the  first
    appellant and  Raekwon  and  that  the  immigration  decision  has  the
    potential of  severely  disrupting  that  relationship.   Although  the
    decision is in accordance with the law, given the provisions of  s.117B
    I find that there is no public interest in removing the  appellant  and
    therefore the immigration decision is not proportionate in  respect  of
    Article 8 ECHR.

Remaking the decision in relation to the second appellant

21. Although this deals with the first  appellant,  it  leaves  the  second
    appellant in a peculiar position.  At the date of hearing  she  is  not
    the child of a person with limited leave to remain and therefore cannot
    benefit from the provisions of appendix FM.  Although  I  have  allowed
    the appeal of the first appellant, that decision does not confer  leave
    on him.  Nor can the second appellant  benefit  from  paragraph  276ADE
    because she has not lived in the UK for over seven years and is  not  a
    British citizen.

22. The evidence before me is that  the  first  appellant  lives  with  the
    second appellant and  the  second  appellant's  mother.   There  is  no
    dispute that the first appellant enjoys family  life  with  the  second
    appellant and her mother; they live together  as  a  family  unit.   To
    remove the second appellant from the UK would put the  first  appellant
    in an impossible situation.  He has  family  life  with  Raekwon  which
    would be disrupted should he leave the UK but if the  second  appellant
    were to leave the UK then his relationship with  that  child  would  be
    disrupted.

23. I also take into consideration the fact that the second  appellant  has
    her own relationship with her step brother, Raekwon, which both mothers
    and the first appellant encourage.  This relationship would end if  the
    second appellant were removed from the UK.  On its own the evidence for
    this relationship would  not  be  sufficient  to  outweigh  the  public
    interest considerations in maintaining effective  immigration  controls
    but this  evidence  cannot  be  taken  on  its  own.   In  context,  it
    strengthens the second appellant's position in relation  to  s.117B  of
    the 2002 Act and weakens the public  interest  in  removing  the  child
    because to do so would be to disrupt the continued development  of  two
    children.  Such disruption cannot be regarded as  in  either  of  their
    best interests.

24. This is a case where the first appellant has  a  complex  family  life,
    enjoying family life with two children who have different mothers.   As
    it is unreasonable to expect Raekwon to leave the UK, on  the  evidence
    before me I have to conclude that the decision  to  remove  the  second
    appellant from the UK cannot be proportionate.

Other issues

25. I have heard no good evidence that the  first  appellant  continues  to
    have a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with his other son,
    Theo.  The evidence suggests that  Theo's  mother  prevents  the  first
    appellant having contact.  Therefore, I have not considered  this  part
    of the first appellant's claim.

26. With regard to my decision in favour of the second appellant, I realise
    it is likely to have implications for her mother.   Those  implications
    are not ones on which I can make any  finding  because  no  immigration
    decision has been made against that individual and therefore I have  no
    jurisdiction.

27. In light of these considerations, I find that  the  second  appellant's
    appeal is allowed under Article 8 ECHR  applied  directly  because  her
    situation is one not contemplated in the immigration rules.

Decisions

The decision and reasons statement of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  K  Miller
contains an error on a point of law and is set aside.

I remake the decision in respect of the first appellant and allow  it  under
paragraph EX.1 of  the  immigration  rules  and  in  the  alternative  under
Article 8 ECHR.

I remake the decision in respect of the second appellant and allow it  under
Article 8 ECHR applied directly.

I make no anonymity order.

I make no fee award even though I  have  allowed  the  appeals  because  the
evidence before me is not what was available to the decision  maker  at  the
date of decision.




                               Signed   Date


                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
