
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/37957/2013
                                                               IA/41164/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 26 June 2014                                 |On 1 July 2014             |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 mr Carl Anthony Poorman (First respondent)
             miss Caleisa Gwendolyn Poorman (second respondent)
                        (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr. L. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondents:   Ms. Francesca Clarke, Counsel.


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. This is a respondent appeal but I shall henceforth refer to the parties
    in the original terms detailed in the determination  of  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Majid following a hearing on 18 March 2014.

 2. The appellants are citizens of Jamaica who appealed against a  decision
    of the respondent dated 30 August 2013 refusing them leave to remain in
    the United Kingdom under the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended).

 3. Judge Majid's determination, promulgated on 21 March 2014, allowed  the
    appellants' appeals under both  the  Immigration  Rules  and  on  human
    rights grounds.

 4. The respondent was granted permission to appeal by Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Foudy on 6 May 2014.  Her decision is as follows:-

         "1.  The Respondent seeks permission to appeal, in time, against  a
             decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Majid  who,  in  a
             determination  promulgated  on  22  March  2014  granted   the
             Appellant's appeal under Article 8 ECHR  and  the  Immigration
             Rules.

         2.   The grounds argue that the Judge erred in his approach to  the
             entire case.  In particular they argue that the  Judge  failed
             to address the contested issue of whether the 2nd  Appellant's
             son Raekwon Poorman was a British citizen, mistakenly believed
             the  1st  Appellant  to  be  British  when  she  is  not,  and
             misdirected himself as to paragraph EX.1 in Appendix FM of the
             Immigration Rules.

         3.   The Judge's findings are brief and confusing.  He  repeatedly,
             and incorrectly, refers to 'EX.1' and fails to identify  which
             Immigration Rule he finds  the  Appellants  were  entitled  to
             benefit from.  Moreover he obliquely refers to the  Appellants
             representative's 'special submission' without ever  describing
             what the submission was.

         4.   The Judge refers in the briefest  possible  way  to  the  oral
             evidence received however it is not clear what factors weighed
             in mind when he decided that the Appellants met some  part  of
             the  Immigration  Rules  and  that  their  removal  would   be
             unjustifiable (sic) harsh.   This  lack  of  reasoning  is  an
             arguable error of law.

         5.   Given the Tribunal's decision in  Gulshan  (Article  8  -  new
             rules -  correct  approach)  [2013]  UKUT  00640  it  is  also
             arguable that the Judge misdirected himself as to the  law  on
             Article 8."

 5. Mr. Tarlow relied on all the grounds put  forward  in  the  application
    seeking permission to appeal  and  in  particular  submitted  that  the
    determination does not adequately  analyse  the  circumstances  of  the
    entire family or explain why  it  cannot  be  returned  as  a  unit  to
    Jamaica.  There is no balancing exercise which takes into  account  the
    respondent's responsibilities to controlling immigration.

 6. Ms. Clarke, who was Counsel at the original hearing, helpfully provided
    a skeleton argument  wherein  she  sets  out  events  at  the  original
    hearing.  It is unfortunate that Judge Majid  has  not  been  asked  to
    provide a Record of Proceedings from  his  hearing.   This  would  have
    assisted me greatly today.  For example, Ms. Clarke disputes  paragraph
    7 of the determination which states:-

         "In response to Mr  Page's,  Ms  Clarke's  and  my  questions,  the
         appellant made some statements and the evidence was consistent with
         the assertions contained therein."

    Ms. Clarke disputes that there was any cross-examination whatsoever and
    that as a consequence the evidence of the appellant was undisputed.

 7. Ms. Clarke maintains that there is no  error  in  the  judge's  overall
    assessment of the evidence, and further that it was "never as suggested
    that Caleisa Poorman was a British citizen".  Ms. Clarke concludes  her
    submissions  by  acknowledging  that  the  decision  recorded  in   the
    determination may contain typing errors, but do  not  contain  material
    errors of law and that it should stand.

 8. The judge's determination is in essence a  series  of  observations  on
    issues that need to be taken into account.  Those observations are  not
    linked to the evidence that the judge heard.  Indeed,  beyond  what  is
    said in paragraph 7 of the determination (see above) it is difficult to
    ascertain precisely what evidence the judge did take into account  when
    deciding to allow the appeals.

 9. As Mr. Tarlow asserts there is a lack of clarity as to how  the  appeal
    was  allowed  under  the  Immigration  Rules.   There   is   inadequate
    consideration of the material aspects of the relevant Rules themselves,
    coupled with a failure to explain why the appeal should also be allowed
    on human rights grounds.

10. In short, it is difficult to  glean  from  the  determination  why  the
    appellants succeed on  both  bases.   The  judge  has  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for findings on material matters, failed to take  into
    account and/or resolve conflicts of fact on material matters, has given
    weight to immaterial matters, and for all the reasons  put  forward  in
    the  grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal  has  made   a   material
    misdirection of law.

11. The determination is therefore set aside in its entirety and the appeal
    will proceed to a de novo hearing.

12. In deciding whether  to  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal under Section 12 of the Tribunal's Court Enforcement Act 2007,
    I can dispose of the appeal in one or two ways, either by remitting the
    case to the First-tier Tribunal  or  by  remaking  the  decision.   The
    choice is regulated by paragraph 7 of Part 3 of the Practice Directions
    of the Immigration and Asylum Chamber of the Upper Tribunal which  only
    contemplates remittal in very limited circumstances.   This  though  is
    such a case.  The effect of the cumulative errors detailed  above  have
    been to deprive a party - the respondent (Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department) - before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing, or
    other opportunity for the parties' case to be put to and considered  by
    the First-tier Tribunal.  In those circumstances I remit  the  case  to
    the First-tier Tribunal subject to the attached directions.   I  do  so
    with the consent of both representatives before me today.






Signed                              Date 30 June 2014.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard



             DIRECTIONS FOR REMITTAL TO THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL


 1. The appeal is to be listed at Taylor House on the first available date.

 2. The time estimate for the hearing is three hours.

 3. No interpreter is required.

 4. In the event of either party wishing to file and serve additional
    evidence this must be done no later than five working days prior to the
    date of hearing.






Signed                              Date 30 June 2014.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard


