
[pic]
Upper Tribunal         Appeal Number
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             IA/37891/2014
                                                IA/37894/2014, IA/37893/2014
                                             IA/37892/2014, IA/37890/2014[1]

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard  at  Field   House                                        Decision   &
                                             Reasons promulgated
On 3 March 2016       On 19 May 2016

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                         Mr Wahajat Muhammad Mirza,
                              Mrs Afshan Mirza
                                    [MFM]
                                    [MZM]
                                    [WM]
                         (Anonymity orders not made)
                                                              Appellants
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                   Respondent
Representation
For the Appellants:    Mr C Lam of Counsel instructed by David Tang & Co.
For  the  Respondent:     Ms  N  Willocks-Briscoe,  Home  Office  Presenting
                       Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. These are linked appeals against the decisions of First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Dennis promulgated on 3 July  2015  dismissing  the  Appellants'
      appeals against decisions of the Respondent dated 9 September 2014  to
      remove each of them from the UK.


Background

   2. The Appellants are nationals of Pakistan. Their  respective  dates  of
      birth and immigration histories are a matter of record  and  are  also
      summarised at paragraph 1 of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal.
      It is unnecessary to rehearse all such details here.


   3. The background to the Appellants' most recent applications culminating
      in the Respondent's decisions to remove each of them from  the  UK  is
      set out in considerable detail at paragraphs  4-13.  The  Respondent's
      decisions are summarised - again in some detail - at paragraphs 14-18.
      As this is a matter of record, is known to the parties, and is not the
      subject of dispute before me, I do not  propose  to  re-rehearse  such
      matters herein.


   4. The Appellants appealed to the IAC against the removal decisions of  9
      September 2014.


   5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissed the  Appellants'  appeals  for
      reasons set out in his determination.


   6. The Appellants sought permission to appeal which was granted by First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Landes on 1 October 2015.


Consideration

   7. The principal complaint made by the Appellants  in  their  application
      for permission to appeal - and  the  basis  upon  which  Judge  Landes
      granted permission - is an allegation  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge failed to have due and proper regard to the circumstances of the
      individual  Appellants  and   in   particular   [MFM].   Specifically,
      permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it  was  considered
      arguable that the Judge had failed to consider the  private  lives  of
      the children Appellants, in particular [MFM] who had been resident  in
      the UK between the ages of 3 and 11, and with particular reference  to
      'best interests' under section 55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
      Immigration Act 2009, and the analysis in the decision in Azimi-Moayed
      and others (decisions affecting children; onward appeals) [2013]  UKUT
      00197 (IAC).


   8. In the context  of  'individual  analysis',  the  Appellants  seek  to
      identify a distinction between the individual children  on  the  basis
      that "it is unreasonable to assume that they all  could  pick  up  the
      language at the same pace in order to adapt to the  school  system  in
      Pakistan" (see Grounds at paragraphs 1 and  2).,  Further,  particular
      emphasis was placed on the fact that [MFM] "acquired his 7 years  long
      residence from the early ages of 3 years and three months" (Grounds at
      paragraph 3).


   9. I find no merit in these Grounds.


  10. As a starting point, in my judgement it is very clear that the  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge had in mind the basis upon which  the  Appellants'
      cases were being advanced which essentially focused upon the  position
      of the children and the length of time they had been living in the UK.
      The Judge is overt in identifying the basis upon which the Appellants'
      application was advanced on 27 June 2014, and in particular the  basis
      upon which the Appellants sought to argue that there had been a change
      of circumstances since the last refusal of their case: see decision at
      paragraph 13. The Judge is again overt at paragraph 22 in  identifying
      "in this appeal the focus has been primarily on the education  of  the
      children", and goes on to identify in  that  paragraph  the  contended
      issue in respect of potential language problems  in  adapting  to  the
      educational  system  in  Pakistan.  See  similarly  at  paragraph   25
      recounting the evidence of Mr Mirza. And again it is  overt  that  the
      Judge has focused on the circumstances of  the  children  in  that  he
      states at paragraph 27: "I consider  the  circumstances  carefully.  I
      acknowledge that the children spent important early years in the UK".


  11. As regards the ability of the children to  adopt  to  the  educational
      system in Pakistan the Judge says this at paragraph 26:

"I am satisfied that  some  practical  accommodation  must  be  reached.  In
      respects of language, the principal problem is ever and always general
      familiarity. I am satisfied that the Appellant children,  said  to  be
      good students, can apply their minds relatively quickly to the written
      form of their spoken language. Given their father's  ready  duplicity,
      it is possible that they  are  in  fact  much  more  fluent  and  even
      literate in Urdu already... All of them are young,  all  of  them  are
      able, and I do not find it unreasonable for them to  return  to  their
      home country as was the ostensible plan of their parents from the very
      date of entry."


  12. In my judgement, the Judge's  very  clear  finding  that  all  of  the
      children are sufficiently able to adapt to the  different  educational
      system, even allowing for some initial limitation of language, is such
      that it is immaterial that he has not made a specific  finding  as  to
      any distinction as to the exact speed of  adaptation  as  between  one
      child and another.  The  overarching  conclusion  that  all  are  able
      encompasses an evaluation of each. The Judge's findings  are  adequate
      and adequately reasoned, and on the facts and circumstances  here  are
      not to be impugned on the  suggestion  of  a  failure  to  distinguish
      between the children.


  13. Moreover, it is clear that the Judge had in  mind  that  a  particular
      approach was being urged upon him in respect of [MFM]:  "Although  not
      contained in his witness  statement,  at  the  hearing  the  principal
      Appellant is now urging that the older child, in particular, could not
      be expected to continue his education because  he  would  have  to  do
      compulsory  Urdu,  Sindhi  and  Islamic  studies  courses  to   enrol,
      evidently, in secondary school" (paragraph 25).  The  Judge  addresses
      this both in paragraph 25 and in his conclusion at paragraph  26  that
      all of the children are able to adapt.


  14. Although the Judge did not cite Azimi-Moayed, in my  judgement  it  is
      apparent that his decision covers  the  same  territory  that  is  the
      subject of guidance  in  Azimi-Moayed,  and  is  consistent  with  the
      guidance and principles identified therein. In  particular  the  Judge
      identifies   the   significance   of   7   years   residence,   whilst
      uncontroversially also identifying that such a duration  of  residence
      does not guarantee a grant of leave to remain: e.g. see paragraphs 14,
      16, 19, and 29, and compare with paragraph  13(iii)  of  Azimi-Moayed,
      "What amounts to lengthy residence is  not  clear  cut  the  past  and
      present policies have identified seven years as  a  relevant  period".
      More particularly - and echoing the words at paragraph 13(iv) of Azimi-
      Moayed, "the Tribunal notes that seven years from age four  is  likely
      to be more significant to a child than the first seven years of  life"
      - the Judge observes "I  acknowledge  that  the  children  have  spent
      important early years in the UK" (paragraph  27),  also  referring  to
      potential "interfer[ence] with secondary school entry" (paragraph 29).


  15. It is also clear that the Judge was alert to section 55  of  the  2009
      Act. He makes express reference to section 55 having  been  considered
      as an aspect of earlier applications and refusals (e.g. see paragraphs
      4, 8, and 11). The current RFRL - to which it is  manifest  the  Judge
      has had careful regard in that he has set out  its  contents  in  some
      detail - referred to section 55; moreover the Judge  directed  himself
      in respect of section 55 at paragraph 20.


  16. More particularly, in his own consideration of the cases, the Judge is
      overt in having regard to best interests:

"I am obliged to consider that should the parent Appellants have elected  to
      comply with their original undertaking and to return on the completion
      of their leave to remain or, even, upon unsuccessful determination  of
      their second appeal, no-one would or could have concluded that it  was
      contrary to the best interests of the children that they should return
      to their home country  in  the  company  of  their  parents.  That  is
      effectively the circumstance which I see before me,  and  I  can  find
      nothing in it which renders the decision now on appeal  unreasonable."
      (paragraph 27);

and

"For the foregoing reasons, therefore, I conclude, as did IJ Birk, that  the
      best interests of the children have been considered and that there not
      seen to suffer any disproportionate consequence  of  the  decision  to
      return their entire family to their home country, whose language  they
      speak, at this stage in their lives." (paragraph 28).


  17. Accordingly I find  that  on  closer  analysis  than  is  possible  or
      appropriate at the 'permission' stage, the grounds of  challenge  that
      informed the grant of permission to appeal are  of  no  substance  and
      identify no error of law; they essentially constitute an attempt to re-
      put and reargue the case rejected by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.


  18. In addition to the basis of the grant of permission to appeal, Mr  Lam
      sought to raise  submissions  in  respect  of  Article  8  by  way  of
      development  of  paragraph  7  of  the  grounds  in  support  of   the
      application for permission to appeal. It is to be  observed  that  the
      deliberations of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  were  in  the  context
      primarily of considering paragraph 276ADE in respect of the  children,
      with the particular focus on the balancing exercise of  reasonableness
      under  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  and/or  Appendix  FM.   However,   as
      identified by Judge Landes there is no arguable error of law based  on
      a proportionality submission in the context of Article 8:  "I  do  not
      consider that it is an error of law for the Judge to  have  failed  to
      consider proportionality, If he was correct in finding that  it  would
      be reasonable to expect the minor appellants to leave the UK  then  it
      cannot possibly be disproportionate for them to be removed".  This  is
      essentially to identify that the reasonableness test  under  paragraph
      276ADE - which is in any event a paragraph designed to give effect  to
      the  UK's  obligations  under  Article   8   -   has   an   'in-built'
      proportionality evaluation.


  19. Be that as it may, I note that Mr Lam argued that  the  Judge  was  in
      error in essentially relying upon the earlier conclusion in respect of
      Article 8 of First-tier Tribunal Judge promulgated on 26  March  2013.
      Mr Lam argued that it was an error for the Judge simply to adopt Judge
      Birk's findings given that some two years had elapsed which meant also
      that the seven-year threshold had been passed, and that  the  children
      were older and at different educational levels. Mr  Lam  alights  upon
      the words of Judge Dennis at paragraph 30 - "I fully approve and adopt
      the analysis put forward by IJ Birk in the  previous  decision  of  26
      March 2013".


  20. In my judgement that phrase needs to be read not only in  the  context
      of paragraph 30, but in the  overall  context  of  the  decision.  The
      significant words at paragraph 30 are those  that  immediately  follow
      the quotation above: "I find no substantial or substantive  change  in
      the   circumstances   to   alter   that   conclusion,   whatever   the
      representations put forward by the principal Appellant or  his  agents
      in   that   respect".   Judge   Dennis   identifies   those    further
      representations at paragraph 13 in referring to the supposed change of
      circumstances relied upon by the Appellants in their application of 27
      June 2014. The Judge states "the  only  event  that  appears  to  have
      changed is that the children are now older than  they  were  in  March
      2013. It was now also argued (though this could not be seen  to  be  a
      change) the children could speak Urdu but were unable to read or write
      it which would be "a barrier to their future development  should  they
      be required to return to Pakistan". It is very much the  circumstances
      of the children and their educational  opportunities  that  the  Judge
      focuses upon in the key paragraphs of his decision - as may be gleaned
      from the analysis above in respect of those grounds of challenge  that
      led to the grant of permission to appeal: it is clear beyond any doubt
      that when the Judge refers to "no substantial or substantive change in
      the circumstances to alter [the] conclusion" of Judge Birk, that he is
      reiterating his own finding that the circumstances of the  children  -
      notwithstanding the further passage of time - are not such as to  make
      the  removal  of  any  or  all  of  the  Appellants  unreasonable   or
      disproportionate. This is not a simple reliance upon,  and  repetition
      of, the earlier finding.


  21. Mr Lam sought to raise one further point  during  the  course  of  his
      submissions. He argued that pursuant  to  sections  117A-117C  of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  the  public  interest
      considerations had changed since the earlier Article 8 assessment, and
      that in any event Judge Dennis had not had regard to  such  provisions
      in his own deliberations.


  22. I observed to Mr Lam that such a submission did  not  feature  in  the
      grounds in support of the application for permission  to  appeal,  and
      there was no formal application before me to amend  such  grounds.  As
      such I did not allow such a ground to be developed. In any event, even
      if it were the case - notwithstanding that the Judge did not  embarked
      a freestanding Article 8 analysis - that  it  was  necessary  to  have
      regard to  the  public  interest  considerations  as  non-exhaustively
      identified in Part 5A of the 2002 Act, in my judgement  it  could  not
      possibly have made a material  difference  to  the  outcome  in  these
      appeals.


  23. As Judge Dennis identified the Appellants' cases have  been  put,  re-
      put, and put again at different  stages  since  the  expiry  of  their
      legitimate leave in October 2011: e.g. "It was then asserted that  the
      Respondent should  re-re-re-consider  the  Article  8  rights  of  the
      Appellants" (paragraph 13). The Appellants have at  no  earlier  point
      advanced a compelling case to remain in the UK. Moreover  applications
      were made with false documents, and  Article  8  representations  were
      informed  by  untruthful  attempts  to  explain  deception,  and  were
      otherwise based on exaggeration of circumstances.


  24.  Presently  -  and  notwithstanding  the   clear,   sustainable,   and
      unchallenged finding by Judge Dennis that the principal Appellant  has
      continued to dissemble and exaggerate - the family essentially wish to
      re-present their Article 8 based claim to remain on  the  sole  ground
      that it is now bolstered by the  lapse  of  time  since  it  was  last
      considered and the consequence of that lapse  of  time.  That  is,  in
      effect, to rely upon their wilful disregard of  the  expectation  that
      they quit the UK, and their wilful disregard of the law  of  the  land
      (i.e. by continuing to work), whilst also seeking to plead in aid  the
      fortuitous access to  public  services  (most  notably  education)  to
      which, if they had respected immigration control and quit the UK, they
      would have no entitlement to access.


  25. The conduct in remaining in  the  UK  after  each  successive  earlier
      rejection - working illegally and accessing  free  public  services  -
      strikes at  the  very  core  of  the  public  interest  imperative  of
      maintaining  effective  immigration  control.  (Judge  Dennis  appears
      mindful of this in his observations at paragraphs 12-13  and  29.)  To
      permit this family to remain now - as they seek - would be  to  permit
      them to remain essentially on the basis that they have improved  their
      immigration position by reason of their wilful defiance  in  remaining
      unlawfully. This would run fundamentally contrary to the wider  public
      interest in effective immigration control.


  26. I should add that it also seems to me absolutely clear that the timing
      of the application on 27 June 2014 - coming just  10  days  after  the
      seven-year anniversary of the arrival in the UK of Mrs Mirza  and  the
      two older children, gives rise to an almost inescapable inference that
      the adult  Appellants  cynically  waited  out  the  time  between  the
      promulgation of the decision of Judge Birk on 26 March  2013  and  the
      making of these applications some 15 months  later  precisely  because
      they perceived a  favourable  significance  to  the  presence  of  the
      children in the UK for 7 years. In my  judgement  this  very  strongly
      reinforces the notion that the family should not have any  immigration
      advantage essentially by reason of having remained in the UK cynically
      in defiance of immigration control, irrespective of the good  progress
      the children may have made academically.


  27. In all such circumstances I find no error of law in the  approach  and
      findings of the First-tier Tribunal.


Notice of Decision

  28. The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal contained no  error  of  law,
      and accordingly the decisions stand.


  29. Each of the appeals is dismissed.


  30. No anonymity orders are sought or made.



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     16 May 2016
-----------------------
[1] The case numbers are not listed numerically  but,  following  the  style
adopted by the First-tier Tribunal, reflect  the  seniority  of  the  family
members, as does the case title.

