
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/37961/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 3 November 2015                   |On 20 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before
                                LORD TURNBULL
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES


                                   Between

                              BHAGMATTIE RAMJIT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A. Pipe, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P. Nath Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant is Miss Bhagmattie Ramjit, a citizen of  Guyana  born
         14 February 1988. This appeal is against the decision of the First-
         tier Tribunal to dismiss her  appeal  itself  brought  against  the
         removal directions of 11 September 2014 made under  section  10  of
         the immigration and Asylum Act 1999, her application for  leave  to
         remain  on  human  rights  grounds  having  been  refused  by   the
         Respondent.

      2. The appellant had an unhappy background in Guyana. Her  mother  and
         father separated when she was young and her mother was subsequently
         murdered by her new partner, leaving the appellant and her  brother
         to live with their alcoholic father. Both  the  appellant  and  her
         brother suffered serious psychological effects as a consequence  of
         their mother's death and lived in very harsh circumstances  because
         of their father's alcoholism. In 2004 a Mrs Gurprashad,  a  British
         Citizen  who  was  visiting   Guyana,   learned   of   the   family
         circumstances and later made arrangements for the appellant and her
         brother to join her own family in the UK.

      3. The appellant first came to the UK in May 2006 with leave to  enter
         as a working holiday maker valid until 25 April 2008. In  2008  she
         returned to Guyana in  order  to  make  an  application  for  entry
         clearance as a student. That application was granted  and  she  re-
         entered the UK in October  2008  with  leave  to  remain  until  30
         September 2009. In September  2009  she  made  an  application  for
         further leave to remain as a  student,  which  was  refused  on  18
         October 2009. She made a second such application  which  was  again
         refused on 23 December 2009. A third such application was  made  in
         March 2010 which was also refused in May of that year. In July 2011
         she made an application for leave to remain  in  the  UK  on  human
         rights grounds outside the Immigration Rules which was  refused  in
         October 2012, with no right of  appeal.  Following  a  request  for
         reconsideration a further assessment was made by the respondent and
         the application again refused on 3  December  2013  with,  on  this
         occasion, a right of appeal attached. A further reconsideration was
         required by the respondent after an appeal of this decision to  the
         First-tier Tribunal and this led  to  the  decision  letter  of  11
         September 2014, which was the subject of appeal in this process.

      4. Throughout her time in the United Kingdom the appellant  has  lived
         with Mr and Mrs Gurprashad and their  own  children.  In  2007  the
         appellant's brother also came to live with  the  Gurprashad  family
         and entered full-time education. After an appeal before the  First-
         tier Tribunal in 2012 he was granted limited discretionary leave to
         remain in the UK until 2015. By the  date  of  the  hearing  before
         First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Nicholls  in  the  present  case   the
         appellant's brother  was  no  longer  pursuing  his  education  but
         working in a local convenience store. The  appellant  also  has  an
         elder sister who remains living in Guyana with her child.

      5. Before the First-tier Tribunal Judge evidence was led from which he
         concluded that, although the  appellant  was  not  related  to  Mrs
         Gurprashad, they had formed a family life  together  and  that  the
         appellant continued to have unusual emotional  and  physical  needs
         which were met by Mrs Gurprashad and her own, now adult,  children.
         Evidence was also placed before him of  medical  reports  from  two
         doctors showing that the appellant had suffered symptoms of anxiety
         and depression caused by  the  prospect  of  having  to  return  to
         Guyana.

      6. On the evidence led  before  him,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         concluded that the  Gurprashad  family  had  substantial  financial
         resources available to them which could enable them to continue  to
         support the appellant if she were to return  to  Guyana,  that  her
         removal would not interfere with any course of study and that there
         was no reason  to  think  that  any  medical  condition  which  the
         appellant continued to suffer from could not adequately be  catered
         for in Guyana. Having taken account of the terms of Rule 276ADE the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge found that it had  not  been  shown  that
         there would be very significant obstacles to the appellant's return
         to Guyana and concluded that the appellant had not shown  that  she
         met the requirements of the Rule.

      7. The First-tier Tribunal Judge then considered  the  appeal  outside
         the Immigration Rules  and  give  consideration  to  the  terms  of
         section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002
         ("the  2002  Act").  As  he  explains  in  paragraph  35   of   his
         determination, he understood that subsection (4)  required  him  to
         give little weight to a private life, or to a  relationship  formed
         with a qualifying partner, established by a person at a  time  when
         the person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully, and that subsection
         (5)  required  him  to  give  little  weight  to  a  private   life
         established by a person at a time  when  the  person's  immigration
         status is precarious. The First-tier Tribunal Judge took  the  view
         that  the  definition  of  "qualifying  partner"  was  wider   than
         something akin to a spouse. On this view he then concluded that the
         relationship which the  appellant  had  with  Mrs  Gurprashad  fell
         within the definition and proceeded upon the premise that he  would
         therefore require to give little weight to what he called "the more
         recent aspects of the relationship".

      8. In the end, having taken account of the weight to be given  to  the
         effective control of immigration to  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
         appellant's whole  circumstances,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         concluded that the compassionate factors  were  not  sufficient  to
         outweigh the substantial weight  which  required  to  be  given  to
         immigration  control  and  concluded  that  the  appeal  should  be
         dismissed both under the Immigration  Rules  and  on  human  rights
         grounds.

      9. Before the Upper Tribunal the ground of appeal  was  restricted  to
         the issue of how the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had  addressed  the
         issue of human rights grounds arising outside  of  the  Immigration
         Rules. It was contended that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had
         misdirected himself in his application of  section  117B  and  that
         this had been  a  material  misdirection  given  the  other  finely
         balanced circumstances of the case. On behalf  of  the  respondent,
         whilst it was acknowledged that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  may
         have fallen into  error  in  his  interpretation  of  the  relevant
         provisions of section 117B, it was argued that any  such  error  of
         law was of no materiality given the lengthy period of  time  during
         which  the   appellant   had   been   in   precarious   immigration
         circumstances. In short, any error which had occurred was  said  to
         have been one of form rather than substance.

     10. Section 117B of the 2002 Act is headed: "Article 8: public interest
         considerations applicable in all cases." So far as is  relevant  it
         provides as follows:

             "(4)      Little weight should be given to -

                   a) a private life, or

                   b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

                  that is established by a person at a time when the  person
                  is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

             (5)  Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a   private   life
             established  by  a  person  at  a  time  when   the   person's
             immigration status is precarious."

     11. Section 117D of the 2002 Act is  headed:  "Interpretation  of  this
         Part" and, so far as is relevant, provides as follows:

             "(1)      In this Part -

                  "qualifying partner" means a partner who -

                      (a)   is a British citizen"

     12. We agree with the submission made on behalf of the  appellant  that
         the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has  misdirected  himself  in  his
         application of these provisions.  A  "qualifying  partner"  is  not
         simply a British citizen with whom  the  person  has  any  form  of
         family  relationship.  The  relationship  to  which  the  statutory
         provision applies is restricted, in terms of the plain words of the
         section, to that which  exists  between  partners.  In  a  domestic
         context, which is what the provisions are directed to, the  use  of
         the term "a partner" in section 117D is clearly intended to  define
         a relationship which is distinct from that of, for example,  mother
         and daughter.

     13. We also recognise, as was submitted on  behalf  of  the  appellant,
         that both subsections (4) and (5) of section 117B refer to  private
         life, not family life, and agree that it was the latter  which  the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge concluded had  been  established,  rather
         than the former. The contention was that  the  Judge  wrongly  gave
         little weight to family life thinking that this was caught by these
         provisions whereas only private life was mentioned.

     14. We are not persuaded that the Judge  misdirected  himself  in  this
         regard.  In  paragraph  35  of  his  determination  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge mentions both subsections but  goes  on  to  explain
         that  it  was  subsection  (4)  which  he  found  applied  to   the
         appellant's circumstances. He explained that this  was  because  of
         the relationship which the appellant had  with  Mrs  Guprashad  and
         because the appellant had been unlawfully  in  the  United  Kingdom
         since 18 October 2009. Thus, on his understanding of the definition
         of a qualifying partner, we consider it plain that  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge understood that subsection (4)(b) applied.  He  gave
         no other reason for considering that he required to give effect  to
         the restriction provided for by section 117B  and,  in  particular,
         made no mention of being bound to do so by virtue of family life or
         by virtue of private life formed whilst in a precarious immigration
         status.

     15.  Having  acknowledged  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   did
         misdirect himself to the  extent  mentioned,  we  are  required  to
         consider the materiality of  that  error.  We  recognise  that  the
         proportionality  of   the   interference   with   the   appellant's
         established family life which  would  result  from  her  return  to
         Guyana was the sole question for the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  in
         considering her  appeal  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.  It  was
         though, of course, accepted that in  this  balancing  exercise  the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge  did  require  to  take  account  of  the
         appellant's whole immigration history, which included her  presence
         without lawful authority since October 2009.

     16. It might fairly be said that the First-tier Tribunal Judge examined
         the question through the  wrong  lens.  Rather  than  applying  the
         section 117B statutory restriction upon the  mistaken  belief  that
         the relationship between the  appellant  and  Mrs  Garprashad  fell
         within the definition of a qualifying partner and was in  that  way
         caught by  that  provision,  he  ought  to  have  focussed  on  the
         consequence of having concluded that the appellant had  established
         a family life in the United Kingdom. He ought then  to  have  given
         consideration to the circumstances in which that  family  life  had
         been created. As was stated  in  the  Grand  Chamber  judgement  in
         Jeunesse v Netherlands at paragraph 108:

             "Another important consideration is whether  family  life  was
             created at a time when the persons involved  were  aware  that
             the immigration status of  one  of  them  was  such  that  the
             persistence of that family life within the  host  State  would
             from the  outset  be  precarious.  It  is  the  Court's  well-
             established case-law that, where  this  is  the  case,  it  is
             likely only  to  be  in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the
             removal of the non-national family member  will  constitute  a
             violation of Article 8."

         The First-tier Tribunal Judge ought to  have  had  regard  to  this
         criterion in addressing the question of  whether  the  interference
         with the appellant's right to respect for family life  which  would
         result from her requiring to return  to  Guyana  was  justified  in
         terms of Article 8 (2).

     17. In our view, it can however be  seen  that  he  did  in  fact  give
         appropriate weight to the relevant considerations. In paragraph  36
         of his determination he points out that the appellant has lived  in
         the United Kingdom almost continuously for a period of nine  years.
         He  comments  that  weight  must  be  given  to  that  duration  of
         residence. At paragraph 37 he takes account of the circumstances of
         the appellant's brother and at paragraph 39 he notes  that  removal
         of the appellant would separate her from her brother but would also
         place her back in contact with her  elder  sister.  The  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge undertook a  balancing  exercise  of  the  competing
         factors, but concluded that  the  compassionate  factors  were  not
         sufficient to outweigh the substantial weight which must  be  given
         to immigration control. In performing this exercise he gave what he
         described as "some weight" to the  life  which  the  appellant  had
         formed in the United Kingdom since returning in  October  2008.  It
         does not seem to us that the weight which the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge in fact gave to the competing considerations  of  immigration
         control on the one hand, and the length of  time  throughout  which
         the appellant had built up a family life in in the knowledge of the
         precarious, and then unlawful nature of her immigration  status  on
         the other hand, was materially different to  the  weight  which  he
         would have attached to these considerations had he directed himself
         properly to the correct approach.

     18. In these circumstances, we do not consider that the  error  of  law
         which we have identified  was  material  and  we  will  uphold  the
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.




    Signed
    Judge of the Upper Tribunal


    Date
