


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37457/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 16 July 2014                             |On: 8 August 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE LEWIS
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                             motiur rahman latif
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Ahluwalia instructed by Zahra & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, born on 23 February 1992. He
      has been given permission to appeal against the determination of First-
      tier  Tribunal  Judge  Herlihy,  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
      respondent's decision to refuse to vary his leave to remain.

   2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 31 January 2007 with leave
      to enter as a visitor until 30 July 2007. He applied for leave outside
      the immigration rules on 12 July 2007 but his application was  refused
      on 14 September 2007. On 7 November 2007 he applied  for  asylum.  His
      application was  refused  on  17  January  2008  but  he  was  granted
      discretionary  leave  to  remain  to  23  August  2009,  following   a
      successful appeal. He applied again on  29  June  2009  for  leave  to
      remain outside the rules and again his application was refused,  on  6
      May 2010. Following another successful appeal  he  was  granted  three
      years' discretionary leave to remain until 27 July 2013.

   3. On 12 June 2013 the appellant applied for a further  period  of  leave
      outside the immigration rules, on the basis of his private life in the
      United Kingdom. His application was refused on 2 September 2013  under
      paragraph 322(1) of the rules on the basis that a variation  of  leave
      was being sought for a purpose not covered by the rules. Consideration
      was also given to his family and private life under  Appendix  FM  and
      paragraph 276ADE but it was concluded  that  he  could  not  meet  the
      criteria in either.

   4. The appellant appealed against that decision.

   5. The basis of his claim, as set out in a witness statement produced for
      his appeal and his statement for a previous  appeal  in  2010,  is  as
      follows. He came to the United Kingdom with his father at the  age  of
      14 years, entering as a visitor, but his father abandoned him and left
      him with his uncle whilst he returned to Bangladesh.  His  mother  had
      died in 2000 in Bangladesh and his father had  re-married.  His  step-
      mother had ill-treated him. His uncle, Abdul Gafur, brought him up  as
      his own child, together with his own four children, and it was on  the
      basis of his  family  life  with  his  uncle  and  aunt  that  he  was
      previously  granted  discretionary  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
      Kingdom. On 11 May 2012 he got married and moved out  of  his  uncle's
      home and it was on the  basis  of  his  marriage  that  he  instructed
      solicitors to make an application on his behalf for further  leave  to
      remain. When he met  his  wife  in  September  2011  they  kept  their
      relationship a secret from their respective families  but  her  family
      found out and were angry and so she went to live with his sister until
      they went through an Islamic marriage and she came to live with him at
      his uncle's house before they moved out to their own place. In  August
      2013 his wife left him and returned to live with her parents and so  a
      week later he returned to his uncle's house. In October 2013 his  wife
      told him that she would not be coming  back  and  he  had  been  badly
      affected by the breakdown of his marriage to the extent that he had to
      seek medical treatment for depression and counselling. He had no  life
      outside the United Kingdom. He had no family in Bangladesh other  than
      a married sister who lived with  her  own  family.  He  did  know  the
      whereabouts of his older brother  who  had  left  home  prior  to  his
      departure due to ill-treatment at the hands of their step-mother.  His
      other two sisters lived in the United Kingdom and he was very close to
      them and their children.

   6. The appellant's appeal was  heard  on  28  March  2014  by  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge  Herlihy.  The  judge  heard  oral  evidence  from  the
      appellant and his uncle and sister. She did not  accept  that  he  had
      lost all ties to Bangladesh. She found that he had lived independently
      from his uncle following his marriage. She did not find  the  evidence
      of the witnesses credible in their claims as to their lack of  contact
      with family in Bangladesh and she considered it very likely that  they
      knew of the whereabouts of the appellant's father and that it had been
      entirely planned that he would come to the  United  Kingdom  and  live
      with his uncle. She considered that the support that he received  from
      his family in the United Kingdom would continue if he were  to  return
      to Bangladesh. Having found  that  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
      requirements of the immigration rules relating to family  and  private
      life, she went on to consider Article 8 in a wider  context.  She  did
      not accept that the appellant had established a  family  life  in  the
      United Kingdom. She found it likely that there were family members  in
      Bangladesh with  whom  the  United  Kingdom  family  members  were  in
      contact. She did not accept that the appellant's removal would  breach
      Article 8 and she dismissed the appeal under the immigration rules and
      on human rights grounds.

   7. Permission to appeal that decision was sought on the grounds that  the
      judge's finding, that there was no  established  family  life  in  the
      United Kingdom, failed to take account of relevant factors such as the
      appellant's treatment  for  depression,  his  history  of  losing  his
      mother, being ill-treated by his step-mother and  being  abandoned  by
      his father and his consequential reliance upon his family for care and
      support. The grounds asserted further that the  judge  had  failed  to
      consider family life in the context of  the  appellant's  relationship
      with his minor nephews, nieces  and  cousins;  failed  to  follow  the
      guidance in Devaseelan v SSHD [2002] UKIAT 000702 with respect to  the
      findings of the  judge  in  his  previous  appeal  in  regard  to  his
      abandonment and loss of ties to Bangladesh; and  had  failed  to  take
      account of further relevant matters.

   8. Permission to appeal was granted on 30 May 2014.

Appeal hearing and submissions

   9.  Mr  Ahluwalia  expanded  upon  the  grounds  of  appeal,  relying  in
      particular on the ground related to Devaseelan  v  SSHD  [2002]  UKIAT
      000702. He referred us  to  the  findings  of  Judge  Balmain  in  his
      determination of the appeal in 2010, whereby the  appellant's  account
      of being abandoned by his father and of lack  of  ties  to  Bangladesh
      were accepted, and submitted that Judge Herlihy had failed  to  follow
      the guidance in Devaseelan in regard to those positive  findings.  Her
      failure to do so was a material  error,  since  her  adverse  findings
      infected her conclusions as to the relationship between the  appellant
      and his uncle. She failed to consider the medical evidence relating to
      the  appellant's  emotional  state  following  the  breakdown  of  his
      marriage and the protective factors consisting of the support from his
      uncle's family as referred to in the medical evidence,  in  concluding
      that there was no element of dependency  over  and  above  the  normal
      emotional ties between adult family members. The judge  had  erred  by
      finding that family life was not established.

  10. Mr Avery submitted that  the  question  of  the  findings  as  to  the
      appellant's abandonment by his father was irrelevant.  The  judge  had
      had regard to the findings  in  the  determinations  of  the  previous
      appeals but gave proper reasons for finding  that  the  appellant  had
      significant links to Bangladesh. Her conclusion,  that  there  was  no
      family life with his uncle, was a sustainable one.

  11. In response, Mr Ahluwalia submitted that the question  of  abandonment
      was relevant, as Judge Herlihy's adverse credibility finding  infected
      her findings on family life. There was no realistic support system for
      the appellant in Bangladesh.

  12. We decided to reserve our decision with respect to the  error  of  law
      and heard further submissions in the event that we were to  set  aside
      Judge  Herlihy's  decision.  There  is  no  need  to  set  out   those
      submissions since we have found that the judge's decision  should  not
      be set aside for error of law.

Consideration and findings

  13. We consider Judge Herlihy's decision to be a detailed and careful  one
      and it is clear that she took into account all relevant  matters  when
      considering the appellant's case.

  14. The main thrust  of  the  grounds  of  appeal,  as  reiterated  by  Mr
      Ahluwalia in his submissions, is that the judge failed to  follow  the
      principles in Devaseelan and failed to give reasons for departing from
      the findings of a previous judge who  had  made  positive  credibility
      findings and had allowed the appellant's appeal, leading to a grant of
      discretionary leave to remain. However, whilst Judge Herlihy  did  not
      specifically cite Devaseelan, we  have  no  doubt  that  she  had  the
      relevant principles in mind and followed those principles when  making
      her own findings, taking the decisions of the previous Tribunals as  a
      starting point. That much is abundantly clear  from  her  findings  at
      paragraphs 5.5 and 5.6  of  her  determination,  where  she  expressly
      referred to the decisions of the Tribunals  allowing  the  appellant's
      previous two  appeals.  As  she  said  at  paragraph  5.5,  the  first
      determination, in 2008, allowed the appeal only on the basis that  the
      Secretary of State  had  failed  to  have  regard  to  her  policy  on
      unaccompanied minors, the appellant being only 16 years of age at  the
      time. The merits of the appellant's case were not considered  by  that
      Tribunal and no findings of  fact  were  made.  To  that  extent,  the
      determination is of no relevance to the current appeal.

  15. With regard to the 2010  determination  of  Judge  Balmain,  that  was
      considered by Judge Herlihy at paragraph  5.5,  where  she  noted  the
      basis for the appeal being allowed, namely that the appellant had only
      just turned 18 years of age, he had never lived independently  of  his
      family and he was entirely emotionally and financially dependent  upon
      his uncle. She went on, at paragraph 5.6, to set out the change in the
      appellant's circumstances such that she had decided that  the  reasons
      for the previous appeal succeeding no longer applied. Whilst we accept
      that the judge did not specifically refer to, or give specific reasons
      for departing from, Judge Balmain's findings on the evidence that  the
      appellant had been abandoned by his father and had lost  contact  with
      his brother in Bangladesh, we do not consider such an omission  to  be
      material. That is for several reasons.

  16. Firstly, whilst Judge Balmain accepted the evidence of the  witnesses,
      ie the appellant, his uncle and his sister, as credible, that evidence
      was not subjected to any cross-examination  as  it  was  before  Judge
      Herlihy since the Secretary of State was not represented  before  him.
      Judge Herlihy therefore had the  benefit  of  the  witness's  evidence
      being  tested  under  cross-examination  and  accordingly  reached   a
      different view on credibility. Secondly, and more  importantly,  Judge
      Herlihy's adverse credibility findings arose as  a  result  of  events
      that had occurred subsequent to  Judge  Balmain's  decision  and  from
      evidence given in that regard, namely the appellant's uncle's visit to
      Bangladesh in 2012 and the medical evidence contained in the notes  of
      a counselling session on 11 February 2014.  It was as a result of  the
      evidence set out at paragraph 5.8 of her determination that she  found
      the accounts of  the  witnesses  about  the  family  circumstances  in
      Bangladesh and surrounding  the  appellant's  arrival  in  the  United
      Kingdom to be lacking  in  credibility.  Having  had  regard  to  that
      evidence and having viewed the counselling notes at page  177  of  the
      appeal bundle in which, as the judge observed, no reference  was  made
      to abandonment, we consider that the judge was entitled to  make  such
      adverse findings for the reasons given and we consider that there  was
      nothing inconsistent in the  judge's  approach  to  that  set  out  in
      Devaseelan.

  17. We find further that even if the judge had erred by  making  her  own,
      adverse findings about the appellant's claim to have been abandoned by
      his father (which we find that she did not), that  did  not  have  any
      material  effect  on  her  overall   conclusions   on   family   life,
      particularly as  the  appellant  could  not  in  any  event  meet  the
      immigration rules. Mr Ahluwalia sought to make his  arguments  on  the
      basis of a wider Article 8 consideration and submitted that there were
      compelling reasons justifying leave outside the rules on the basis  of
      the family  life  in  any  event  established  by  the  appellant.  He
      submitted that the judge's contrary and adverse findings in regard  to
      the appellant's family history would have infected her conclusions  on
      family life to the extent that the findings at paragraphs 5.6, 5.7 and
      5.15 could not be relied upon. However it seems to  us  that,  on  the
      contrary, the judge gave full and proper reasons for  concluding  that
      family life had not been established. The appellant was, by that time,
      22 years of age and had been married and  moved  out  of  his  uncle's
      house to live independently with his wife, albeit  moving  back  after
      the breakdown of the marriage.  Mr  Ahluwalia  accepted,  furthermore,
      that the appellant and his wife had been in receipt  of  public  funds
      whilst living away from his uncle's home and, as such, it is clear  it
      us that they were not dependent financially upon  his  uncle  at  that
      time.

  18. The grounds of appeal further challenge  the  judge's  findings  under
      Article  8  on  the  basis  that  when  considering  the  question  of
      dependency for the purposes of family life established  as  an  adult,
      she did not take into account the appellant's mental  health  problems
      and consequential emotional dependency upon his uncle's family nor the
      fact that his history as  an  abandoned  child  led  him  to  stronger
      emotional ties to his uncle. However the judge was fully aware of  the
      appellant's mental  health  condition  arising  as  a  result  of  the
      breakdown  of  his  marriage.  Having  had  regard  to  that  evidence
      ourselves, whilst we have noted the reference to the comfort  received
      by the appellant  from  his  uncle's  family  following  the  marriage
      breakdown, we find nothing  in  that  evidence  to  suggest  that  the
      judge's findings on the question of dependency upon his uncle's family
      in terms of the principles in Kugathas v Secretary of  State  for  the
      Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31 were not sustainable ones that were
      properly open to her on the evidence.  Neither  do  we  find  that  an
      acceptance of the appellant's account of his family history would have
      led her to any other decision than the one she reached.

  19. Likewise, we find the judge's finding in  regard  to  the  absence  of
      established family life with his sisters  to  be  a  sustainable  one.
      Whilst the grounds assert that the judge erred by failing to  consider
      family life between the appellant and his cousins, nieces and nephews,
      we find nothing in the evidence before the judge to suggest  that  the
      best interests of the children lay anywhere other  than  in  remaining
      with their respective parents. We note that the judge  considered  the
      maintenance  of  those  family  ties  at   paragraph   5.17   of   her
      determination and we consider that the findings that she made in  that
      regard were perfectly sustainable ones.

  20. With regard to private life, we consider that the judge gave full  and
      careful consideration to all relevant matters, both within and outside
      the rules. She was entitled to find that the appellant could not  meet
      the requirements of the rules, having failed to  demonstrate  that  he
      had lost ties to Bangladesh. As already discussed, she gave  full  and
      proper reasons, based on more recent evidence, for departing from  the
      conclusions of the judge in the previous appeal in regard to the issue
      of ties to Bangladesh and in any event was entitled  to  rely  on  the
      accepted facts that  the  appellant's  uncle  maintained  a  house  in
      Bangladesh and that the appellant had a married  sister  remaining  in
      Bangladesh. The judge was perfectly entitled to find that  a  22  year
      old man who had previously separated from his family members and lived
      independently as a married man for a period of more than one year, who
      had spent the first 15 years of his life in Bangladesh and who had, at
      the very least one sister  in  Bangladesh,  whether  or  not  she  was
      married with her own family,  could  reasonably  be  expected  to  re-
      establish himself in that country.

  21. Accordingly, we find no errors of  law  in  the  judge's  findings  on
      Article 8 and consider that the grounds in essence  amount  to  little
      more than a disagreement with her decision.

DECISION

  22. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. We do not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to dismiss the appeal stands.






Signed   [pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  21 July 2014
