
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37186/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 November 2015                  |On 9 December 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               REDWANUL KARIM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr I Hossain, Solicitor of Liberty Legal Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Lenier who, sitting at  Taylor  House  on  11
    March 2015 and in a determination subsequently promulgated on 30  March
    2015, allowed the appeal of  the  Respondent  (hereinafter  called  the
    claimant), a citizen of Bangladesh, born on 26  January  1990,  against
    the decision of the Secretary of  State  dated  18  September  2014  to
    curtail his leave to remain, to refuse him leave to enter and to remove
    him from the United  Kingdom  under  Section  47  of  the  Immigration,
    Nationality and Asylum Act 2006.

2.   The Respondent successfully sought permission to appeal that  decision,
    the grounds of which in summary contended that the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge had stated at paragraph 50 of his determination:

         "Overall I was satisfied the evidence before me was  unsatisfactory
         in many respects.  I did not find the Respondent had established on
         the balance of probabilities that the Appellant had  done  anything
         wrong at all".

3.   It was submitted that given the bundle of documents placed  before  the
    Judge by the Secretary of State  in  support  of  the  allegation  that
    information from ETS indicated that the claimant had obtained  a  false
    English language certificate from Synergy Business College of London on
    28 March 2012, and given that the spreadsheet identified  the  claimant
    by name and recorded that  the  tests  taken  on  28  March  2012  were
    invalid, that it followed that it was clear, that the Judge  had  erred
    in his finding, above referred.

4.   It was  further  submitted  that  had  the  Judge  properly  taken  the
    evidence into account he would have  found  that  documentary  evidence
    supported the Respondent's assertions.

5.   Thus the appeal came before me on 26 November 2015 when my  first  task
    was to determine whether the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge disclosed an error or errors on a point of law such as  may  have
    materially affected the outcome of the appeal.

6.   Ms Sreeraman relied on the grounds maintaining that had the Judge  paid
    proper and more careful attention to the witness statements of  Rebecca
    Collings, Peter Millington and  Gareth  Jones  as  well  as  the  other
    documentation before him within the Secretary of  State's  bundle,  the
    outcome would have been materially different.  She maintained that  the
    weight of evidence was sufficient to demonstrate that the Secretary  of
    State had discharged the burden of proof  upon  her  to  the  requisite
    balance of probabilities.

7.   Notably she accepted that although the claimant gave oral  evidence  he
    was not cross-examined.

8.   Mr Hossain produced a skeleton argument upon which he relied  in  which
    he submitted that contrary to the assertions of the Secretary of State,
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge's  determination  revealed  that  it  was
    "teemed with adequate reasoning for the finding that the  Secretary  of
    State's decision was not in accordance with the law".

9.   In addition, the Judge had identified what  he  described  as  a  major
    inaccuracy in the spreadsheet.  That clear mistake in the base evidence
    lodged, alone was sufficient to discredit the evidence as submitted  as
    a whole, whereas the statement provided by the claimant was  consistent
    with the dates of the test.

10.  Mr Hossain referred me to the decision of the President in  R  (on  the
    application of Gazi) JR/12120/2014.  Whilst he accepted that this was a
    judicial review case that in common with other recent  case  law  found
    that judicial review was not the appropriate forum in which  to  decide
    ETS cases, it was nonetheless relevant.  At paragraph 40 the  President
    had inter alia this to say:

         "The present case illustrates every case belonging  in  this  field
         will be unavoidably fact-sensitive.  Each litigant will put forward
         his  or  her  individual   disputed   assertions,   agreed   facts,
         considerations and circumstances.  These will  be  evaluated  by  a
         fact-finding Tribunal, to be contrasted with a court or Tribunal of
         supervisory jurisdiction.  This analysis  is,  in  my  view,  amply
         confirmed by the growing number of FtJ decisions  in  this  sphere.
         Within these, one finds emphasis on self-evidently important issues
         such as the Appellant's evident English language ability, demeanour
         and previous life  events.   Furthermore,  it  is  trite  that  the
         assessment of each Appellant's demeanour and  credibility  will  be
         carried out on a case by case basis".

11.  Mr Hossain further referred to the  Secretary  of  State's  Enforcement
    Instructions and Guidance -  Chapter  50  where  under  the  subheading
    "50.12 Section 10(1)(b) - Leave to Remain by Deception" the instruction
    is as follows:

         "The evidence of deception should be clear and unambiguous in order
         to initiate action under  Section  10.   Where  possible,  original
         documentary evidence admissions under caution  or  statements  from
         two or more witnesses should be obtained, which  substantiate  that
         if an offence has been committed  before,  authority  is  given  to
         initiate action under Section 10 of the 1999  Act.   The  deception
         must be material - in other words, had the officer known the  truth
         leave would not have been given.  The evidence must always prove to
         a high degree of probability that deception had been used  to  gain
         the leave, whether or not an admission of deception is  made.   The
         onus - as always in such situations - is on the officer making  the
         assertion to prove his case".  (Emphasis added).

12.  Mr Hossain continued that the ETS test was not  infallible.   Such  was
    demonstrated for example in Gazi which  further  emphasised  that  each
    case was decided on its own facts.

13.  Fortunately the claimant in  this  case  had  an  in-country  right  of
    appeal and an opportunity to give oral evidence before the Judge.

14.  The  Secretary  of  State's  grounds  of  challenge  went  straight  to
    paragraph 50 of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision.  However  the
    evidence  and  the  statements  and  the  spreadsheet   comprehensively
    considered by the Judge over paragraphs 24 to 44 of  the  determination
    showed that he had carefully  analysed  each  and  every  part  of  the
    evidence before him at the date of the hearing.  The Judge had  clearly
    explained why he concluded that the Secretary of State  had  failed  to
    produce any direct and reliable evidence against the claimant in  these
    particular  circumstances.   It  was  further  to  be  noted  that  the
    claimant's  interview  was  in  English  and  without  the  aid  of  an
    interpreter as noted by the Judge at paragraph 32 of his  determination
    in which he had stated as follows:

         "32. The initial interview record showed the Appellant confirmed he
             had taken the tests.  It was recorded by the interviewer  that
             he was able to answer questions in basic English, in a  fluent
             manner and there were no points  where  he  appeared  to  lack
             credibility.  At the second interview on  18  September  2014,
             the Appellant confirmed the dates when he took his tests as 26
             March 2012 and 28 March 2012.  He said he  did  not  know  the
             test was not genuine.  He  confirmed  that  he  submitted  the
             tests as part of his application for entry clearance".

15.  Ms Sreeraman in response submitted that little weight should have  been
    given by the Judge to the fluency of  the  claimant's  English  at  his
    interviews, given that this was several years after he had entered  the
    United Kingdom.

16.  She repeated that if the Judge had adequately or  carefully  considered
    what was said in the witness statement produced, the outcome would have
    been materially different.  He failed to appreciate that  the  evidence
    in those witness statements was sourced directly from ETS.

17.  Having heard the parties' submissions I reserved my decision.

Assessment

18.   Following  a  well-known  report  on  the  BBC  television   programme
    "Panorama" it has become notorious  that  the  Secretary  of  State  is
    satisfied that an extremely large number of English language tests were
    taken by impersonators rather than the person claiming to be doing  the
    test.

19.  Be that as it may, I am not aware of anyone having been prosecuted  for
    any involvement in the alleged wholesale criminal conspiracy.

20.   In  a  detailed  and  well  reasoned  determination,  indeed   rightly
    described by Mr Hossain as "well explained and well drafted" the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge looked very carefully at extensive generic evidence
    that led to a finding by the Secretary of State this claimant had  been
    involved in such fraud.

21.  Whilst acknowledging  that  evidence,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    found no evidence proving conclusively  that  this  claimant  had  done
    anything wrong.  He recognised, as do ETS, that false positives were  a
    possibility (see paragraph 46) and that the Secretary of State had done
    nothing to show that false positives were not the explanation  in  this
    case.

22.  It follows that the First-tier Tribunal Judge was faced  with  no  more
    than a weak prima facie case.

23.  In deciding if this claimant had done anything  wrong,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge was entitled to be impressed by the  claimant's  command
    of the English language, the claimant having in  common  with  his  two
    interviews given his evidence before the Judge in  fluent  English  and
    without the  aid  of  an  interpreter.   I  do  however  appreciate  Ms
    Sreeraman's submission that this must be seen in  the  context  of  the
    fact that the claimant had by then, already lived in the United Kingdom
    for several years.  Of course a person  who  speaks  excellent  English
    might have cheated, but the  Judge  was  entitled  to  regard  that  as
    inherently unlikely.

24.  The claimant gave evidence.  He was in a better  position  than  anyone
    to know if he had cheated and he said clearly that he did not.  He  was
    entitled to be believed unless his evidence was unsettled in some  way.
    But far  from  challenging  the  evidence,  the  Secretary  of  State's
    representative at the hearing asked no questions.  The claimant was not
    cross-examined at all.

25.  It follows therefore that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  was  entitled
    to accept the oral evidence and indeed he may well have been criticised
    if he had done anything else.

26.  This is a decision  that  takes  seriously  the  prima  facie  evidence
    raised by the  Secretary  of  State  and  has  evaluated  it  with  the
    unchallenged oral evidence of the claimant.  It is not an error of  law
    to believe a witness.

27.  The grounds in any event fail to place  the  Judge's  findings  in  the
    context of his overall reasoning on the totality of the evidence.

28.  Whilst paragraph 50 is more particularly addressed in  the  grounds  of
    challenge, it would be as well, bearing in  mind  what  the  Judge  had
    noted at paragraph 32 of the determination (above), to set out in  full
    what he had to say at paragraphs 48 and  49  of  his  determination  in
    which he had this to say:

         "48. It was clear the spreadsheet  contained  a  major  inaccuracy.
             The Appellant's original score reports showed the  tests  were
             on 26 March 2012 and 28 March 2012.  The spreadsheet  produced
             by ETS showed the Appellant's tests on 28 March  2012  and  17
             April  2012.   The  Appellant  gave  oral  evidence  which   I
             accepted, that the correct dates were  26  and  28  March,  as
             shown on his certificates.  This was consistent with  what  he
             had said when interviewed.

         49.  The certificate number given on the spreadsheet for  the  test
             allegedly taken on 17 April was different from  that  recorded
             for 26 March.  It appeared clear the test that took  place  on
             17 April, marked as invalid, did not relate to the  Appellant.
             Ms Bassi submitted only the test of 28 March would  be  relied
             upon as evidence  of  invalidity.   However  the  Home  Office
             cancellation of leave to remain report at paragraph 17  stated
             the tests relied upon as invalid were on 28 March 2012 and  17
             April 2012.  Mr Hossain submitted, in my view correctly,  that
             the Respondent could not pick  and  choose.   The  spreadsheet
             clearly showed the Appellant's correct name, date of birth and
             the college where he took the test,  alongside  the  incorrect
             certificate number and date.  Given how  little  evidence  was
             supplied, the fact there were such significant mistakes within
             it did not support it being generally reliable.  I  also  bore
             in mind that there was no  independent  verification  of  this
             spreadsheet.  There was insufficient evidence to establish how
             voice comparisons were made.  However, there appears to  be  a
             possibility that there  were  comparisons  between  tests,  as
             otherwise it  would  be  unclear  how  other  samples  of  the
             Appellant's voice would be obtained.  If a test  on  28  March
             taken by the Appellant was compared by one taken  not  by  the
             Appellant on 17 April, it was unsurprising they did not match.
              It is accepted this supposition is speculative, as there  was
             simply insufficient information.  However the  comparison  was
             done, if any use was made of the test  recorded  on  17  April
             wrongly ascribed to the Appellant, any  invalid  result  would
             not relate to the Appellant.   In  my  view,  key  information
             relied upon from the spreadsheet was unreliable".

29.  This was a finding made on its own  facts  and  dependent  to  a  large
    extent on the clearly favourable impression the claimant gave, in  oral
    evidence and on the documentary evidence tendered before the Judge.

30.  My decision should not be seen as a general criticism of the  Secretary
    of State's evidence in ETS cases, it is simply a  recognition  that  in
    the present case, the First-tier Tribunal Judge gave cogent and  lawful
    reasons for reaching his decision that was supported by and open to him
    on the evidence and thus sustainable in law.

31.  I find upon a reading of the Judge's determination as a whole, that  it
    is entirely clear why the appeal was allowed.   The  reasoning  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge cannot be  said  to  be  irrational  nor  his
    conclusions perverse.  The Judge was required to explain why he reached
    his conclusions but was not required to assemble and  set  out  in  the
    determination everything that was  capable  of  supporting  a  contrary
    view.

32.  As was said by Davies LJ at paragraph 21 of ZS  (Jamaica)  [2012]  EWCA
    Civ 1639: "a court should not be astute to categorise as  an  error  of
    law what is no more than a  disagreement  with  an  assessment  of  the
    facts".

33.  Mindful of the guidance of the Court of Appeal in R (Iran) [2005]  EWCA
    Civ 982, I find that this is not a case where the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's reasoning was such that the Tribunal was unable  to  understand
    the thought process that he employed in reaching his decision.

34.  I find that the Judge properly  identified  and  recorded  the  matters
    that he considered to be critical  to  his  decision  on  the  material
    issues raised before him in this appeal.

Notice of Decision

35.  The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error  on
    a point of law and I order that it shall stand.

36.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 7 December 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein

