
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37363/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 1 September 2014                           |On 10 September 2014         |
|Decision given orally                         |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                        abdul rahim nurul ameen babu

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     The appellant appeared in person
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a national of India where he was born on  5  September
    1988.  He has been in the United Kingdom since 20  May  2011.   He  was
    granted leave to enter as a student until 31 August 2014, however  this
    was curtailed on 25 May 2012  because  the  college  at  which  he  was
    studying was removed from the list of approved educational providers by
    the Secretary of  State.   Within  the  time  given  to  the  appellant
    following that curtailment he made application  for  further  leave  to
    remain for a purpose not covered by the Rules on 24 May 2012.  This was
    refused in brief terms by the respondent under paragraph 322(1) of  the
    Immigration Rules on the basis that the appellant's situation  was  not
    considered compelling enough for the grant of  exceptional  leave.   He
    had sought an extension of leave  in  order  to  secure  further  study
    opportunities.  The appellant appealed against that decision.

 2. The grounds of appeal refer to the consequences for  the  appellant  of
    the failure of the college and his decision to marry a British  citizen
    on 23 June 2012.  He feared the parents of a person in India with  whom
    a match had been arranged.

 3. The appellant requested that the appeal be decided on the  papers.   He
    was informed by the First-tier Tribunal that his notice of  appeal  had
    not given until 11 September 2013 and did not  include  an  application
    for time to be extended.  He was invited to  comment  on  that  and  to
    provide details of any special circumstances for failing to give notice
    of appeal in time by no later than 27 November 2013.  He replied with a
    letter that was received on 25 November 2013;  the  appellant  enclosed
    copy of tracking details in support  of  his  contention  that  he  had
    appealed in time.  He also asked for an oral hearing  and  proposed  to
    pay the difference in cost.  According to  a  note  of  an  Immigration
    Judge dated 19 December 2013 the appeal was accepted in  time  with  an
    endorsement "NB request to change to oral hearing to be  actioned".   A
    letter was sent by the  First-tier  Tribunal  dated  20  December  2013
    confirming that it was accepted the appeal had been lodged in time.  No
    comment was made however with regard  to  the  appellant's  request  to
    switch to an oral hearing.

 4. On 23 December 2013 notice was sent to the appellant explaining that he
    had indicated that he wanted the appeal to be  decided  on  the  papers
    without a hearing and  any  further  written  evidence  or  submissions
    should be received by 20 January 2014.   Meanwhile  the  appellant  had
    moved from his address in London E12 to Manchester on 9  December.   He
    sent an email to the First-tier Tribunal on 24 December explaining that
    he had moved address.  This follows a telephone call he  had  made  the
    day before when he was invited to put these  details  in  writing.   It
    appears that the email was not acknowledged by the First-tier  Tribunal
    until 31 December with an explanation that  information  could  not  be
    supplied to an email address that was not in the name of  somebody  not
    recorded on the database.  The appellant was invited to provide further
    information which he explains he sent the same day.

 5. The next development was notification by the First-tier Tribunal of the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing  the  appeal  after
    consideration on the papers. Permission to  appeal  that  decision  was
    granted on 24 April 2014.

 6. Mr McVeety does  not  oppose  the  appeal.   It  is  evident  that  the
    appellant was slow in notifying the First-tier Tribunal of  his  change
    of address but it is clear that by 24 December, if not the day  before,
    the First-tier  Tribunal  was  aware  that  the  address  had  changed.
    Furthermore the First-tier Tribunal  appears  to  have  overlooked  the
    request for an oral hearing.  It is that failure to act on the  request
    for  an  oral  hearing  that  persuades  me  there  was  a   procedural
    irregularity in this case and that the appellant  was  unfairly  denied
    the oral hearing that he had requested.

 7. Accordingly I set aside  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Turnock and I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  hearing
    at which the appellant can attend and give evidence.  He is aware  that
    he will need to pay the additional fee for that to take place.



Signed                                           Date 9 September 2014

[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

