
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37682/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 July 2014                               |On 06 August 2013            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             GLADYS INORI POWIS

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Jack
For the Respondent:    Mr Caskie, instructed by McGuire Solicitors.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State  had  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Scobbie who, for reasons given in
    a determination dated 23 January 2014, dismissed the appeal  under  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 but allowed it on
    human rights grounds against a decision dated 3 September 2013 refusing
    to issue a derivative residence card to the respondent (the claimant).

 2. The claimant is a national of Nigeria born 6 July 1983 and  is  married
    to a UK citizen. When she applied for the derivative residence card the
    couple had one child. They now have two  children.   The  Secretary  of
    State was not satisfied that there was sufficient evidence to show that
    the first child would be unable  to  remain  in  this  country  if  the
    claimant were required to leave.

 3. At the hearing the judge heard evidence from the claimant, her  husband
    and her father-in-law, as well as submissions.  It was accepted on  the
    claimant's behalf that she  could  not  meet  the  requirements  for  a
    derivative residence card and instead  based  her  case  on  Article  8
    grounds.

 4. The judge noted in his decision that the submissions on behalf  of  the
    respondent were in terms that there were no removal directions  and  it
    was not possible for the claimant to argue a breach of Article 8 as she
    was not being removed.

 5. The judge did not decide the point at the  hearing  but  on  reflection
    with reference to  Patel  and  Others  v  SSHD  [2013]UKSC  72  and  AS
    (Afghanistan) [2013] EWCA Civ 1469 considered  that  the  claimant  was
    nonetheless entitled to argue Article 8 as  she  had  done  so  in  her
    notice of appeal.  The judge then proceeded to consider the issues  she
    was required to under Article 8.  She noted the British nationality  of
    the claimant's husband and their two sons and that if the claimant were
    removed it would not be reasonable  to  expect  her  to  take  the  two
    children with her, nor would  it  be  reasonable  for  her  husband  to
    accompany her.  Having regard to the  circumstances  of  the  husband's
    employment, which would require him to leave home  to  go  to  sea  for
    reasonably lengthy periods, the judge concluded  there  were  no  other
    relatives who could be called upon to look  after  the  children.  This
    included consideration of the circumstances of  the  claimant's  mother
    and father-in-law who live in England. With these matters in  mind  the
    judge concluded that it would not be  in  the  best  interests  of  the
    children for their father to be removed and for the parents to be split
    up and concluded that reveal of the claimant would be disproportionate.

 6. The Secretary of State argues:

    (i)  The judge had materially misdirected himself  in  law  by  finding
         that he had jurisdiction to make findings on the Article 8  grounds
         when the Secretary of State had not made a decision  regarding  the
         claimant's removal.

    (ii)     The judge had failed to give any or adequate consideration  to
         the merits of the claimant's circumstances  under  the  Immigration
         Rules but instead made his assessment on Article 8 by reference  to
         case law that predated the change in the Rules.

    (iii)    The judge had  failed  to  consider  whether  there  were  any
         insurmountable obstacles  to  family  life  contusing  outside  the
         United Kingdom.

    (iv)     The judge did not have sufficient information to carry out  an
         analysis of the best interests of the children.

    (v)  The judge had failed to identify any exceptional circumstances  in
         the case that would render  the  claimant's  removal  unjustifiably
         harsh.

 7. Prior to commencement of the hearing I invited the  representatives  to
    address me on the impact of the decision in Haleemudeen v  SSHD  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 558 in particular [40] from the judgment of Beatson LJ.  After
    submissions I reserved my  determination.   I  take  each  in  turn  as
    summarised in [6] supra

Jurisdiction to make findings on Article 8

 8. As observed by the judge, the claimant's leave  to  remain  expired  in
    2011 and her application for a residence card was made on  22  February
    2012.

 9. The entitlement by the appellant to appeal is provided for in  reg.  26
    of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic   Area)   Regulations   2006.
    Regulation 26(3A) provides:

         "3A If a person claims to be a person with a  derivative  right  of
             entry or residence he may not appeal under  these  Regulations
             unless he possesses a valid national identity card  issued  by
             an EEA state or a passport , and either-

              (a)      an EEA family permit; or

              (b)      proof that -

                  (i)  where the person claims to have a derivative right of
                      entry or residence as a result of reg. 15A(2), he  is
                      a direct relative or guardian of an EEA national  who
                      is under the age of 18;

                  (ii)     where the person  claims  to  have  a  derivative
                      right of entry or  residence  as  a  result  of  reg.
                      15A(3), he is the child of an EEA national;

                  (iii)    where the person  claims  to  have  a  derivative
                      right of entry or  residence  as  a  result  of  reg.
                      15A(4), he is a direct relative or  guardian  of  the
                      child of an EEA national;

                  (iv)     where the person  claims  to  have  a  derivative
                      right of entry or residence  as   a  result  of  reg.
                      15A(5), he is under the age of 18 and is a  dependant
                      of a person satisfying the criteria in (i) or (iii);

                  (v)  where the person claims to have a derivative right of
                      entry or residence as a result of reg. 15A(4A) he  is
                      a direct relative or guardian of a British citizen."

10. Regulation 15A(4A) provides in  respect  a  person  is  entitled  to  a
    derivative right to reside in the UK as long as  he  satisfies  certain
    criteria which relevant to this appeal:

         "(4A) he satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if -

             (a)  he is the  primary  carer  of  a  British  citizen  ("the
                  relevant British citizen");

             (b)  the relevant British citizen is residing  in  the  United
                  Kingdom; and

             (c)  the relevant British citizen would be unable to reside in
                  the UK or in another EEA State  if  he  were  required  to
                  leave."

11. The Secretary of State's position briefly stated is that the  appellant
    had failed to demonstrate that the first child, Thomas Powis, would  be
    unable to remain in the United Kingdom or the  European  Union  if  she
    were required  to  leave  in  the  light  of  the  failure  to  provide
    sufficient evidence why the child's father was not  in  a  position  to
    provide that care.

12. Having dealt with the matter of EEA rights,  the  Refusal  Letter  then
    turns to Article 8 and the Immigration Rules.  In  essence  the  letter
    explains  that  the  Immigration  Rules  now  include  provisions   for
    applicants wishing to remain based on private or family life.   If  the
    claimant wished the Home Office to consider an  application  she  would
    need to make a separate "charged  application"  using  the  appropriate
    specified application form for the five year  partner  route,  for  the
    five year parent or ten year partner or parent route  or  for  the  ten
    year private life route.

13. The refusal letter continues:

         "Since you  have  not  made  a  valid  application  for  Article  8
         consideration, consideration has not been given as to whether  your
         removal from the United Kingdom would breach Article 8 of the ECHR.
          Additionally, it is pointed out that a decision  not  to  issue  a
         derivative residence card does not require you to leave the  United
         Kingdom if you can otherwise demonstrate that you have a  right  to
         reside under the Regulations."

14. After explaining that the Secretary of State had discharged its duty of
    care with reference to its obligations under s.55 of the 2009 Act,  the
    letter continues as follows:

         "It is pointed out that the decision  not  to  issue  a  derivative
         right of residence card does not require you to  leave  the  United
         Kingdom if you can otherwise demonstrate that you have a  right  to
         reside under the Regulations."

15. After recording the documentation that the claimant had  provided,  the
    letter concludes, so far as it is relevant to  this  appeal,  in  these
    terms:

         "As you appear to have no alternative basis of stay in  the  United
         Kingdom you should now make arrangements to leave.  If you fail  to
         do so voluntarily your departure may be enforced.  In that event we
         would first contact  you  again  and  you  would  have  a  separate
         opportunity to make representations against the proposed removal."

16. Otherwise the letter was taken up with details of an  agency  that  may
    assist the appellant and  other  routine  matters  in  connection  with
    prospective removal.

17. An EEA decision is defined in the 2006 Regulations as

         "EEA  decision  means  a  decision  under  these  Regulations  that
             concerns

         (a)  a person's entitlement to be admitted to the United Kingdom;

         (b)  a person's entitlement to be issued with or have  renewed,  or
             not to have revoked a residence certificate,  residence  card,
             derivative  residence  card,  documents  certifying  permanent
             residence or permanent residence card;

         (c)  a person's removal from the United Kingdom; or

         (d)  the cancellation, pursuant to reg. 20A, or a person's right to
             reside in the United Kingdom."

18. Schedule 1 to the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006
    provides:

         "1.  The following provisions of, or made under the 2002  Act  have
             effect in relation to an appeal under these Regulations to the
             First-tier Tribunal  as  if  it  were  an  appeal  against  an
             immigration decision under s.82(1) of that Act:

              Section 84(1) except paragraphs (a) and (f);  Sections  85  to
             87;

              Section 85 and any Regulations made under that Section; and

              Section 106 and any Rules made under that Section."

19. Section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 provides
    that a person may appeal to the Tribunal where an immigration  decision
    of a kind that is detailed in Section 82(2) is made.

20. Section 84 is in these terms:

         "1.  An appeal under s.82(1) against an immigration  decision  must
             be brought on one or more of the following grounds -

             (a)  if the decision is not in accordance with the Immigration
                  Rules;

             (b)  if the decision is unlawful by virtue of Article  20A  of
                  the  Race  Relations   (Northern   Ireland)   Order   1976
                  (discrimination by public authorities);

             (c)  if the decision is unlawful under s.6 of the Human Rights
                  Act 1998 (c.42) public authority not to  act  contrary  to
                  the Human Rights Convention as being incompatible with the
                  appellant's Convention rights;

             (d)  that the appellant is an EEA national or a member of  the
                  family of an EEA national and the  decision  breaches  the
                  appellant's rights under the Community Treaties in respect
                  of entry to or residence in the United Kingdom;

             (e)  that the decision is otherwise not in accordance with the
                  laws;

             (f)  that the person taking the decision should have exercised
                  differently a  discretion  conferred  by  the  Immigration
                  Rules;

             (g)  that removal of the appellant from the United Kingdom  in
                  consequence of the immigration decision would  breach  the
                  United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee  Convention
                  or would be unlawful under Section 6 of the  Human  Rights
                  Act  1998  as  being  incompatible  with  the  appellant's
                  Convention rights."

21. The grounds of appeal by the claimant are in terms that:

         "[the claimant] is primary carer of British citizen child

         [her] spouse is merchant seaman, to refuse application is beach  of
         rights under 2006 Regulations

         Further, to remove [the  claimant]  would  breach  her  and  family
         members rights under Article 8 of the ECHR."

    No further particulars were provided.

22. At the hearing as recorded at [17] of the determination the  Presenting
    Officer argued that the key feature of the case was that there were  no
    removal directions. It was not possible for the claimant  to  argue  in
    breach of Article 8 as she was  not  being  removed.   For  her  to  be
    granted leave under Article 8 would be a "higher value" than  what  she
    had applied for.

23. The judge noted that there had been no one-stop  notice  and  that  the
    respondent had clearly  not  considered  Article  8.   Furthermore  she
    observed at [22] that it was difficult for her  to  take  a  view  with
    regard to Appendix FM:

         "I simply do not know from the information before  me  whether  the
         appellant complies  with  Appendix  FM.   However  case  law  would
         suggest that in any event I am entitled to consider  an  additional
         Article 8 argument that there is a good arguable case.  I  consider
         there is a good arguable case here  and  proceeded  with  the  five
         pronged Razgar considerations."

24. It is unarguable that the claimant was entitled to rely on the  grounds
    available to her under Section 84 in the light of the above  provisions
    I have set out.  The submissions I heard  on  the  application  of  the
    principles in JM v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1402 have no direct  relevance.
    It seems to me that the real issue in this  case  is  not  whether  the
    judge had jurisdiction to consider Article 8 as clearly  she  had,  but
    whether she was correct in her approach to Article 8  and  this  brings
    into play the remaining grounds relied on.

Was there error in the article 8 assessment?

25. In essence Mr Jack  argued  that  the  judge  had  erred  in  taking  a
    freewheeling exercise  on  Article  8  without  first  considering  the
    circumstances under the Rules referring to [40] of Haleemudeen which  I
    quote:

         "I however consider that the FTT Judge did consider in his approach
         to Article 8.  This is because he did not consider Mr Haleemudeen's
         case for remaining in the  United  Kingdom  on  the  basis  of  his
         private and family life against the Secretary of State's policy  as
         contained in Appendix FM and Rule 276ADE of the Immigration  Rules.
          These new provisions in the Immigration Rules are a  central  part
         of the legislative and policy context in  which  the  interests  of
         immigration control are balanced against the interests  and  rights
         of people who come to this  country  and  wish  to  settle  in  it.
         Overall the Secretary of State's policy as to when an  interference
         with an Article 8 right will be  regarded  as  disproportionate  as
         more particularised in the new Rules than had previously been ..."

26. In his submissions Mr Caskie referred to the  application  having  been
    made prior to the change in the Rules in July 2012.  He argued  without
    producing the decision that on remittal of  Haleemudeen  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal it had been conceded by the  Secretary  of  State  that  where
    applications had been made prior to July 2012 it  was  the  law  before
    that date which had to be applied.

27. I do not consider there is any merit in this submission for the  simple
    reason that although the application had been made in February 2012  it
    had not included an Article 8 application and  it  was  only  when  the
    claimant had appealed in September 2012 that there was an indication of
    reliance on Article 8 grounds.

28. Mr Caskie also submitted that  the  decision  in  Haleemudeen  was  not
    binding in Scotland but  highly  persuasive.   Its  force  was  reduced
    because the issue in Edgehill had not been  argued.   He  submitted  in
    the alternative that the claimant would  succeed  under  the  (current)
    Immigration Rules. As to why  no  application  had  been  made  to  the
    Secretary of State, he explained that this was only possible  once  any
    appeal had been  disposed of.  Unfortunately Mr Caskie  was  unable  to
    explain the basis on which he considered the claimant would be able  to
    meet the requirements of the Rules, a task that the judge likewise  did
    not undertake.

29. In my view it was incumbent upon the judge to start  his  consideration
    of article 8 with Appendix FM  and  paragraph  276ADE  (if  applicable)
    before deciding whether there should be a separate Article  8  enquiry.
    Accordingly the second ground is made out.  That error was material and
    sufficient to require the decision to be set aside and remade.

30. As to that remaking, Mr Jack and Mr Caskie accepted that the First-tier
    Tribunal was the appropriate forum for that exercise.  That task should
    be on the basis of the acknowledged facts that the claimant is  married
    to a British national and that she and her husband have two sons,  both
    of whom are British nationals.  The task for  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge will be to determine whether on the evidence the claimant is able
    to meet the criteria of the Immigration Rules and  if  not,  to  decide
    whether an Article 8 case is made out. This will include  consideration
    of the recent Court of Appeal authorities on this including R  (on  the
    application) of MM and Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 985.

31. In summary therefore the appeal by the Secretary of State in the  Upper
    Tribunal is allowed.  The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  set
    aside. The  case  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  its
    reconsideration.



Signed                                  Date 5 August 2014

[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson


