
[pic]
IAC-AH-pc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37690/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 6th October 2015                  |On 13th October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                Shakila Munir
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Singh of Counsel instructed by Syeds Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of a panel of the First-tier
    Tribunal comprising Judges Landes and McGarr (the FTT)  promulgated  on
    6th January 2015.

 2. The Appellant is a female citizen of Pakistan born 17th  November  1944
    who entered the United Kingdom as a visitor on 14th January  2014  with
    leave valid until 14th July 2014.  On  30th  June  2014  the  Appellant
    applied for further leave to remain to enable her to live with her  son
    Atiq Ahmed Mir (the Sponsor) and his wife Shagufta Ghulam.

 3. The application was refused on  12th  September  2014,  the  Respondent
    issuing a Notice of Immigration Decision of that date refusing to  vary
    leave to remain, and deciding to remove the Appellant from  the  United
    Kingdom.  The Respondent issued a reasons for refusal letter also dated
    12th September 2014.  In summary that letter acknowledged  the  medical
    evidence produced on behalf of the Appellant but contended that medical
    treatment would be available in Pakistan.  The  Respondent  noted  that
    the Appellant had applied for leave to remain relying upon  Articles  3
    and 8 of the  1950  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  (the  1950
    Convention) and on  compassionate  grounds.   The  Respondent  did  not
    accept that the Appellant's removal would breach Articles 3 or 8.   The
    appeal was heard by the FTT on 8th December 2014.  Evidence  was  given
    by the Appellant, the Sponsor, and  Mrs  Ghulam.   The  FTT  found  the
    evidence to be inconsistent and unreliable.  It was made clear  to  the
    FTT that the appeal was not being pursued with reference to Article  3,
    but it  was  contended  that  the  Respondent's  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law because the Respondent had not  considered  the
    application outside the Immigration Rules on the basis  of  exceptional
    circumstances.  It was submitted that to  remove  the  Appellant  would
    breach Article 8.  The FTT did  not  accept  the  submissions  made  on
    behalf of the Appellant and the appeal was dismissed.

 4. This resulted in the Appellant making an application for permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  In essence  the  Appellant  relied  upon
    five grounds which are  set  out  in  summary  below,  using  the  same
    headings as contained in the grounds;

         (i)  Misdirection in law - decision not in accordance with the law

             The FTT should have found the Respondent's decision to be  not
             in  accordance  with  the  law  as  the  Respondent  had   not
             considered the Appellant's case outside the Immigration  Rules
             on the basis of exceptional circumstances.

         (ii) Misdirection in law -  psychiatric  report  of  Dr  M  Qureshi
             consultant psychiatrist

             The  FTT  erred  in  law  by  taking  issue  with  the  expert
             psychiatric report of Dr  Qureshi.   The  FTT  was  not  in  a
             position to go behind the conclusions of the expert report.

         (iii)    Misdirection in law - failing to take  into  consideration
             irrelevant  (sic)  matters/  findings  inconsistent  with  the
             evidence/inadequate reasoning

             The decision and findings reached by the FTT are  contrary  to
             the evidence.  The FTT failed to make any specific findings in
             relation to the  medication  the  Appellant  was  taking,  and
             findings made that  there  was  no  evidence  to  suggest  the
             Appellant was cared for  in  Pakistan  before  coming  to  the
             United Kingdom are perverse and contrary to the evidence.







         (iv) Article 8 - right to family life

             The  FTT  erred  in  finding  that  the  Appellant   had   not
             established family life with the Sponsor and her  daughter-in-
             law that would engage Article 8.

          (v) Acceptance of family life - reasonableness of relocation

             The FTT erred in concluding that it was reasonable  to  expect
             the Sponsor and the Appellant's daughter-in-law to relocate to
             Pakistan which was contrary to  the  decision  in  Sanade  and
             Others [2012] UKUT 00048 (IAC).

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  P
    J M Hollingworth in the following terms;

         1.   An arguable error of law has arisen in relation to  the  scope
             of  the  interpretation  of  the  evidence  of  Dr  Qazi.   At
             paragraph 30 of the decision the judges have set out Dr Qazi's
             conclusion that the  Appellant  required  a  full-time  family
             attendance to boost  her  morally  and  psychologically.   The
             judges stated  that  they  found  this  was  the  nub  of  it.
             Subsequently the judges stated that they  were  not  satisfied
             that the Appellant's  dependency  was  not  more  than  normal
             emotional ties.  In reaching this conclusion the  judges  have
             not explained  the  rejection  of  Dr  Qazi's  conclusions  or
             differentiated his conclusions from  other  findings  of  fact
             leading to the conclusion that dependency  was  no  more  than
             normal emotional ties.

         2.   A substantial analysis has been conducted in relation  to  the
             evidence of Dr Qureshi.   This  has  not  been  undertaken  in
             relation to the evidence of Dr Qazi.

         3.   At paragraph 34 the judges proceed on the hypothesis that they
             are wrong on the footing that the relationship does amount  to
             family life.  Subsequently it is arguable that the analysis is
             inadequate or fails to attach sufficient  weight  to  relevant
             factors in reaching the conclusion that it would be reasonable
             to expect the family to relocate.

 6. The Tribunal issued directions making  provision  for  there  to  be  a
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal  to  decide  whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision should be set aside.

The Appellant's Submissions

 7. Mr Singh relied upon the grounds contained within the  application  for
    permission to appeal in their entirety contending  in  particular  that
    the FTT had erred in  its  assessment  of  the  medical  evidence,  and
    Article 8 assessment.

 8. Mr Smart contended the FTT decision contained  no  error  of  law.   In
    relation to the medical evidence reliance was placed upon paragraph  21
    of SS (Sri Lanka) [2012] EWCA Civ 155.  I was asked to accept that  the
    FTT was entitled not to place weight upon Dr Qureshi's report.

 9. I was asked to find that the FTT had made  factual  findings  upon  the
    evidence which it was entitled to make, one example being  the  finding
    that there was no medical evidence to indicate that the Appellant's use
    of a wheelchair was  recommended  by  a  doctor  even  though  she  had
    attended the hearing in a wheelchair.

10. I was asked to uphold the decision of the FTT.

11. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

12. I will deal with the points raised on behalf of the  Appellant  in  the
    order that they are set out in the grounds.

Ground (i)

13. This ground does not disclose an error of law.  The FTT dealt with this
    point in paragraphs 6 and 20.  The FTT found that  the  Respondent  had
    considered Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules and referred to  the
    appropriate authority, that being AI (India) [2011] EWCA Civ  1191,  in
    particular paragraphs 21 and 22 of that judgment.   A  reading  of  the
    reasons for refusal letter  confirms  the  application  was  considered
    outside the Immigration Rules, the author of that letter  finding  that
    the Appellant's "claim is not considered to be  so  exceptional  as  to
    override the legitimate requirements of immigration control."  The  FTT
    properly considered the preliminary  point  made  by  Counsel  for  the
    Appellant, and did not err in law in concluding that  the  Respondent's
    decision was in accordance with the law, and that  it  was  appropriate
    for the FTT to go on and consider the appeal.

Ground (ii)

14. It is not appropriate for a Tribunal to accept an expert report at face
    value.  I set out below paragraph 21 (in part) of SS (Sri Lanka);

         "... A judge's decision not to  accept  expert  evidence  does  not
         involve an error of law on his part, provided  he  approaches  that
         evidence with appropriate care  and  gives  good  reasons  for  his
         decision.  Ultimately, therefore, there are only two issues  as  to
         the Senior Immigration Judge's treatment of medical  evidence:  did
         he address that evidence with appropriate care and did he give good
         reasons for his conclusion?"

15. The FTT considered Dr Qureshi's report at paragraphs 27 -  29.   It  is
    evident that the report was considered with care.  The FTT give  cogent
    reasons why little weight was placed upon Dr Qureshi's clinical opinion
    regarding the  Appellant's  physical  health  condition,  and  why  his
    opinion of the Appellant's mental health  condition  was  treated  with
    caution in the absence of results from a memory  clinic.   The  reasons
    given by the FTT are adequate and sustainable and disclose no error  of
    law.

Ground (iii)

16. In my view this ground is misconceived and discloses no error  of  law,
    but discloses a disagreement with the findings made by the FTT.

17. It is incorrect to state that the FTT failed to make specific  findings
    on material matters.   Again  it  is  evident  that  the  evidence  was
    considered with care and the FTT concluded that the evidence  given  by
    the Appellant and her two witnesses was  inconsistent  and  unreliable.
    The FTT pointed out the inconsistencies in the evidence  in  paragraphs
    22, 23 and 26.  Further inconsistencies are noted in  consideration  of
    Dr Qureshi's report at paragraphs 27 - 29, with further inconsistencies
    in paragraph 30.  This ground discloses no error of law.

Ground (iv)

18. The FTT in paragraph  25  accepted  that  when  considering  Article  8
    outside the rules, the initial question to be decided is whether  there
    is family life that engages Article 8.  The FTT  correctly  noted  that
    family life between adults and their parents would not normally  engage
    Article 8, but may do if there is dependency which  creates  more  than
    the normal emotional ties.

19. In considering whether family life existed which would  engage  Article
    8, the FTT was entitled to take into account  the  unreliable  evidence
    that had been given and was entitled to reach the conclusion  that  the
    Appellant had been living alone prior to coming to the United Kingdom.

20. The judge granting permission has raised an issue  in  relation  to  Dr
    Qazi's evidence, which was not raised in  the  grounds.   The  evidence
    submitted by Dr Qazi was contained in  a  letter  dated  21st  December
    2013, comprising eleven lines.  The  judge  granting  permission  notes
    that Dr Qazi stated the Appellant needed "full-time  family  attendance
    to boost her morally and psychologically", and the FTT had found  "this
    is the nub of it."  However the FTT  had  gone  on  to  find  that  the
    Appellant's dependency was no more than normal emotional  ties.   I  do
    not find that this is inconsistent.  The FTT took into account what  Dr
    Qazi had stated and made a specific finding that the Appellant was self-
    caring in Pakistan, but was lonely since the death of  her  husband  in
    2008.  The FTT found that the Appellant wished to be  with  her  family
    but on the evidence presented, dependency was no more than  the  normal
    emotional ties between parent and adult son.  This was a  finding  that
    the FTT was entitled to make and did not err in so doing.

Ground (v)

21. It is contended that the FTT  erred  in  paragraph  34  in  reaching  a
    conclusion, that if family life did exist, then it would be  reasonable
    to expect the family unit to move to Pakistan to continue family  life.
    Reliance is placed upon Sanade in which the  Upper  Tribunal  indicated
    that it would not be reasonable for a British citizen to have  to  move
    from the United Kingdom to continue family life.

22. The FTT noted the Sponsor is a British citizen and that if he left this
    country, it would mean leaving  his  job  and  his  property.   He  had
    however only lived in the United Kingdom for nine years and his wife is
    a  citizen  of  Pakistan  and  they  have  no  children.   Despite  the
    conclusion in Sanade, the FTT was entitled to find that if family  life
    existed (which was not accepted) it would be reasonable for the Sponsor
    to return to Pakistan with the  Appellant.   The  Court  of  Appeal  in
    Agyarko and Others [2015] EWCA Civ 440 considered a claim by a national
    of Ghana for leave to remain in the United Kingdom with her naturalised
    British citizen husband.  At paragraph 28 Sales LJ stated;

         "28. So far as concerns Mrs Agyarko's claim  under  Article  8  for
             leave to remain outside the Rules, since her family  life  was
             established with knowledge that she had no right to be in  the
             United Kingdom and was therefore precarious  in  the  relevant
             sense, it is only if her case is exceptional for  some  reason
             that she will be able to establish a violation of Article 8:"

23. Sales LJ went on to conclude in paragraph 33 that in  that  case  there
    were no exceptional circumstances which would oblige the  Secretary  of
    State to grant leave to remain.  It was  specifically  found  that  the
    fact that Mrs Agyarko's husband is a British citizen "is not in itself,
    nor in combination with any other features of the case, something which
    makes this case exceptional for the purposes of the test under  Article
    8."

24. In the appeal dealt with by the FTT, if family life was established  by
    the Appellant it was done in the knowledge that she  had  no  right  to
    remain  in  the  United  Kingdom,  and  her  immigration   status   was
    precarious.  According to the judgment  in  Agyarko  to  succeed  under
    Article 8 the Appellant would have to show that her case is exceptional
    for some reason, and the FTT gave sustainable reasons why that was  not
    found to be the case, and the fact that her son is  a  British  citizen
    and would have to go back to Pakistan with her, did not make  the  case
    exceptional.

25. In conclusion the grounds submitted on behalf of the Appellant disclose
    disagreements with the findings made  by  the  FTT,  but  they  do  not
    disclose any material error of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error  of  law.
I do not set aside the decision.  The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

Nor order for anonymity was made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   There  has
been no request for anonymity and the  Upper  Tribunal  makes  no  anonymity
order.


Signed   Date 7th October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed   Date 7th October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

