
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37769/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 14th January 2015                          |On 28th January 2015          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                              mrs kamrun nahar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms. A. Muzira, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr. T. Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


The Appellant

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 26  March  1968.   She
    appeals against the decision of Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Boyd
    sitting  at  Hatton  Cross  on  26th  August  2014  who  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal against  decisions  of  the  Respondent  dated  27th
    August  2013.   Those  decisions  were  to   refuse   the   Appellant's
    application for variation of leave to enter the United Kingdom  and  to
    make removal directions under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and
    Nationality Act 2006.

2.   The Appellant's case was that her presence in the  United  Kingdom  was
    required because she was caring for her sister, Ms Shamsun Nehar  ("the
    sister"), who  was  suffering  from  a  number  of  medical  conditions
    including stage 4 chronic kidney disease  and  type  2  diabetes.   The
    Appellant accepted at first  instance  that  she  could  not  meet  the
    requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  for  a  variation  of  leave
    including the requirements of Appendix FM and  paragraph  276ADE.   Her
    claim was based  on  a  consideration  of  Article  8  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

3.   On 2nd January 2012 the  Appellant  was  granted  leave  to  enter  the
    United Kingdom as a family visitor valid for six months until 2nd  July
    2012.  She entered the United Kingdom on 17th January 2012 and  applied
    on 26th June 2012 shortly before  her  leave  was  due  to  expire  for
    variation.  This was refused by the Respondent on 27th August 2013, the
    appeal against which has given rise to the present proceedings.

The Proceedings at First Instance

4.   The Judge noted the medical evidence that  was  submitted  to  him,  in
    particular a letter from Addenbrooke's  Hospital  dated  14th  February
    2013 that the Appellant's sister was able to perform all activities  of
    daily living.  The Judge considered that if the Appellant's sister  was
    unable to walk without support she would be receiving disability living
    allowance with a mobility component, but she did not receive this.  Nor
    had she received a blue badge.  The sister's chronic kidney disease was
    under review and at no point in the GP's letter before the Judge was it
    suggested that the sister was unable to care for herself.

5.   The Appellant told the  Judge  that  her  sister's  condition  had  not
    improved or worsened since February 2013.  The Judge was not  satisfied
    that the sister needed  the  level  of  care  and  attention  from  the
    Appellant that was claimed.  In any event, the sister  lived  with  her
    husband and a daughter aged 18.  The medical evidence did  not  suggest
    the sister could not be left alone.  The sister carried out  activities
    of self-care and would be able to look after herself  during  the  day.
    The sister had two other daughters who, although married with children,
    lived five and ten minutes walk away respectively.  There was no reason
    in the Judge's view why those daughters could not arrange  to  call  in
    from time-to-time to check that their mother the Appellant's sister was
    well (there appears to be a typographical error at paragraph 24 of  the
    determination where the Judge has used the word "Appellant").

6.   The issue before the Judge turned on the Respondent's  carer's  policy,
    a copy of which was produced in the  Appellant's  bundle.   Chapter  17
    Section 2 - "Carers" states that leave should only be granted where  it
    is   warranted   by   particularly   compelling    and    compassionate
    circumstances.  The Judge's view  was  that  this  imposed  a  slightly
    higher test than that imposed on considering an Article 8 claim outside
    the Immigration Rules.

7.   It had not been established that the Appellant's sister was  frail  and
    required the type of constant care and attention  which  had  been  put
    forward to him in evidence.  It was much more likely  that  the  sister
    was able to self-care  with  the  assistance  where  necessary  of  her
    husband and children.  She could also use the facilities of the NHS  as
    she was a UK citizen.  It was not necessary for the Appellant to be  in
    the United Kingdom to look after her sister.  It would be possible  for
    the Appellant to come over to help  with  her  sister's  post-operative
    care in the event of a kidney transplant.  The  circumstances  did  not
    come within the definition of compelling, compassionate or  exceptional
    circumstances such as to allow  the  appeal  outside  the  Rules  under
    Article 8.

8.   Insofar as the Appellant's private life claim was concerned, she  could
    not speak English and her private life had been established at  a  time
    when her immigration  status  was  precarious.   The  Appellant  had  a
    husband, children and other extended family members back in Bangladesh.
     She was born and brought up there and had  only  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom since January 2012.  The Appellant was  now  46  and  had  thus
    spent almost 42 years of her life growing up and living in  Bangladesh.
    It would cause her no difficulty to return to Bangladesh and resume her
    married and family life there.  The relationship of the  Appellant  and
    her sister was that of adults.  The Judge dismissed the appeal.

The Onward Appeal

9.   The grounds of onward appeal argued that the Respondent had  failed  to
    consider the carer's policy and the decision ought to have been to have
    allowed the Appellant's appeal on the  grounds  that  the  Respondent's
    decision  was  not  in  accordance  with  the  law  and  thus  remained
    outstanding before the  Respondent  to  take  a  valid  decision.   The
    grounds of appeal argued that the  Judge  should  not  have  reached  a
    conclusion on the carer's  policy  without  setting  out  the  relevant
    criteria of the policy in the determination.  It was  argued  that  the
    policy set out a two stage process.  First of all  there  would  be  an
    initial grant of leave of three  months  so  that  an  applicant  could
    establish the type of illness or condition. That would be supported by,
    for example, a consultant's letter and evidence of  the  type  of  care
    required.  It was only at extension stage when there was a request  for
    further leave to remain for up to twelve months that  further  detailed
    enquiries should be made to establish the full facts of the case.

10.  I note here that Chapter 17.3.1  of  the  policy  as  enclosed  in  the
    Appellant's bundle states that where an application is to  care  for  a
    sick or disabled relative it will  normally  be  appropriate  to  grant
    leave to remain for three months  outside  the  Rules.   The  applicant
    however must be informed that leave has  been  granted  on  the  strict
    understanding that during that three months period arrangements will be
    made for the future care of the patient by a person who is not  subject
    to the Immigration Rules (my emphasis).

11.  The second ground of onward appeal was an argument that the  Judge  had
    not given adequate reasons for rejecting the claim under Article 8.  It
    was argued that there had been evidence before the Judge that  stage  4
    kidney disease was where severe kidney  damage  had  happened  and  the
    Judge was wrong to conclude that the  Appellant's  sister  was  not  on
    haemodialysis.   There  was  medical  evidence  more  recent  than  the
    February 2013 evidence quoted  in  the  determination  which  had  been
    before the Judge. That evidence was  summarised  in  the  grounds.   It
    included a letter from the sister's consultant stating that the  sister
    had opted for haemodialysis which would involve her attending  hospital
    as an outpatient for four hours three times per week.   A  letter  from
    the sister's GP stated that the sister  needed  assistance  with  daily
    household tasks.  Another consultant wrote that it was clear  that  the
    sister's kidney function was still declining progressively.

12.  It was argued that the Judge had erred in his assessment of  the  level
    of care and attention from the Appellant which the sister  would  need.
    The Judge's conclusion that the Appellant's sister could self-care  was
    wrong.

13.  The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Shimmin on 24th November 2014.   In  granting
    permission to appeal he wrote that it was arguable that the  Judge  had
    given inadequate consideration to  the  criteria  of  the  Respondent's
    carer's policy and also arguable that the Judge had not taken  adequate
    account of the up-to-date medical evidence relating to the Appellant.

14.  The Respondent replied to the grant  of  permission  on  10th  December
    2014  stating  that  the  Judge  had  directed  himself  appropriately.
    Paragraphs 23 and 24 of the determination were fatal to the  appeal  on
    the basis of the carer's policy. In Paragraph 23 of  the  determination
    the Judge was satisfied that the Appellant's sister was able to perform
    all the activities of daily living and that she would have been able to
    walk.  It was to be expected that having  stage  4  disease  she  might
    suffer a degree of tiredness, but she would be able to self-care and to
    walk and she was not on haemodialysis. I have summarised  Paragraph  24
    above at paragraph 7 of this determination.  The Judge had applied  the
    policy to the findings of fact made and concluded that the  appeal  had
    failed.  Even if there was an error in the assessment of Article  8  it
    was unclear how it might be material.

The Hearing Before Me

15.  In her oral submissions Counsel relied on the  grounds  for  permission
    to appeal.  The Judge had ignored the medical evidence dated 24th  July
    2014 (the letter from Dr Birch, the sister's GP) which  confirmed  that
    the  sister  needed  assistance  with  day-to-day  tasks.   There  were
    exceptional circumstances in this case that brought the  appeal  within
    Article 8.

16.  In reply the Presenting Officer argued that  the  Appellant's  original
    application had been made on two bases.  One was to spend time with her
    sister after a benign brain tumour had been extracted, and secondly  it
    was for the Appellant to see  grandchildren.   Although  there  was  no
    specific reference in terms  to  the  carer's  policy  in  the  refusal
    notice, the Respondent had stated  that  her  policy  was  to  consider
    granting  leave  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  where   particularly
    compelling circumstances existed.  Grants of such leave were  rare  and
    given only for genuinely compassionate  reasons.   The  Respondent  had
    carefully considered the claim to remain in the United Kingdom  for  an
    extra six months "in respect of your family's circumstances".   As  the
    Appellant had requested six months' further  leave  to  be  allowed  to
    remain in the United Kingdom until February 2013 the Respondent was not
    satisfied that the Appellant's circumstances were such that  discretion
    should be exercised outside the Immigration Rules.

17.  The first ground of appeal (failure to apply the  carer's  policy)  had
    no merit as the Respondent's decision  was  a  valid  response  to  the
    application made.  Under Article 8 the Judge had dealt with the medical
    evidence adequately and had referred to the fact that the  evidence  as
    at the time of the hearing showed that the Appellant's sister  was  not
    currently having dialysis.  Even if the Appellant's sister had  ongoing
    long-term medical difficulties she had family members  who  could  care
    for her.  In his statement the husband of the  Appellant's  sister  had
    said it was cheaper for him to have the Appellant living in the  United
    Kingdom. Even if the extra help which the Appellant  could  provide  to
    her sister would be beneficial to the sister, that would not produce  a
    dependency such as to bring the claim within Article 8.  In  truth  all
    the Appellant's grounds were, was an attempt to reargue the case.

18.  The argument that the carer's policy should be applied  in  two  stages
    related to the circumstances of the initial application. In  this  case
    the initial application by the Appellant was for entry clearance  as  a
    visitor.  Thus entry  clearance  was  not  granted  under  the  carer's
    policy.  The application was made on a different basis  to  that  which
    was being  claimed  at  the  hearing.   When  the  Appellant  had  been
    questioned during the hearing she had said there was no  difference  in
    her sister's condition.

19.  In response the Appellant's counsel  argued  that  the  carer's  policy
    contemplated that family visitors could make an application  under  the
    policy to remain.  The written evidence included declarations from  two
    witnesses who said that the basis of  the  Appellant's  application  to
    come to the United Kingdom was to spend  more  time  with  her  sister.
    That brought the carer's policy  to  the  Respondent's  notice  and  it
    should have been applied in the refusal letter.  The Appellant's answer
    in oral testimony about the improvement in her  sister's  health  arose
    from the fact that she did not know what was being argued.  The Judge's
    findings should be set aside.  There was an emotional dependency by the
    Appellant on her sister because if the Appellant had to leave she would
    leave her sister without proper day-to-day care.   Only  the  Appellant
    could provide that.  She had been  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  three
    years.

Findings

20.  There are two inter-connected issues raised in this appeal.  The  first
    is whether the carer's policy applied in this case and  if  so  whether
    the Respondent correctly applied it.  If the Respondent had a  relevant
    policy but it was not applied the decision would not be  in  accordance
    with the law and should remain outstanding for the Respondent to take a
    lawful decision.  The second point, if  the  Appellant  cannot  succeed
    under the  policy  argument  is  whether,  in  the  light  of  all  the
    circumstances,  this  appeal  should  have  been  allowed  outside  the
    Immigration Rules under Article 8.

21.  Dealing with the specific issue of the  policy,  the  Respondent  could
    only deal with the application which was before her.  This application,
    which was made shortly before the six  month  visit  visa  was  due  to
    expire, referred to the deterioration in her sister's kidney  condition
    and that she intended to stay with her sister  during  these  difficult
    times.  The letter set out some information about her sister's  medical
    condition and tasks which the Appellant assisted her sister with.   The
    carer's policy was not specifically  referred  to  in  the  Appellant's
    application, nor was it specifically referred to in the refusal letter.



22.  The application made on form FLR(O) had said  "I  am  applying  for  an
    extension of stay in the UK as a family visitor".  There  was  thus  no
    specific reference made to the carer's policy, although the evidence of
    the two witnesses did indicate that the idea was for the  Appellant  to
    spend more time with her sister because of the medical  treatment  that
    the sister was receiving, specifically treatment  for  a  brain  tumour
    operation at Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge.  It is clear that  both
    parties had the circumstances of the case in their minds when,  on  the
    Appellant's part, she made the application,  and  on  the  Respondent's
    part, when she refused that application by reference to the Appellant's
    family situation which included the sister.

23.  I reject the argument  that  the  Respondent  failed  to  consider  the
    carer's policy and/or failed to apply it. There was no error of law for
    the Judge to find that the Appellant could not bring herself within the
    policy by  reason  of  the  sister's  condition.  As  the  Respondent's
    decision involved the exercise of her discretion (whether to apply  the
    policy) it was open to the Judge to consider the Respondent's  decision
    and to make his own decision in the matter, which  he  did.  The  Judge
    found as a fact that the sister's condition was not such as to  trigger
    the exercise of the policy. That was a conclusion which was open to the
    Judge on the evidence before him. I deal with that point in more detail
    below since as I explain at paragraph 20  the  conditions  which  might
    give rise to the application of the policy  apply  to  the  case  under
    Article 8.

24.  That there is family life between the Appellant and her sister  is  not
    in dispute, however it is a relationship between adults and  the  issue
    is whether that relationship goes beyond normal  emotional  ties.   The
    Appellant's case under Article 8 is that there is a dependency  by  the
    sister on the Appellant because of the sister's medical condition.  The
    Judge did not accept that argument, particularly in the  light  of  his
    findings regarding the sister's condition.  The  onward  appeal  argues
    that evidence which was before the Judge suggested  that  the  sister's
    condition was worse than the Judge found it to be, partly  because  the
    Judge was relying on out-of-date medical evidence.

25.  In fact the Judge was well-aware of  the  up-to-date  medical  evidence
    before him that was contained in the Appellant's bundle.   At paragraph
    25 of his determination for example he referred to the letter  from  Dr
    Jeevaratnam which was dated 8th August 2014.  This letter  stated  that
    the Appellant's sister had opted for haemodialysis and  that  the  best
    outcome was for a kidney transplant and the sister was on  the  waiting
    list.  The Judge noted that the letter only confirmed that  the  sister
    had opted for haemodialysis,  not  that  it  had  yet  commenced.   His
    comment on this evidence  was  that  if  the  sister  were  to  undergo
    haemodialysis she would still be able to live a relatively normal life.
     The Judge noted the medical evidence (at page 174 of  the  Appellant's
    bundle) that kidney transplants have become a routine procedure with  a
    high success rate and that a patient with a successful transplant would
    be able to  return  to  a  more  independent  lifestyle  with  a  quick
    recovery.

26.  It was not necessary for the Judge to set out  in  detail  all  of  the
    medical evidence  he  received.   He  had  before  him  the  up-to-date
    evidence and he had read it and he  referred  to  some  of  it  in  his
    determination.  In any event the medical evidence did not deal with the
    issue raised by him that there were other people who were  in  just  as
    good if not better position to care for the  sister  as  the  Appellant
    was.  The sister would continue to be able to access NHS treatment  and
    the sister's husband appeared to be motivated more by a desire to  save
    money in seeking to have the Appellant remain in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Be that as it may, even under the carer's policy as  I  have  indicated
    above, it would still have been necessary for the Appellant's sister to
    indicate someone who was not subject to the Immigration Rules who would
    be able to be a carer should there be a need for care.

27.  In assessing the Article 8 claim therefore the Judge had to  factor  in
    as he did at paragraph 27 that the Appellant could  not  bring  herself
    within the Immigration Rules.  Although  not  mentioning  the  case  of
    Gulshan by name he was aware that for a case to be allowed outside  the
    Immigration Rules compelling and/or compassionate circumstances had  to
    be shown.

28.   By  the  time  that  the  Judge  heard  the  appeal  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 had been amended by the Immigration Act
    2014 and at paragraph 28 he reminded himself of  the  relevant  factors
    contained in Section 117B.  He found at paragraph 29 that the Appellant
    had no family life which would engage the  Convention  as  he  did  not
    accept the dependency argument for the reasons he had set out  at  some
    length regarding the sister's medical condition.  The Appellant  had  a
    degree  of  private  life  in  the  United  Kingdom,  but  it  was  not
    disproportionate to interfere with any private life she might  have  in
    this country by removing her  to  Bangladesh.  The  Judge  gave  cogent
    reasons for this finding. The Appellant could not  speak  English,  she
    was not  financially  independent,  being  supported  by  the  sister's
    daughters and such private life as she had had  was  established  while
    her immigration status was precarious and/or unlawful. Furthermore  she
    had her own family still in Bangladesh.

29.  The appeal in relation to Article 8 thus  failed  on  both  family  and
    private life grounds.  In light of  the  Judge's  findings  as  to  the
    medical position which were open to him  on  the  evidence  the  family
    relationship between the Appellant and her sister could not be said  to
    go beyond normal emotional ties and the private life claim failed,  not
    least because of the little weight that was  to  be  afforded  to  that
    private life by operation of the statute. I  find  therefore  that  the
    judge did not make any error in dismissing the Appellant's appeal and I
    uphold his decision to do so.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law.  I uphold the First-tier  Tribunal  decision  to  dismiss  the
Appellant's appeal.

Appellant's appeal dismissed.


No anonymity direction is made there being no public policy  reason  for  so
doing.

Signed this 27th day of  January  2015


.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed this 27th day of January 2015


.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft













