
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/37273/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 3 December 2015                   |On 25 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                               MUHAMMAD WAQAS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Rashid, Counsel
For the SSHD:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

      1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan and is married to a  British
         citizen ('the sponsor').  His appeal against a decision  to  refuse
         to grant him leave to remain as a spouse dated 6 September 2014 was
         dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  McAll  in  a   decision
         promulgated on 10 December 2014.  At the  hearing  before  me  both
         representatives agreed that it  is  difficult  to  disentangle  the
         issues in dispute before Judge McCall when these two decisions  are
         read together.

      2. Both representatives however also agreed that the application dated
         4 June 2014 before  the  SSHD  was  one  based  upon  the  parties'
         marriage and not their cohabitation.  As part  of  his  application
         the appellant relied upon a marriage certificate dated  27  January
         2014.  Unfortunately the relevant application form is not available
         on the  Tribunal's  file.   The  SSHD's  decision  letter  dated  6
         September 2014 referred to the application for leave to  remain  as
         "a spouse of a settled person".  The decision however then goes  on
         to deal with the application under the Immigration  Rules  relevant
         to partners (paras 8  and  9)  before  referring  to  the  marriage
         certificate and stating that this and other evidence "all appear to
         show  that  [the  appellant]  is  in  a  genuine   and   subsisting
         relationship  with  his  British  citizen  wife  Nazam  Begum.   He
         therefore would  meet  the  requirements  specified  in  E-LTRP  of
         appendix FM of the immigration rules" (para 14).  When the decision
         is read as a whole it appears to suggest that but for the  concerns
         regarding the appellant's English language test the relevant  rules
         as a spouse are met.  The reference to EX.1  seems  to  be  on  the
         basis that the appellant could not meet the Rules  because  of  the
         English language test concerns.

      3. By the date of the hearing before Judge McAll the  SSHD  no  longer
         relied upon her concerns regarding the appellant's English language
         test [8 and 11].  Judge McAll's decision does not  however  clearly
         set out which issues remained in dispute as  at  the  date  of  the
         hearing.  Although the judge refers to the appellant having applied
         for leave to remain as a spouse [7] and having married  at  Burnley
         Registry Office on 12 January 2014 [12] he then  went  on  to  find
         that "there remains no evidence that the appellant and his  sponsor
         were married or in a relationship akin to a marriage for two  years
         at the date of hearing" [12] and the Rules are not met "in  respect
         of the length of [the appellant's] relationship with  the  sponsor"
         [16].  These findings are inconsistent with the  SSHD's  concession
         within the decision letter that the parties were married as claimed
         and  in  a  genuine  relationship.    These   findings   are   also
         inconsistent with and difficult  to  reconcile  with  the  marriage
         certificate referred to by the  judge.   There  is  no  requirement
         under the Immigration Rules for a marriage to be of any  particular
         vintage provided it is valid, genuine and subsisting.

      4. As Mr Harrison conceded, Judge McAll has erred in law in  requiring
         the parties to have lived together for a particular length of  time
         when it was accepted that they are married and the application  for
         leave to remain was made on this basis.  This amounts to a material
         error of law.  It is difficult to  separate  this  error  from  the
         other adverse findings.   I  am  satisfied  that  Mr  Harrison  has
         properly conceded that the decision is infected by a material error
         of law and should be set aside.

      5. Both representatives agreed that this is  a  case  in  which  fact-
         finding  shall  need  to  commence  afresh  before  the  First-tier
         Tribunal.  I have had regard to para 7.2  of  the  relevant  Senior
         President's Practice Statement and the nature  and  extent  of  the
         factual findings required in remaking  the  decision,  and  I  have
         decided that this is an appropriate case to remit to the First-tier
         Tribunal.

Decision

      6. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  a
         material error of law.  Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.

      7. The appeal shall be remade by First-tier Tribunal de novo.

Directions

      1) The appeal shall be reheard de  novo  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         sitting in Manchester (TE: 2 hrs) on the first date available.

      2) Within 28 days the SSHD shall file and serve  an  updated  position
         statement that sets out: (i) the nature of the application made  by
         the appellant; (ii) under  which  Rule  the  application  has  been
         considered and / or should be considered; (iii) which  requirements
         of the Immigration Rules it is alleged the appellant is  unable  to
         meet; (iv) the position adopted regarding Art 8 of the ECHR outside
         of the Immigration Rules.

      3)  28  days  thereafter  the  appellant  shall  file  and   serve   a
         comprehensive bundle that contains evidence addressing  the  issues
         said to remain in dispute.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
3 December 2015
