
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-dh-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/37266/2014
                                                               IA/37271/2014
                                                               IA/37274/2014
                                                               IA/37277/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 November 2016                           |On 10 January 2017            |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                              GH, CT, JT and NT
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr T Bobb, of Aylish Alexander, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmed, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the appellants against a decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge  Peter-John  S  White)  dismissing  their  appeals
    against the respondent's decision made on 17  September  2014  refusing
    them leave to remain and deciding to remove them from the UK.

Background

2.   The appellants are citizens of Ecuador.  The first appellant  was  born
    on 28 November 1970 and is the wife of the second appellant born  on  8
    January 1974.  They have two sons, the  third  and  fourth  appellants,
    born respectively on 11 December 2006 and 1 October 2009. The first and
    second appellants claim to  have  entered  the  UK  with  their  eldest
    daughter D on 12 August 2000.  D was born on 9  October  1992  and  was
    seven years old when she arrived.  Their entry  was  illegal  and  they
    have remained in the UK since  then  and  subsequently  the  third  and
    fourth appellants were born here.

3.   On 2 November 2007  the  first,  second  and  third  appellants  and  D
    applied for leave to remain on human rights grounds outside the  Rules.
    Their application was refused on 24 January 2010.  On 25 September 2012
    the appellants made a further application for leave to remain but  that
    was rejected as invalid on 18 October  2012.   On  28  October  2012  D
    applied for leave to remain on human rights grounds and on 19 September
    2013  she  was  granted  30  months'  leave  to   remain   under   para
    276ADE(1)(v).  On 31 October  2012  the  appellants  resubmitted  their
    application which was accepted as valid but refused on 18 October 2013.
     They lodged an application for judicial  review  on  16  January  2014
    which was withdrawn by consent. By an order signed on  11  March  2014,
    the respondent agreed to reconsider the application and, if the refusal
    of leave was maintained, to make a decision giving a right of appeal to
    the First-tier Tribunal.  On 17 September  2014  the  respondent  again
    refused leave to remain and decided to remove the appellants.  This  is
    the decision under appeal.

4.   The respondent was not satisfied that the  appellants  could  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules ("the Rules")  on  the  basis  of
    family  life  or  private  life  or   that   there   were   exceptional
    circumstances which would justify a grant of leave outside the Rules.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

5.   The judge heard oral evidence from the first and second appellants  and
    their daughter D.  The appellants told the judge that they had come  to
    the UK in 2000 in pursuit  of  a  better  life  after  they  were  made
    redundant in Ecuador with help from the second appellant's  sister  who
    was living here.  They first went to Madrid but  were  unable  to  find
    work there so came to the UK.  They were  supported  at  first  by  the
    second appellant's sister and subsequently both appellants  have  found
    work as cleaners.  The judge noted that they have never  had  leave  to
    remain or permission to work.  All three witnesses told the judge  that
    D would not be able to cope  on  her  own  financially  or  emotionally
    maintaining that she could not go back with them to  Ecuador.   D  told
    the judge that she would have no home or money if she stayed here alone
    but it would be even worse if she went back to Ecuador, that was not an
    option.  The judge commented that he  found  this  evidence,  that  she
    would insist on adopting the  worst  possible  course,  no  alternative
    being even considered, incomprehensible save as a  device  to  pressure
    the Tribunal into granting leave to the rest of the family  because  of
    her refusal to leave the country [12].

6.   The appellants also gave evidence that it would be impossible  for  the
    adult appellants to find work in Ecuador because they were too old  and
    that no-one over 25 could get a job.  He  heard  evidence  about  their
    extended family in Ecuador.  The first  appellant  said  that  she  had
    eight brothers and her parents there and that she was in touch with her
    parents but not with her brothers.  There was then  a  mention  in  her
    evidence about a sister, a teacher, and the first  appellant  corrected
    her evidence saying that she  had  six  brothers  and  two  sisters  in
    Ecuador.  The second appellant agreed that he had a mother and  brother
    in Ecuador and that there were uncles and aunts but they  were  not  in
    contact with these relatives.

7.   The judge found that it was entirely clear from the evidence  that  the
    appellants had a large extended family in Ecuador and that the evidence
    about  the  low  levels  of  contact  and  the   reasons   given   were
    inconsistent, inherently improbable and ultimately incredible.  He  was
    not persuaded that any weight could be given  to  the  suggestion  that
    none of the extended family in Ecuador would be  able  to  provide  any
    assistance at all to the appellants were  they  to  return  [19].   The
    judge added in [22] that he was not satisfied that  any  of  the  three
    witnesses from whom he heard was a credible or reliable witness or that
    he could safely accept their evidence where it was uncorroborated  save
    in so far as it was an admission against interest and  likely  on  that
    account to be true.  The  adult  appellants  had  come  to  the  United
    Kingdom in 2000 without leave and in search of a better life.  They had
    remained without leave and worked without permission justifying this on
    the basis that as parents with children to support they had no  choice,
    matters they regretted.  The judge said it was plain that they had been
    and remained wholly unwilling to contemplate the possibility of  return
    to Ecuador whatever the temporary difficulties imposed by their lack of
    status and that they had been determined to settle in  the  UK  by  one
    means or another.

8.   The judge accepted  that  D  might  find  it  difficult  to  cope  both
    financially and emotionally if her parents  and  brothers  returned  to
    Ecuador while she stayed in the UK and if they were  unable  thereafter
    to provide her with any support, although he did not  accept  that  her
    situation would be as desperate as the family sought  to  portray.   He
    found that there was extended family  on  both  sides  in  Ecuador  and
    rejected the claim made that they had virtually no contact with most of
    them and that there would be no possible support available from any  of
    them.  He  also  rejected  the  evidence  that  neither  of  the  adult
    appellants would be employable if they returned  to  Ecuador  which  he
    regarded as a startling claim which could only succeed if backed up  by
    significant independent and objective evidence of which there was none.

9.   It was accepted at the  hearing  that  none  of  the  appellants  could
    succeed under the Rules for the reasons set out in the decision  letter
    coupled with the acceptance that the third appellant had  not  been  in
    the United Kingdom seven years at the date of the application  made  in
    October 2012.  As the appellants were relying on rights under article 8
    but could not bring themselves within the Rules, there needed to be  an
    examination  of  whether  there  were  compelling   circumstances   not
    sufficiently  covered  by  the   Rules   which   would   make   removal
    disproportionate.   The   judge   accepted   that   there   were   such
    circumstances.  He had no doubt that  the  appellants  had  established
    both private and family life and that, although she was now  an  adult,
    that  family  life  included  D.    The   proposed   interference   had
    consequences sufficient to engage article 8.  The decision  was  lawful
    and in pursuit of a legitimate aim and, therefore, the  critical  issue
    was whether the interference was proportionate to  the  legitimate  aim
    pursued.

10.  The judge then said at [28]  that  decisions  which  affected  children
    must be made against the background that their best interests  were  to
    be regarded as a primary,  although  not  a  paramount,  consideration.
    They were not determinative but they should be considered in advance of
    other matters and no other single interest should be regarded  as  more
    important.  He said that it was undoubtedly in the  best  interests  of
    children to be brought up in a  stable  and  secure  family  with  both
    parents where that was possible as it was in the present case.  It  was
    equally undoubtedly in the best interests of children that they  should
    not be separated and generally that their lives and in particular their
    education should be disrupted as little as possible.   It  was  usually
    regarded as in the best interests of children that they should grow  up
    in the country in which they were  nationals  and  so  enjoy  the  full
    cultural and other benefits of their system in a situation  where  they
    could have  contact  with  grandparents,  cousins  and  other  extended
    family.

11.  The judge said that it had been recognised for many  years  that  where
    children live in one country for a significant period of time the point
    was likely to be reached at which they are so far  integrated  in  that
    country that removal to another country of which  they  were  nationals
    might be contrary to their best interests.  The jurisprudence  and  now
    the Rules had eventually converged on a period of seven years as  being
    the time after which it may no longer be reasonable for the child to be
    required to leave the UK but this was not an automatic  cut-off  point.
    As had been pointed out the years from birth to seven were of much less
    importance in terms of the child's development and  social  integration
    than the period of seven years starting from the age of four or  older.
    He noted that the fourth appellant had not yet been in the UK for seven
    years but the third appellant had been  here  for  nine  and  that  was
    clearly a significant period which might suggest that  he  had  reached
    the stage where removal would be contrary to his best interests.

12.  The judge went on to consider at [32] the disruption to  the  education
    of the third and fourth appellants but  said  that  neither  was  at  a
    crucial stage in  their  education  in  this  country.   There  was  no
    evidence before him about the education system in  Ecuador  or  how  in
    practice the move would affect their  education.   At  [33]  the  judge
    considered the disruption to the third and fourth  appellants  if  they
    were separated from D.  He said that such  separation  would  no  doubt
    happen at some stage when she left the family home to form a  new  life
    of her own but that did not affect the fact that it would  be  somewhat
    disruptive if it were to happen now. However, D was also an  Ecuadorian
    national and had 30 months' leave to remain.  If the rest of her family
    were unable to remain, she would have  an  unenviable  but  nonetheless
    genuine choice to make whether to pursue her chance to remain in the UK
    without them, prioritising her private life, or to prefer the financial
    and emotional support of remaining with the rest of the family.

13.  At [35] the judge commented that the assessment of the children's  best
    interests formed part only of the broader assessment of proportionality
    and that he must take account  of  the  provisions  of  s.117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the  2002  Act").   This
    required  him  to  take  account  of  the  fact  that  maintenance   of
    immigration control was in  the  public  interest,  that  private  life
    established whilst in the UK precariously or family life whilst in  the
    UK unlawfully carried little weight.  The  appellants'  stay  had  been
    unlawful throughout, although the  judge  accepted  that  none  of  the
    children were in  any  way  to  be  blamed  for  that.   He  noted  the
    provisions of s.117B(6) dealing with the situation of a person who  had
    a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a  qualified  child
    who had been in the UK for seven years,  without  the  limitation  that
    this should be completed by the date of application, and that  in  such
    case the public interest did not require removal  where  a  person  had
    such relationship and it would be unreasonable to expect the  child  to
    leave the UK.

14.  The judge found that in the case of the fourth appellant he was  in  no
    doubt that his best interests required that he remain with his  parents
    and elder brother and ideally with his elder sister as  well  but  they
    were not materially affected by whether that was going to be in Ecuador
    or in the UK.  The case of the third appellant  in  the  light  of  the
    greater length of residence was more  finely  balanced  but  given  the
    absence of any  evidence  of  specific  detriment  as  opposed  to  the
    generalised disruption arising from the move, he was  not  in  the  end
    persuaded that his best interests required him to remain in the UK  and
    he said he was certainly not persuaded that they pointed so strongly to
    that conclusion as to mean that he should remain  in  the  UK  even  if
    necessary without his parents.  When considering  s.117B(6)  the  judge
    said that the application  of  that  sub-section  turned  on  the  same
    question he  had  already  had  to  resolve  in  identifying  the  best
    interests of the children.  In a case where the parents had no right to
    remain and the best interests of the children did not suggest that they
    should remain in the UK, with the implication that leave must therefore
    be granted to their parents, it followed in his judgment  that  it  was
    reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK with their parents.

15.   Taking  into  account  the  adult  appellants'  immigration   history,
    entering the UK unlawfully and  remaining  here  unlawfully  making  no
    attempt to bring themselves to official notice until  seven  years  had
    elapsed, it was in the public  interest  that  they  be  removed.   The
    children had received the benefit of a free education to which they had
    not been entitled and if allowed  to  remain  they  would  continue  to
    receive such education.  There was evidence of  registration  with  GPs
    and, although he accepted that there was  no  direct  evidence  of  any
    treatment received, common sense suggested that it  was  overwhelmingly
    probable that children at these ages would have seen their GP a  number
    of times whilst they were growing up.  In summary, the judge found that
    removal would be proportionate to a legitimate aim within article 8(2).

The Grounds and Submissions

16.  The grounds of appeal set out three grounds.  Ground 1 argues that  the
    judge failed properly to assess the best interests  of  the  third  and
    fourth appellants in that their  best  interests  were  not  considered
    first and also that the judge conflated with the best interests of  the
    children issues that had nothing to do  with  that  matter.   Ground  2
    argues that the judge failed properly to apply s.117B and that the  use
    of the word "unlawful"  in  s.117B(4)  and  "precarious"  in  s.117B(5)
    contemplate two different scenarios.  Sub-section (4) is  referring  to
    persons without  leave  to  remain  who  are  illegal  entrants  and/or
    overstayers, in which case they  would  be  here  unlawfully  and  sub-
    section (5) refers to those who  have  leave  to  remain  but  are  not
    settled and/or are settled but face deportation.  It is argued that the
    latter sub-section has no application because  the  appellants  had  no
    leave and therefore their immigration status could not be precarious.

17.  It is argued that the judge was wrong to find that little weight  could
    be given to any aspect of their private or family life as  family  life
    did not enter into consideration and sub-section (4) was concerned only
    with family life between those  in  a  relationship  and  in  terms  of
    private life, it would  be  inimical  to  the  best  interests  of  the
    children if little weight were  given  to  their  private  life  which,
    whilst established when unlawfully here, was through no fault of  their
    own.  It is further argued that appropriate weight should be given to a
    qualifying child under s.117B(6).   Ground  3  argues  that  the  judge
    failed to assess properly the first and second appellants'  benefit  to
    the community in the light of the decision of the Court of Appeal in UE
    (Nigeria) v Secretary of State [2010] EWCA Civ 975.

18.  Permission to appeal was refused on ground 3 but granted on  grounds  1
    and 2 for the following reasons:

         "... 3.  Although it is not arguable that the  Tribunal  failed  to
              consider the best interests of  the  children  first,  it  is
              arguable that the Tribunal failed to undertake a freestanding
              assessment of the children's  best  interests,  combining  it
              instead with considering whether it was reasonable to  expect
              the children to leave with their parents who had no basis  on
              which  to  remain  in  the  UK  (apart  from   the   parental
              relationship).


         4.   It is arguable that the Tribunal  may  have  made  a  material
              error of law at paragraph 35 by conflating  the  test  to  be
              applied under 276ADE(iv)  with  the  test  of  reasonableness
              under s.117(6) of the NIA (as amended)."

19.  Mr Bobb adopted his  grounds  arguing  that  the  judge  had  erred  by
    failing to assess the best interests of the  children  first.   He  had
    made adverse findings of credibility in [11]-[22] and only then at [28]
    onwards, went on to consider the best interests of the  children.   His
    previous adverse findings would have had the effect, so he  argued,  of
    prejudicing  his  consideration  of  the  children's  best   interests.
    Secondly, it was submitted that the judge conflated other  issues  when
    he said at [29] that  the  best  interests  of  the  children  must  be
    assessed in the real world and specifically by reference to  the  facts
    as they are about the right or otherwise of the parent  to  be  in  the
    United Kingdom referring to  EV  (Philippines)  v  Secretary  of  State
    [2014] EWCA Civ 874 when at para 33 of that  judgment  it  was  clearly
    said that the best interests of the children were to be  determined  by
    reference to the children alone without reference  to  the  immigration
    history or status of either parent.

20.  Mr Bobb also referred to  JO  and  Others  (Section  55  duty)  Nigeria
    [2014] UKUT 00517 where the Tribunal had said that the striking feature
    of s.55 was that it operated to protect all children who were in the UK
    and there was no qualification such as residence  or  nationality.   He
    submitted that the judge had fallen into  the  error  of  "crystal-ball
    gazing" and had indulged in speculation.  It was irrational to conclude
    anything other than that the best  interests  of  the  third  appellant
    required him to remain in the UK.  He submitted that any countervailing
    factors weighing against the best interests of the children  in  favour
    of removal had not been adequately raised on the facts  of  this  case.
    The judge had erred by failing to take into account  all  the  relevant
    issues and taken into account irrelevant matters.  Further, he had made
    no specific finding on what the children's  best  interests  were.   On
    ground 2 he submitted that the judge  had  erred  by  attaching  little
    weight to the children's private life, s.117B(6)  made  it  clear  that
    appropriate weight must be given to a qualifying child and then  weight
    had to be given to the family relationship between the parent and child
    and to other considerations which could have an impact  on  whether  it
    was unreasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.

21.  Ms Ahmed  submitted  that  the  findings  of  the  judge  on  the  best
    interests of the children could not be  regarded  as  irrational.   His
    assessment of the issues in  [11]-[22]  did  not  relate  to  the  best
    interests of the children but to the credibility of the evidence he had
    heard.  The judge was entitled to make findings on that aspect  of  the
    appeal and then go on to consider the best interests of  the  children.
    It was clear from [28] that the judge had regarded that as  a  primary,
    although not a paramount consideration, and as a matter which should be
    considered in advance of other matters.  She referred to and relied  on
    MA (Pakistan) and Others v Secretary of State [2016] EWCA Civ  705  and
    submitted that the judge's approach to the assessment of the children's
    interests had been consistent with the guidance given in  the  judgment
    at paras [46]-[49].

Assessment of the Issues

22.  I must consider whether the First-tier Tribunal erred in law such  that
    its decision should be set aside.  The first issue raised in  ground  1
    is the argument that the  best  interests  of  the  children  were  not
    considered first.  Permission was not granted on this issue but it  was
    relied on in submissions as part and parcel of the challenge to the way
    the judge dealt with the issue of the best interests of the  third  and
    fourth appellants.  For the avoidance of any doubt I am  not  satisfied
    that the judge erred in this respect.  He stated plainly at  [28]  that
    the children's  best  interests  were  to  be  regarded  as  a  primary
    consideration, they were not determinative but should be considered  in
    advance of other matters and no other single  consideration  should  be
    regarded as more important.  His approach was entirely consistent  with
    the approach set out by the Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania) [2011]  UKSC
    4 and Zoumbas v Secretary of State [2013] UKSC 74.  The fact  that  the
    judge had in  earlier  paragraphs  considered  the  evidence  and  made
    findings on credibility does not alter the fact that the  first  matter
    he considered  in  his  assessment  of  proportionality  was  the  best
    interests of the children. In any event, so far as the issue of whether
    he  considered  the  best  interests  of  the  children  first,  in  MA
    (Pakistan) Elias LJ at [56] said that he did not think  that  it  could
    now be said that courts and tribunals were mandated to look at  matters
    in any particular way such that it was an error of law for them to fail
    to do so.  No doubt it would usually be  sensible  to  start  with  the
    children's best interests but ultimately it  did  not  matter  how  the
    balancing exercise was conducted provided the children's best interests
    were treated as a primary consideration.

23.  It is further argued that the judge conflated  the  best  interests  of
    the children with other factors.  His reference to the  comment  in  EV
    (Philippines) that the best interests of the children must be  assessed
    in the real world and by reference to the facts as they are  about  the
    right or otherwise of either parent to be in the  United  Kingdom  does
    not indicate a conflation of the best interests of  the  children  with
    other matters but an indication than when assessing  proportionality  a
    balance had  to  be  struck  between  those  various  factors.   In  MA
    (Pakistan), the Court of Appeal rejected at para 47 a  submission  that
    the best interests question automatically resolved  the  reasonableness
    question and said that even where the child's best  interests  were  to
    stay, it may still not be unreasonable to expect the child to leave.

24.  In EV (Philippines) at para [35]  Christopher  Clark  LJ  set  out  the
    factors on which an assessment of the best interests of children  would
    depend,  including their age, the length of time they have been in  the
    UK, how long they have been in education, what  stage  their  education
    had reached or what extent they had become distanced from  the  country
    to which  it  was  proposed  that  they  return,  how  renewable  their
    connection with that country may be, to what  extent  they  would  have
    linguistic, medical or other difficulties in adapting to life  in  that
    country and the extent to which the court proposed would interfere with
    their family life or rights if any as British citizens.  These  factors
    were considered by the judge in his assessment.  By way of  example  he
    considered the length of residence in the UK in [31] and the extent  of
    any disruption to their education in [32].  He  said  that  he  had  no
    detailed evidence of particular social links formed by either appellant
    whose disruption would be particularly harmful and did not  think  much
    weight could be attached to that factor.   He  took  into  account  the
    disruption if the third and fourth appellants were to be separated from
    their sister D but he was entitled to note that she was  an  Ecuadorian
    national who had  what  he  described  as  "a  perhaps  unenviable  but
    nonetheless genuine choice to make" on whether she would remain in  the
    UK if her parents and brothers return to Ecuador.

25.  I am satisfied that the judge took all relevant  matters  into  account
    when considering the best interests of the children.   His  conclusions
    are set out in [34].  So far as the fourth appellant was  concerned  he
    found that it was in his best interests to remain with his parents  and
    elder brother and ideally with his elder sister as well but  they  were
    not materially affected by whether that was to be in Ecuador or the UK.
     In the case  of  the  third  appellant  with  his  greater  length  of
    residence he described the issue as more finely balanced.  He noted the
    greater disruption to his education and his  social  networks  as  some
    indication that it was in his best interest to remain in the UK but  on
    the other hand there  were  the  benefits  of  enjoying  both  his  own
    citizenship and culture and forming close bonds with his large extended
    family in Ecuador.  The judge  said  that  given  the  absence  of  any
    evidence of specific detriment as opposed to the generalised disruption
    from the move he was not persuaded that his best interests required him
    to remain in the UK and certainly not that they pointed so strongly  to
    that conclusion to mean that  he  shall  remain  even  if  without  his
    parents.  These findings on the best interests  of  the  children  were
    conclusions properly drawn from the evidence and  not  as  the  grounds
    assert, "crystal-ball gazing" or speculation. I am not  satisfied  that
    there was any conflation of the children's best  interests  with  other
    factors. There is nothing in the argument referred to in the  grant  of
    permission of conflating the test under para 276ADE(iv)  of  the  Rules
    with the test of reasonableness under s.117B(6).   As  the  judge  made
    clear, the third appellant fell outside the provisions of  para  276ADE
    (iv).

26.  The judge went on to consider how his findings on  the  best  interests
    of the children should be  considered  in  the  light  of  the  broader
    assessment of proportionality in [35].  He was required  to  take  into
    account the considerations set out in s.117B of the 2002 Act.  There is
    no substance in the argument that he misinterpreted the  provisions  of
    sub-sections (4) and (5) which require a judge to give little weight to
    private life established whilst in the United Kingdom  precariously  or
    family life established whilst in the UK unlawfully.   The  meaning  of
    the sub-sections is clear and, moreover, in Rajendran (s.117B -  family
    life) [2016] UKUT 00138 the Upper Tribunal held  that  "precariousness"
    was a criterion of relevance to family life as  well  as  private  life
    cases as an established part of article 8 jurisprudence  and  that  the
    little weight provisions of s.117B(4)(a) and (5) of the 2002  Act  were
    confined to private life established at a time when  their  immigration
    status was unlawful or precarious but that did not mean when  answering
    the public interest question posed in  s.117A(2)-(3)  that  "precarious
    family life" criteria established on article 8 jurisprudence should  be
    ignored. I am not satisfied that the judge erred in law in his approach
    to the weight to be attached to private and family life in the light of
    the fact that the appellants  have  been  in  the  UK  unlawfully,  and
    therefore necessarily, precariously.

27.  In the context of s.117B(6) the judge found that it was  reasonable  to
    expect the third and fourth appellants  to  leave  the  UK  with  their
    parents. He took the third appellant's length of residence into account
    regarding that as a significant factor. But when reaching his decision,
    he was entitled to take into account wider public interest factors  and
    in particular the poor immigration history  of  the  first  and  second
    appellants in accordance with  EV  (Philippines)  at  para  37  and  MA
    (Pakistan) at para 45.

28.  In summary, when assessing whether it was unreasonable  to  expect  the
    children to leave the UK  and  when  assessing  proportionality,  I  am
    satisfied that the judge took account all relevant factors into account
    and reached a decision properly open to him on  the  evidence  for  the
    reasons he gave.


Decision

29.  The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law  and  its  decision  stands.
    The anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal  remains  in  force
    until further order.




Signed         H J  E  Latter                            Date:  30  December
    2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter


