
[pic]


Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/37580/2014

                                                      THE IMMIGRATION ACTS




|At  Field House                        | Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 28th August  2015                   |On 6th October 2015               |
|                                       |                                  |
|                                       |                                  |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between


                               MR FARHAN AHMED
                                      (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                          Appellant

                                     And


               THE  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                          Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      No appearance.
For the Respondent:   Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction


 1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan, born on 25th January 1983. He
    came to the United Kingdom in early 2011 as a student.

 2. On 3 July 2014 he applied for a Residence Card as proof of his
    entitlement to reside by reason of European Treaty free movement
    rights. This was on the basis of his marriage to Ms Andrea Nistor on 11
    February 2014. She is a national of Romania and the appellant said she
    was exercising Treaty rights as a student. He stated she was studying
    for an advanced Diploma in English at the London State College in
    Hounslow and he was financing her.

 3. His application was refused on 1 September 2014 on the basis his wife
    was not a qualified person within the meaning of regulation 4 and 6 of
    the immigration (EEA) regulations 2006 (`the 2006 regulations').

 4. Regulation 6(1)(e) provides that a qualified person includes someone
    who is an EEA national and is in the United Kingdom as a student.
    Regulation 4 (1)(d)(i) of the 2006 Regulations defines  a student as
    being someone who:

         is enrolled for the principal purpose of following a course of
         study (including vocational training), at a public or private
         establishment which is-
             (aa) financed from public funds; or
             (bb)otherwise recognised by the Secretary of State as an
             establishment which has been accredited for the purpose of
             providing such courses or training within the law or
             administrative practice of the part of the United Kingdom in
             which the establishment is located;
         (ii) has comprehensive sickness insurance cover in the United
         Kingdom; and
         (iii) assures the Secretary of State, by means of a declaration, or
         by such equivalent means as the person may choose, that he has
         sufficient resources not to become a burden on the social
         assistance system of the United Kingdom during his period of
         residence.


    Regulation 4(4) provides that for the purposes of paragraphs (1) (c)
    and (d) and paragraph (2), the resources of the person concerned and,
    where applicable, any family members are to be regarded as sufficient
    if -


         (a) they exceed the maximum level of resources which a British
         citizen and his family members may possess if he is to become
         eligible for social assistance under the United Kingdom benefit
         system; or
         (b) paragraph (a) does not apply but, taking into account the
         personal situation of the person concerned and, where applicable,
         any family members, it appears to the decision maker that the
         resources of the person or persons concerned should be regarded as
         sufficient.


 5. In the reasons for refusal letter the respondent said his wife was not
    a student because the college she was enrolled in was not recognised as
    bona fide.It was not on the respondent's list of Tier 4 approved
    sponsors.  His wife had to provide evidence she had access to funds of
    her own and could not rely as she did upon a declaration of financial
    support from the appellant.


 6. In a letter dated 18 November 2014 submitted to the First-tier Tribunal
    the appellant said there is no requirement for the college to be on the
    respondent's Tier 4 register. When the application was submitted the
    college was on the Tier 4 register but not by the time of decision.
    However, it continued to be listed in the Department of Education and
    Skills register. He stated he was financially supporting his wife
    through her studies and has paid her tuition fees. He stated there was
    no requirement that she have funds on her own account.



 The First tier Tribunal

 7. His appeal was heard on the papers by First-tier Judge Burns at Glasgow
    on 14 January 2015. In a decision promulgated on 27 January 2015 the
    appeal was dismissed. Judge Burns agreed with the respondent's approach
    as to what was a recognised establishment and that it was for the
    student personally to have funding. Judge Burns also agreed with the
    respondent's approach to article 8, namely that if the appellant wanted
    this considered he should make a separate fee charged application. In
    the alternative, on the limited information available, the judge
    concluded the requirements of appendix FM and paragraph 276 ADE were
    not met and there was no basis for considering article 8 outside the
    rules.


 The leave

 8. The appellant sought leave to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the basis
    the appellant's situation warranted consideration under article 8 as a
    freestanding right. It was argued that the decision was
    disproportionate and this amounted to a material error of law.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted, based on a different approach. This
    was granted on the basis it was arguable the judge erred  in finding
    the London State College did not meet the requirements of regulation
    4(d)(i)(bb) of the 2006 regulations given that it was listed in the
    Department of Education and Skills register. Leave was also granted on
    the basis it was arguable the judge erred in law in rejecting the
    financial declaration and the evidence of private sickness cover.
    Finally, permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was also
    arguable that the judge should have considered the appellant's article
    8 rights.

The Upper Tribunal

10. A letter from Morgan Mark solicitors dated 26 August 2015 is on file.
    It states that have received no instructions from the appellant and
    will not be attending. They state the appellant has been informed of
    the date of hearing and that he would be attending in person. In fact
    there was no such appearance. I was satisfied the appellant was aware
    of the hearing and that it is the interest of justice to proceed in his
    absence.


11. I have not had the benefit of any submissions on the points raised nor
    have I been referred to any authority. However, having considered the
    points at issue is my conclusion that no material error of law is
    disclosed.

12. The definition of a student was amended to reflect the fact that the
    Secretary of State's mechanism of approving private education
    institutions is not now via the Department for Education Register of
    providers but is via a system of accreditation by the Secretary of
    State for the Home Department (see the Immigration (European Economic
    Area) (Amendment) Regulations, 2012/1547, Sch 1, para 2(a) (July 16,
    2012). Consequently, Judge Byrns approval of the respondent's approach
    with regard to the course was correct.

13. No authority regarding resources has been referred to. The provisions
    of regulation 4 (1) (d) (iii) appears to allow for self-certification
    whereby the student declares they have sufficient resources not to be a
    burden. The source of the resources not identified. Presumably a simple
    declaration would not be sufficient because the respondent must be
    `assured'. Without further argument I am not in a position to say more.
    However, even if the judge were wrong in the approach taken it would
    not be material because the course requirement is not met.

14. The judge did comment on the appellant article 8 rights. The judge's
    enquiry was limited because, as is the position now, the appellant was
    not present and no argument was developed.  Those rights were
    considered in the context of the immigration rules, with the judge see
    no reason for going beyond the rules. It is correct in law that there
    is no need to go beyond the rules unless there is good reason.

15. The judge's primary stance was that article 8 considerations were
    premature. In this regard, I find the judge was correct and the
    position has subsequently been clarified. An amendment to the EEA
    Regulations 2006, effective from 6th April 2015, means that EEA
    nationals and their family members will only be able to appeal against
    an 'EEA decision' on the ground that it breaches their rights under the
    EU Treaties in respect of entry to, or residence in, the United
    Kingdom.  If they wish to raise asylum or human rights as part of their
    EEA appeal, they can only do this in response to a section 120 notice
    issued by the Home Office, or as a new matter raised before the
    Tribunal, but subject to the Secretary of State's consent.

16. Amirteymour and others (EEA appeals; human rights) [2015] UKUT 00466
    (IAC) held  that where no notice under section 120 of the 2002 Act has
    been served and where no EEA decision to remove has been made, an
    appellant cannot bring a Human Rights challenge to removal in an appeal
    under the EEA Regulations.




Decision.

It has not been established that there is a material error of law in the
decision of Judge Burns of the First-tier Tribunal. That decision,
dismissing the appellant's appeal, shall stand.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly


Anonymity.

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for anonymity. No application
for such an order has been made before me. I see no reason of substance for
making one

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly
























