

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/37123/2014
                                                               IA/37125/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|On 6 January 2017                             |On 7 January 2017            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                 A O FAYOYIN
                                      &
                                  O OLAEKAN
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellants:    No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                                DETERMINATION

 1. This determination is to be read along with the decision  on  error  of
    law issued on 9 November 2016, paragraph 12 of which  stated  that  the
    case would be listed "for consideration of any further  evidence  which
    may be tendered, for final submissions and for substantive decision  on
    6 January 2017."  That decision was issued along with notice of further
    hearing.

 2. A letter faxed to the Upper Tribunal  on  29  December  2016  from  the
    appellant's solicitors states:

    We refer to ... the directions issued by the  Upper  Tribunal  dated  9
    November 2016 ...

    We note that the appellants [have] 8  weeks  to  provide  the  required
    evidence of a PhD place ... the appellants are at  the  last  stage  of
    receiving  this  confirmation.   Unfortunately,  due  to  the   festive
    holidays, there have been delays by the  university  in  providing  the
    information required.

    We therefore request  that  a  further  8  weeks  be  allowed  for  the
    appellants to lodged the evidence.

    ...

 3. That letter was placed on the file.  The case  remained  listed  for  6
    January at 10 am.  There was no appearance on behalf of the  appellants
    at that time, and the UT had received  no  further  communication  from
    them.

 4. The UT is under no obligation to contact appellants or  representatives
    who do not appear at times fixed for  hearings.   However,  a  tribunal
    clerk telephoned the appellant's solicitors.  I was advised that  their
    response was that they had not been aware of the hearing, and that they
    had  requested  further  time.   The  clerk  then  told  solicitors  by
    telephone that the hearing would proceed at 11 am.

 5. The hearing proceeded at around 11.10 am.  Mr Matthews advised  that  a
    copy of the letter of 29 December 2016 had not  been  received  by  the
    respondent.  The UT provided a copy.  Mr Matthews further advised  that
    there had been no communication from the appellants to  the  respondent
    since the last hearing.

 6. Mr Matthews submitted thus.  The date had been  provisionally  notified
    orally at  the  previous  hearing,  then  confirmed  in  writing.   The
    appellants had no reason to believe that the hearing had been or  would
    be  adjourned.   Their  letter  of  29  December  does  not   ask   for
    adjournment; it  asks  for  further  time  to  provide  evidence.   The
    appellant has now had several  years  to  arrange  to  pursue  his  PhD
    studies.  It was very clear on  the  last  occasion  that  the  outcome
    depended on evidence of that possibility.  There was no direct evidence
    before the UT that a place might be available.  If there  were  a  real
    possibility, presumably the university concerned could  at  least  have
    indicated a date by which a decision would be forthcoming.   The  first
    appellant might have had some complaint of delay by  the  Home  Office,
    but that was historic.  There was nothing in that delay which gave  him
    or his family a general right to remain in the UK for  study  or  other
    private life reasons.  If he were able in future to secure a PhD  place
    at a UK university, it was open to him to apply from Nigeria for  entry
    clearance.  It was doubtful whether his academic  studies  fell  within
    the scope of Article 8 at all, but in any event there  was  nothing  to
    show that refusal of leave was a disproportionate outcome.

 7. I enquired what the position would  be  if  the  appellant  did  obtain
    evidence of a PhD place within the next few weeks, and then  sought  to
    have a student application  considered  without  leaving  the  UK.   Mr
    Matthews indicated that such an  application  would  be  a  matter  for
    consideration by the Secretary of State on its merits according to  the
    circumstances at the time, and that no indication could be given of the
    outcome.  If such an application were to be refused, there would be  no
    statutory right of appeal.

 8. In course of the submissions by Mr Matthews I was provided with a  copy
    of a faxed letter from the appellants' solicitors, received by  the  UT
    at 10:59, which says that in the absence of response to  their  earlier
    request they were not aware that appearance was required, and  requests
    an adjournment.

 9. I indicated that the hearing would proceed in absence of the appellants
    and their representative under rule 38, and that the appeals  would  be
    dismissed.

10. The appellants through their solicitors were  not  entitled  to  assume
    either that the hearing of 6 January would be adjourned or that further
    time would be granted to provide evidence.  Their first letter does not
    make it clear that adjournment is sought, and in any event preparations
    ought to have been made on the contrary assumption.

11. If arrangements are in progress with a university, it should have  been
    easy to produce evidence that at least a possibility  of  a  PhD  place
    exists, and a date by which the matter might be resolved.

12. Even if the appellant does in future  secure  a  PhD  place,  there  is
    nothing disproportionate in the requirement that he makes the  relevant
    application from Nigeria.

13. There has not been shown to be any feature of the  immigration  history
    or  of  the  private  life  of  the  appellants   such   that   it   is
    disproportionate now to expect them  to  comply  with  the  immigration
    rules, or to return together to Nigeria in absence  of  entitlement  to
    remain here under the rules.

14. It would be open to the appellants to ask the respondent to  waive  the
    requirement to make a student application from abroad, but  that  is  a
    matter for the respondent, based on the circumstances if  and  when  it
    arises.

15. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  been  set  aside.   The
    decision substituted is that the appeals, as originally brought to  the
    First-tier Tribunal, are dismissed.

16. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]

            6 January 2017
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


