

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/37123/2014
                                                             & IA/37125/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|                                          |Decision issued                  |
|                                          |On 26th July 2017                |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                           A O FAYOYIN & O OLAEKAN
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

             Decision on application to set aside under rule 43

 1. This decision should be read along with the UT's decision on  error  of
    law issued on 9 November 2016, determination dated 6 January 2017,  and
    directions dated 16 January 2017.

 2. By letter dated 12  January  2017  the  appellants  seek  to  have  the
    determination set aside.

 3. UT records show that notice of the hearing on 6 January 2017 was issued
    to the appellants, to their representatives, and to the respondent.

 4. The notice was received by the respondent.

 5. Even if neither appellants nor representatives  received  that  notice,
    the date of hearing was clearly indicated on the error of law  decision
    issued  on  9  November  2016,   which   the   appellants   and   their
    representatives did receive.

 6. Nothing happened thereafter which might have made it reasonable for the
    appellants or their representatives to assume that  the  hearing  would
    not proceed on 6 January 2017.

 7. No procedural irregularity has been shown.  By reference to rule 43 (1)
    (b) and (2), the UT is not entitled to set aside its determination.

 8. Even if any procedural irregularity could be derived from the foregoing
    circumstances, I would not find that the interests of  justice  require
    the decision to be set aside, for two reasons.

 9. The first reason is that the appellants have had a fair opportunity  to
    make their case.

10. The second reason is that it is not shown that there might in law  have
    been any outcome more favourable to the appellants than  the  situation
    in which they presently find themselves.

11. The appellants refer in this application to "the protection and  remedy
    available  where  the  rightful  continuation  of  studies   has   been
    unlawfully truncated by the respondent",  but  they  have  been  wholly
    vague about what that remedy might be, its foundation in law,  and  the
    jurisdiction of the FtT or UT to grant it.

12. The appellants blame their situation on historic error and delay by the
    respondent (although it might equally be attributed to their own  delay
    and intransigence), but they are unable to bring their case within  the
    requirements of the immigration rules,  and  it  remains  difficult  to
    discern entitlement to remain in the UK under article 8  of  the  ECHR,
    without complying with the terms of rules (unless based  on  concession
    by the respondent, for reasons falling short of an article 8 right).

13. Putting that difficulty aside, the practical position is that the first
    appellant now says that he has at last found a PhD place.  It  is  open
    to him to make an application to the respondent, showing that it  meets
    the requirements of the rules, other that the requirement to apply from
    outside the UK, and asking the  respondent  to  waive  that  particular
    requirement.  The respondent will be bound to deal with that request on
    its merits.  Such an  outcome  is  as  much  as  the  appellants  could
    reasonably  expect.   Assuming  there  is  a  remedy  within  the  UT's
    jurisdiction, it would be no more  than  to  allow  him  to  make  that
    application.

14. The UT declines to set aside its determination dated  6  January  2017.
    That determination stands.

            [pic]


            10 February 2017
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
