
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37198/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 8 August 2014                                |On 7 October 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                            mankaiarkarasi ratnam

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Solomon, instructed by Soma & Co, Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent, Mankaiarkarasi Ratnam was born on 8 March 1946 and is a
    female citizen of Sri Lanka.  She entered the United Kingdom in  August
    2012 as a visitor.  In October 2012, she applied for  indefinite  leave
    to remain outside the Immigration Rules.  That application was  refused
    by a decision of the appellant dated 21 August 2013.  In addition,  the
    appellant gave directions  for  the  respondent's  removal  by  way  of
    directions under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality
    Act 2006.  The respondent appealed against that decision to the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Maciel) which, in a determination  promulgated  on
    10 March 2014, allowed the appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    Secretary of State now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.
     I shall hereafter refer to the appellant as "the  respondent"  and  to
    the respondent as "the appellant" (as they appeared respectively before
    the First-tier Tribunal).

 2. The appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  turns  on  a  single  issue.   The
    appellant's application was considered under paragraph 276ADE of HC 395
    (as amended).  The appellant could not satisfy the requirement to  have
    lived continuously in the United Kingdom for more  than  twenty  years,
    but claimed that she  had  "no  ties  (including  social,  cultural  or
    family) with the country to which she would have to go if  required  to
    leave the UK [Sri Lanka]" (see Paragraph 276ADE, (vi)).  The First-tier
    Tribunal  heard  evidence  from  the  appellant's   daughter,   Mantila
    Balachandran and also Mr Thuraiappah Balachandran, the appellant's son-
    in-law.  The judge considered that  oral  evidence  together  with  the
    documentary  evidence,  which  included  a  report  from  the   general
    practitioner currently treating the appellant.  The  judge  found  [21]
    that the appellant's husband had died and her  children  had  left  Sri
    Lanka.  The appellant still has siblings  living  in  Sri  Lanka.   The
    judge found that the appellant did not have a "continued connection  to
    life" in Sri Lanka.  That expression is a quotation from what the judge
    describes  [18]  as  "modernised  guidance"  (sic)  followed   by   the
    respondent's case workers as to the implementation of paragraph  276ADE
    although the judge does not provide any detailed source reference.  The
    expression appears in a  passage  of  the  guidance  document  entitled
    "Assessing whether there are 'no ties' (including social,  cultural  or
    family) with the country of origin."  This states that:

         When you assess whether an applicant  has  'no  ties'...  with  the
         country to which they would have to go if required to leave the  UK
         a 'tie' means something more than just having a nationality of  the
         country or having remote or abstract  links  to  the  country.   It
         involves there  being  a  continued  connection  to  life  in  that
         country, something which ties an  applicant  to  their  country  of
         origin.

 3. Whatever the exact provenance of the  "modernised  guidance"  I  accept
    that it (1) emanates from the Home Office and (2) represents an attempt
    to apply the ratio of Ogundimu (Article 8 - new rules)  Nigeria  [2013]
    UKUT 00060 (IAC).  The head note of Ogundimu provides:


   1. The expectation is that it  will  be  an  exceptional  case  in  which
      permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal should be granted where the
      lodging of the application for permission is more than 28 days out  of
      time. Where, in such a case, a judge is minded  to  grant  permission,
      the preferable course is to provide an opportunity to  the  respondent
      to make  representations.  This  might  be  achieved  by  listing  the
      permission application for oral hearing.


   2. The introduction of the new Immigration Rules (HC 194) does not affect
      the circumstance that when considering Article 8 of the  Human  Rights
      Convention "for a settled migrant who has lawfully spent  all  or  the
      major part of his or her childhood and youth in  [this]  country  very
      serious reasons are required to  justify  expulsion."  The  principles
      derived from Maslov v Austria [2008] ECHR 546 are still be applied.

   3. Paragraph 399(a) of the Immigration Rules conflicts with the Secretary
      of State's duties under Article 3 of the UN Convention on  the  Rights
      of the Child 1989 and section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
      Immigration Act 2009. Little weight should be attached  to  this  Rule
      when consideration is being given to the assessment of proportionality
      under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.

   4. The natural and ordinary meaning of the word 'ties' in paragraph  399A
      of the Immigration Rules imports a concept  involving  something  more
      than merely remote or  abstract  links  to  the  country  of  proposed
      deportation or removal. It involves there being a connection  to  life
      in that country. Consideration of whether a person has  'no  ties'  to
      such a country must  involve  a  rounded  assessment  of  all  of  the
      relevant circumstances and is not to be limited to  'social,  cultural
      and family' circumstances.


    On the facts of the appeal before it, the Tribunal found:


    124. We recognise that the text under the rules  is  an  exacting  one.
    Consideration of whether a person has 'no ties' to  such  country  must
    involve a rounded assessment of all the relevant circumstances  and  is
    not to be limited  to  'social,  cultural  and  family'  circumstances.
    Nevertheless, we are satisfied that the  appellant  has  no  ties  with
    Nigeria. He is a stranger to the country, the people, and  the  way  of
    life. His father may have ties but they are not ties of  the  appellant
    or any ties that could result in support to the appellant in the  event
    of  his  return  there.  Unsurprisingly,  given  the  length   of   the
    appellant's residence here,  all  of  his  ties  are  with  the  United
    Kingdom. Consequently the  appellant  has  so  little  connection  with
    Nigeria so as to mean that the consequences  for  him  in  establishing
    private life there at the age of 28, after 22 years  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom, would be 'unjustifiably harsh'.

    125. Whilst each case turns on its own facts, circumstances relevant to
    the assessment of whether a person has ties to  the  country  to  which
    they would have to go if they were required to leave the United Kingdom
    must include, but are not limited to: the length of time a  person  has
    spent in the country to which he would have to go if he  were  required
    to leave the United Kingdom, the age that the person left that country,
    the exposure that person has had to the cultural norms of that country,
    whether that person speaks the language of the country, the  extent  of
    the  family and friends that person has in the country to which  he  is
    being deported or removed and the quality  of  the  relationships  that
    person has with those friends and family members.

 4. In the present appeal, the Tribunal found that it accepted that:

         The extent of the medical conditions is  joint  pains  (sic),  this
         means that [the appellant] requires the level of care which she  is
         not getting in Sri Lanka.  She  needs  assistance  to  do  everyday
         tasks and she was not getting that assistance there despite her son-
         in-law paying for it.  I note that a carer would have to travel  to
         her village and many may be reluctant to do so.  I accept that  the
         son-in-law has encountered difficulties in  securing  a  carer  and
         that carer has proved to be inadequate.  I note that  there  is  an
         elderly sister in Sri Lanka but she is getting increasingly  unable
         to assist  the  appellant  and  increasingly  unable  to  meet  the
         appellant when the latter was in Sri Lanka.  The brothers live some
         distance  away  from  the  appellant  are  busy  with   their   own
         families... the appellant was living an isolated life in Sri  Lanka
         with little assistance from a carer...   I  find  that  securing  a
         carer to provide this assistance [with  bathing  and  cooking]  has
         been unsuccessful for this family who are loathe to attempt  to  do
         so again.  The appellant is settled with her family  in  the  UK...
         She has four of her six children in the UK.

 5. The appellant seeks to rely on an Administrative Court judgment (Bailey
    [2014] EWHC 1078 (Admin)).  Andrews J found that:

         However, taking the Claimant's case at its absolute  highest,  even
         if one were to assume in Mrs Bailey's favour that she had no family
         ties whatsoever with Uganda, (in that she has no family members  to
         whom she could return or with whom she could make contact) and even
         if one were to ignore the half siblings on the basis that she never
         had any contact with them anyway, that is not necessarily an end of
         the matter.

 6. Andrews J found Ogundimu and also Green (Article 8 - new rules)  [2013]
    UKUT 254 (IAC) to be of assistance.  At [14]-[15] she concluded:
   1. The court had already made it clear that consideration  of  whether  a
      person has "no ties" to such other  country  must  involve  a  rounded
      assessment of all the relevant circumstances and is not to be  limited
      to social, cultural and family circumstances. It  follows  from  that,
      that no single one of those factors can have a decisive bearing on the
      determination of whether there are "no ties" and thus  the  mere  fact
      that an applicant has no family or friends in the country will not  in
      and of itself lead inextricably to the conclusion that  there  are  no
      ties. I agree with those submissions.
   1. In the present case, the decision maker  was  entitled  to  take  into
      account the fact that Mrs Bailey had spent most of her formative years
      in Uganda, that  she  had  only  come  to  this  jurisdiction  in  her
      twenties, that she had only been within this jurisdiction for  some  8
      years, that she had clearly had an exposure to the cultural  norms  of
      her country of origin,  and  that  she  spoke  the  language  of  that
      country. In the light of all those factors,  in  my  judgment,  it  is
      impossible to say that the decision that she did not qualify under the
      relevant sub-rule of paragraph 276ADE was irrational, or unlawful,  or
      Wednesbury unreasonable, even if one were to assume in her favour that
      she has no friends or relatives in Uganda. It plainly is not the  sort
      of case with which the Upper Tribunal was  concerned  in  Ogundimu  or
      indeed in Green. Both of those were cases  involving  people  who  had
      come to this country as very young children and been granted leave  to
      remain in the jurisdiction, who had  no  ties  whatsoever  with  their
      country of origin, but who had then committed  criminal  offences  and
      therefore appeared to be subject to  compulsory  deportation  to  that
      country, subject only to Article 8 considerations. But this is  not  a
      case in which it could possibly be concluded that Mrs Bailey would  be
      a complete stranger to Uganda, however strong the ties  that  she  has
      formed in the UK since coming to  this  country  and  overstaying  her
      visa.

 7. In light of the fact that the applicant  in  Bailey  would  not  be  "a
    complete stranger to Uganda" Andrews J found that "the main  ground  of
    challenge simply does not get off the ground, regardless of any further
    information relied on by the Secretary of State in relation  to  family
    members in Uganda." [16].

 8.  I  consider  that  it  is  significant   that   the   (non-exhaustive)
    "circumstances relevant to the assessment of whether a person has  ties
    to the country of return" as set out in Ogundimu [125] closely link the
    circumstances of the appellant to the  country  of  return.   In  other
    words, whilst a decision maker must look at all  the  circumstances  in
    the round, for the purpose of satisfying the requirements of the  Rule,
    it is the appellant's relation to the country of  return  which  is  of
    crucial importance rather than the strength of ties with family members
    and  others  within  the  United  Kingdom  or,  indeed,  the   personal
    circumstances  (for  example,  mental  or  physical  health)   of   the
    particular appellant.  In the present appeal, there is no escaping  the
    fact that this appellant has spent the vast majority of her life living
    in Sri Lanka.  She speaks one of the principal languages of the country
    and her siblings and possibly other relatives are still  living  there.
    The only factor which  the  judge  identified  and  which  led  her  to
    conclude that the  appellant  had  no  ties  with  Sri  Lanka  was  the
    appellant's physical health and its consequences upon  her  ability  to
    care for herself.  In  other  words,  had  the  judge  found  that  the
    appellant was self-caring then, notwithstanding the fact that  she  may
    not have frequent contact with her siblings  and  other  relatives,  it
    simply could not have been asserted that  she  had  no  ties  with  Sri
    Lanka.  I find that, whatever else it may entail,  the  application  of
    the "no ties" rule must remain very firmly focused  on  an  appellant's
    links with the people, institutions and culture of the country to which
    he or she will be returned.  I do not  accept  that  an  appellant  can
    cease to have ties with his or her own country of nationality simply on
    account of a medical condition or its consequences  for  the  appellant
    either in the United Kingdom or in the country of return.  To  take  an
    extreme example, a British citizen who was born and lived all his  life
    in the United Kingdom but who falls into a coma cannot be said to  have
    lost all ties to the United Kingdom as a  consequence  of  his  medical
    condition.

 9. Mr Solomon, for the appellant, was right to submit that the  assessment
    of the appellant's ties with Sri Lanka was for the judge to  decide  on
    the basis of the evidence.  I  find,  however,  that  her  analysis  is
    flawed for the reasons I have given above.  I  accept  that  the  judge
    found that the family have had some difficulty in employing appropriate
    carers for the appellant in Sri Lanka but I do not  accept  that  those
    difficulties have, as the judge  effectively  found,  severed  all  the
    appellant's ties with that country.

10. I set aside the determination of the First-tier Tribunal.  I  have  re-
    made the decision.  I canvassed  with  Mr  Solomon  and  Mr  Tufan  the
    possibility of re-making the decision on  the  basis  of  the  evidence
    already  before  the  Tribunal  and  in  the  event  I  set  aside  the
    determination.  Both agreed that there would be no need for  a  further
    hearing or additional submissions.  Mr Solomon gave me a  copy  of  his
    skeleton argument.

11. It follows from what I have said above that I find that  the  appellant
    is unable to satisfy the requirements of paragraph 276ADE.  I find that
    she does not have "no ties" to Sri Lanka.

12. The question then arises as to whether I should  proceed  to  determine
    the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds outside  the  Rules.   It  is  the
    appellant's case that it  would  be  disproportionate  for  her  to  be
    removed to Sri Lanka where she would be unable to enjoy  the  care  and
    assistance with "normal everyday tasks" such as dressing,  bathing  and
    cooking.  I find that, whilst the  family  may  have  had  difficulties
    obtaining professional care for her in Sri Lanka  in  the  past,  those
    difficulties do not persuade me that it would be  difficult  let  alone
    impossible to obtain such care for the appellant should she  return  to
    Sri Lanka.  What is clear is that the United Kingdom  family  would  be
    prepared to pay for such care.  The  appellant's  diagnosis  of  "joint
    pain", whilst it may cause her some problems with her  daily  life,  is
    not by any definition a serious or debilitating illness.   Furthermore,
    set against the appellant's wish to remain living in the United Kingdom
    with her family there remains the public interest  concerned  with  her
    removal.  The appellant entered on a visit visa which she has  acquired
    by persuading the Entry Clearance Officer that she intended a temporary
    visit to the United Kingdom at the end of which she would return to Sri
    Lanka.  Instead, she has  applied  to  remain  here  permanently.   The
    public interest concerned with the removal of individuals who behave in
    such a way is, in my view, a strong one.  Further, there is nothing  in
    the circumstances of  this  appellant  which  falls  to  be  considered
    outside the provisions of the Immigration Rules (see MF  (Article  8  -
    new rules) Nigeria [2012] UKUT 393 (IAC),  Gulshan  (Article  8  -  new
    rules - correct approach) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC)  and  Nagre  R
    (on the application of) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin)).   The  circumstances  of  the  appellant  (an
    elderly woman with minor health complaints  who  wishes  to  spend  her
    retirement receiving care in the United Kingdom home of  her  children)
    are hardly unusual.  Whilst  returning  to  Sri  Lanka  may  cause  the
    appellant some hardship by comparison with the  more  comfortable  life
    which she currently enjoys here in the United Kingdom, the consequences
    of returning her can hardly be described as unjustifiably harsh.

13. My primary finding is that the circumstances of this appellant  do  not
    justify the Tribunal considering the appeal on Article 8  ECHR  grounds
    outside the Immigration Rules.  Even if I am  wrong  in  that  finding,
    then I would conclude that the appellant's removal to Sri Lanka is  not
    disproportionate when it is set against the public interest.

DECISION

14. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated  on  10  March
    2014 is set aside.  I  have  re-made  the  decision.   The  appellant's
    appeal against  the  immigration  decision  dated  21  August  2013  is
    dismissed under the Immigration Rules.   The  appeal  is  dismissed  on
    human rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR).





Signed                              Date 20 September 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
