
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37270/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14th April 2014                            |On 14th May 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                               MR TARIQ NASEER

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Bagral, (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 13th March 1967.

2.   On 25th May 2013 he made an application for  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.  His  application
    was refused by the respondent on 23rd August 2013, the reason for  that
    refusal is clearly stated in the decision as follows:-

         "Bank statements must be original statements or internet and ad hoc
         printouts which must contain all  the  personal  information  (bank
         name  and  logo/account  holder's   name/account   number/date   of
         statement/amount of money available) and be stamped and  signed  by
         the bank as described under paragraph  1B  of  Appendix  C  of  the
         Immigration Rules.  As the bank statements you submitted in support
         of this application do not show a date stamp countersigned  by  the
         bank, these documents are not acceptable".


3.   The appellant sought to appeal against that decision which  appeal  was
    determined upon the papers by First-tier Tribunal Judge McDade.  It was
    noted by the Judge that the appellant sought to challenge the  decision
    on the basis that the evidential flexibility policy of  the  respondent
    had not been followed.

4.   The Judge held that the evidential flexibility  policy  did  not  apply
    and that plainly the documents were defective on their face.  In  those
    circumstances the appeal was dismissed.

5.   Grounds of appeal were submitted against that  decision  on  the  basis
    that it was not a requirement of the Rules that the  bank  accounts  be
    signed and secondly that even if that had been the case the  respondent
    ought to have drawn the attention of the appellant to that  shortcoming
    under the terms of the evidential flexibility policy.

6.   In any event the discretion could have been exercised in favour of  the
    appellant.

7.   Leave to appeal was granted on the basis that there would  seem  to  be
    no requirement for bank statements to be countersigned under  paragraph
    1B of Appendix C and in any event paragraph 245AA  of  the  Immigration
    Rules was in force from September 2012, documents in the  wrong  format
    were subject to request by  UKBA  paragraph  245AA(b)(ii)(iii)  of  the
    Rules irrespective of the outcome in Rodriguez [2014] EWCA Civ 2.

8.   Thus the matter comes before me in pursuance of that grant of leave.

9.   I was provided with a copy of Appendix C paragraph 1B  which  was  then
    in operation.

10.  Appendix C paragraph 1B(iv) provides as follows:-

     Statements must be either:

    (1)  printed on the bank's or building society's letterhead,
    (2)  electronic bank or building society statements, accompanied  by  a
         supporting letter from the bank or  building  society,  on  company
         headed paper, confirming the statement provided is authentic, or


    (3)  electronic  bank  or  building  society  statements,  bearing  the
         official stamp of a bank or building society on every page.

11.  Mr Bramble who represents  the  respondents  most  fairly  acknowledged
    that in the Rules as at the material time there was no requirement  for
    the stamp of the bank to  be  countersigned  by  the  bank.   Thus  the
    caseworker who had drafted the decision of 23rd August was in error.

12.  He also submitted to me  the  details  of  the  evidential  flexibility
    policy which is version 2 as valid from 20th May 2013.   In  particular
    he drew my attention to the Section  which  deals  with  the  documents
    which it may be appropriate for the  caseworker  to  request  for  each
    Tier.

13.  In relation to Tier 4 the following is set out:-

    Maintenance:


    Missing bank statements from a series.


    Missing information from bank letters.


    Evidence that is copied instead of an original.


    Bank statements not in the desired format.

14.  He most properly  agreed  that  under  the  terms  of  the  policy  the
    appellant could reasonably have expected the caseworker to have  raised
    concerns as to the format of the documents as submitted.

15.  Clearly in  requiring  a  signature  the  caseworker  who  drafted  the
    decision was in  error.   That  error  was  replicated  by  the  Judge.
    Accordingly the evidence presented and the findings made  upon  it  are
    unsafe.  I have no hesitation therefore in setting aside  the  decision
    to be remade.

16.  Mr Bramble raised the question as to the nature of the bank  statements
    that had been submitted and which can be seen  at  Appendix  E  of  the
    respondent's bundle of documents.  These certainly seemed to  have  the
    appearance of being printed from the  internet.   They  bear  the  bank
    stamp that are clearly identifiable as statements from the  Lloyds  TSB
    Bank.  It was not however immediately apparent from the format  of  the
    statement as to whether  that  was  an  online  account  or  simply  an
    ordinary account which could be accessed online.

17.  The appellant was asked about the account and he seemed to  be  unclear
    as to its precise nature.  He said  that  he  did  access  the  account
    online but also he received bank  statements  on  a  regular  basis  in
    relation to that account.  He  presented  to  me  the  bank  statements
    printed on the bank's letterhead  for  the  same  period  as  the  bank
    statements at Annex E ............ indeed is reflective of  that  which
    is recorded at Annex E.

18.  Mr Bramble agreed that it was not entirely clear what was  the  meaning
    of online account ............ it was an account purely created  online
    and had no physicality of paper returns about it.

19.  It seems to me however I so find that it is  not  necessary  to  pursue
    that line of inquiry in all the circumstances.  As I have  indicated  I
    was handed the statement for the relevant period printed on the  bank's
    letterhead, as well as the electronic version with the bank stamp  upon
    it.

20.  In those circumstances I do have little hesitation in finding that  the
    documentation that the appellant now produces is such as to satisfy the
    requirements of Appendix C, paragraph 1B.  It is  significant  that  no
    issue was taken as to the nature of the bank statement but rather  that
    it had not been signed.

21.  I find therefore that the bank statement which was  submitted  and  set
    out in Annex E was such as  to  satisfy  the  requirements  or  in  the
    alternative that the headed bank statement was such as to  satisfy  the
    requirements of the Rules.  It  was  the  only  matter  raised  by  the
    respondent  in  the  refusal  letter.   Indeed  I  find  that  had  the
    evidential flexibility policy been implemented  as  it  should  that  a
    request to the appellant would have elicited a  positive  and  accurate
    document ............ itself.

22.  In all the circumstances therefore the  appeal  is  allowed  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  Article 8 of the ECHR  is  allowed  in  conjunction
    with that appeal as it would  be  clearly  disproportionate  to  remove
    someone who had a lawful right to remain.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

