
IAC-AH-KEW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37412/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 8th April 2015                             |On 17th April 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                MR DAVID ESSI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Adjarho (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Jeromes, promulgated on 30th December 2014, following  a  hearing
    at Birmingham on 16th December 2014.  In the determination,  the  judge
    allowed  the  appeal  of  David  Essi,  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the
    Respondent Secretary  of  State,  subsequently  applied  for,  and  was
    granted, permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  and  thus  the
    matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, who was born on 7th August 1979.
     He applied for a residence  card  as  confirmation  of  his  right  of
    residence under European  Community  law,  as  the  spouse  of  an  EEA
    national, namely, Ludmila Eugenia Fermina, claiming that she  exercised
    treaty rights in the UK.  The application was dated 28th January  2014.
    The Respondent Secretary of State issued  her  refusal  letter  on  9th
    September 2014.  Subsequently, the Appellant appealed on 22nd September
    2014.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge was hearing an appeal "on the papers" and there was  no  oral
    evidence before  him.   Neither  were  any  of  the  parties  obviously
    present.  The refusal letter is predicated on three reasons.

 4. First, that the  Appellant  failed  to  supply  relevant  documentation
    showing that he and the Sponsor are in a genuine relationship.

 5. Second, that he  failed  to  attend  the  marriage  interviews  on  two
    occasions.

 6. Third, that the fact  that  the  marriage  took  place  only  when  the
    Appellant's leave to remain expired was significant  and  went  to  the
    genuineness of the marriage.

 7. The judge looked at the reasons for the Appellant's non-attendance  for
    the interviews.  When he was first asked to attend a marriage interview
    on 6th June 2014, he failed to attend, and gave  his  reasons  as  "not
    feeling well," and maintained that he had written to the Respondent  by
    email which the Respondent acknowledged.  The judge observed,  however,
    that

         "There is no copy of the email, medical report  or  acknowledgement
         in the bundle although there  is  a  copy  of  a  letter  from  the
         Appellant's GP dated 2nd June 2014 which confirms he contacted  his
         GP  to  request  a  certificate  to  cover  absence   from   work."
         (Paragraph 15)

 8. This is, obviously, not the same thing.   Second,  when  he  was  again
    invited for interview on 2nd September 2014, the Appellant again failed
    to attend and now explained that he and the Sponsor missed their train,
    but then says at paragraph  12  of  his  witness  statement  that,  "my
    solicitors sent our flight tickets to the Home Office explaining why we
    did not attend which the Home Office  acknowledged."   Again,  however,
    "there is no copy of the letter/email from the  solicitors,  copies  of
    the tickets, or acknowledgements in the bundle" (see  paragraph  17  of
    the determination).

 9. It was in these  circumstances,  that  the  judge  looked  at  the  law
    applying in the case of marriages of convenience.  Due regard was given
    to the established decision of Papajorgi  (Greece)  [2012]  UKUT  0038.
    The judge observed that "there  is  no  burden  at  the  outset  of  an
    application on a Claimant to demonstrate that the marriage  to  an  EEA
    national is not one of convenience."  The judge added,  however,  that,
    in view of the timing of the marriage (which was after the  Appellant's
    leave to remain expired) and given the failure to attend the  marriages
    interviews,  "the  Respondent  had   evidence   justifying   reasonable
    suspicion that the marriage  was  entered  into  for  the  pre-dominant
    purpose of securing residence rights" (paragraph 19).

10. Significantly, the judge then went on to state that,

         "Although I am troubled by the failure of  the  Appellant  and  the
         Sponsor to attend the interviews and I am not satisfied with  their
         uncorroborated explanations, on consideration of all the evidence I
         conclude that the Appellant has discharged the evidential burden of
         addressing those concerns (and resulting suspicions)  as  there  is
         ample documentation showing that he had been co-habiting  with  the
         Sponsor since the marriage."  (See paragraph 19).

11. The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

12. The grounds of application make two essential points.  First, that none
    of the documents submitted in the evidence are  jointly  addressed  and
    they merely show that the Appellant and his Sponsor are living  at  the
    same address.  They do not go  to  the  genuineness  of  the  marriage.
    Second,  the  Respondent  notes  that  the  parties  were   given   the
    opportunity on two occasions  to  attend  the  marriage  interview  but
    failed to do so and the reasons they have not given for  not  doing  so
    are uncorroborated.

13. On 11th February 2015, permission to appeal was granted.

14. At the hearing before me on 8th April 2015, Mr  Kandola,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Respondent Secretary of  State,  stated  that  additional
    reasons were provided in the refusal letter to say that  the  Appellant
    only got married after his visa expired.  Given that this is the  case,
    paragraph 19 of the determination fell into error.  It was not  at  all
    clear why the judge had allowed  the  appeal.   Of  course,  the  judge
    refers to "ample documentation" but  this  is  not  addressed  to  both
    parties and so it cannot be said that the marriage was  a  genuine  and
    subsisting one.  Indeed, the judge does not even make any  findings  in
    relation to the marriage, where it took place, how the parties met, and
    so forth.

15. Second, given that the appeal was requested to be "on the  papers"  the
    judge should have been much more rigorous in his  approach,  especially
    where the parties had elected not to attend.   There  is  no  interview
    record here because the Appellant and the Sponsor chose not ever to  be
    interviewed.

16. For his part, Mr Adjarho submitted that the judge did properly set  out
    all the concerns that he had, and given that he  did  in  fact  do  so,
    before coming to a decision which allowed the appeal, only showed  that
    all the relevant matters had  been  taken  into  account.   Nothing  of
    relevance had been overlooked.  In these circumstances, it could not be
    said that there was an error of law.

Error of Law

17. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see Section  12(1))  of  TCEA
    [2007] such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are  as
    follows.  First, there is the application of the Tribunal  decision  in
    Papajorgi (Greece) [2012] UKUT 0038.  What this states is that  whereas
    there is "no burden at the outset of an application on  a  Claimant  to
    demonstrate  that  a  marriage  to  an  EEA  national  is  not  one  of
    convenience," there is, however, "an evidential burden on the  Claimant
    to address evidence justifying reasonable suspicion that  the  marriage
    is entered into for  the  predominant  purpose  of  securing  residence
    rights."

18. This is a case where the Appellant did not attend, for whatever reason,
    marriage interviews on two separate occasions.  It is also a case where
    he  got  married  after  his  leave  to  remain  expired.    In   these
    circumstances, the Respondent Secretary of State was bound to have held
    a  justifiable   and   reasonable   suspicion,   especially,   as   the
    documentation that the Appellant also relied upon, was not addressed in
    the joint names of  himself  and  his  Sponsor,  Miss  Ludmila  Eugenia
    Fermina.   Whereas  it  is  clear  that  the  judge  has  painstakingly
    approached the matter before him, and even observed that "I am troubled
    by the failure of the Appellant and the Sponsor to attend  interviews,"
    and adding that what they had was "their  uncorroborated  explanations"
    which she did not accept.  In light of this, it simply did  not  follow
    that the "ample documentation showing that he has been co-habiting with
    the Sponsor since the marriage" discharged the burden of proof upon the
    Appellant,  given  that  the  judge  had  already   referred   to   the
    "uncorroborated explanations" with respect to  non-attendance,  and  he
    remained troubled by this.  There was also no  reference  to  the  fact
    that the marriage had taken place after the leave of the Appellant  had
    expired.  Furthermore, as Mr Kandola points out, no findings were  made
    in relation to how the parties got married, or where, or how.  In these
    circumstances, there must be an error of law.

Re-Making the Decision

19. I have re-made the decision  on  the  basis  of  the  findings  of  the
    original judge, the evidence before him, and  the  submissions  that  I
    have heard today.  I am allowing this appeal to the extent that  it  is
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal under Practice Statement  7.2,
    to be determined by a judge  other  than  Judge  Jeromes  so  that  the
    parties can attend and be cross-examined on the evidence that they wish
    to rely upon.

20. Mr Adjarho  submitted  that  this  would  be  an  opportunity  for  the
    Secretary of State to invite the Appellant and the Sponsor again for an
    interview, but this must be  entirely  a  matter  for  the  Respondent,
    having attempted to do so on two separate occasions unsuccessfully.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original judge.  I re-make the decision as follows.  This appeal is  allowed
to the extent that it  is  remitted  back  to  a  judge  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal to be determined by a judge other than Judge Jeromes de novo.

No anonymity order is made.



Signed        Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    15th April 2015



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed        Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    15th April 2015

