
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37917/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 January 2015                    |On 18 March 2015                     |
|Oral judgment                        |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              mr Mizanur Rahman
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Glass, SEB Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a determination  of
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mayall,  promulgated  on  3  October  2014
    following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 19 September 2014, in which  the
    Judge allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  refusal  of  the
    Secretary of State to vary his leave to remain so as to permit  him  to
    remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier  4  (General)  Student  Migrant.
    The applicant entered the United Kingdom lawfully following a grant  of
    leave as a Tier 4 Student on 10 February 2010 valid  until  31  January
    2013.  On that day, 31 January 2013, he made an application for further
    leave to remain which was that refused in the decision dated 27  August
    2013.   The  application  was  refused  under  the  provisions  of  the
    Immigration Rules and a direction for the appellant's removal from  the
    United Kingdom made pursuant to Section 47 of the  Immigration,  Asylum
    and Nationality Act 2006.

2.   The reasons for the refusal are set out in clear terms as follows:

         "In your application you submitted an education certificate  issued
         by AABPS.  I am satisfied that the  documents  were  false  because
         AABPS have confirmed that you have not been registered with them or
         obtained an award accredited by them.  As false documents have been
         submitted in relation to  your  application  it  is  refused  under
         322(1A) of the Immigration Rules."

3.   The evidence that was relied upon by the decision maker is in the  form
    of  an  exchange  of  emails  between  the  decision  maker   and   the
    verification officer at AABPS.  On 22 April 2013 an email was  sent  to
    the email address verifications@aabps.co.uk  attaching  the  award  and
    asking for the verification staff to confirm the  award  shown  on  the
    attached scan.  The  reply  from  the  verification  team  sent  by  an
    administrative team leader on 23 April 2013 is in the following terms:

         "Dear Sir/Madam,

         Further to your recent correspondence regarding the  authentication
         of certificate.   We  can  verify  that  this  certificate  is  not
         authentic.  This student has not been registered with AABPS and has
         not obtained an award accredited by AABPS."

4.   The appellant appealed  to  challenge  that  decision  both  under  the
    Immigration Rules and Article 8 ECHR grounds.  The judge noted  in  the
    determination the nature of the decision, the grounds of appeal,  notes
    regarding the evidence provided and submissions made.  It  is  in  fact
    noted in paragraph 20 that  the  appellant's  representative  confirmed
    that there was in fact no Article 8 claim so  the  judge  has  made  no
    error of law in not going on to deal with that aspect  of  the  matter.
    It appears conceded that in fact that was withdrawn by the  appellant's
    representative before the judge on that day.

5.   The law clearly states that where an allegation of forgery  or  falsity
    is made the burden of proving that falls upon  the  person  making  the
    allegation.  In this case it is the Secretary of  State  as  the  judge
    correctly identifies  and  directs  himself  in  paragraph  23  of  the
    determination.   The standard is the  balance  of  probabilities.   The
    judge also stated: "Although I bear very much in  mind  that  the  more
    serious an allegation the more cogent the evidence will have to  be  to
    satisfy me to that standard."  That was a correct legal  self-direction
    and no  legal  error  has  been  substantiated  on  the  basis  of  the
    submissions made and the material I have considered.

6.   In paragraph 26 of the determination the judge sets out  the  paragraph
    from the email from AABPS to which I have referred above.

7.   In paragraphs 27 and 28 the judge  makes  some  observations  regarding
    the nature of the evidence to which I shall refer shortly.

8.   At 29 he refers to  the  appellant's  own  evidence  which  includes  a
    letter from Techshed who are  the  college  where  he  claims  to  have
    studied and who he stated issued him with the certificates in question.
     I accept from the material which has been received that Techshed  were
    an accredited supplier of services  and  accredited  by  AABPS  at  the
    relevant period that the certificates were issued.  The  judge  records
    what he describes as disturbing features about the appellant's evidence
    as a discrepancy as to the course dates and the  dates  which  Techshed
    say he undertook the course arose.  There is a discrepancy  as  to  the
    date of the letter from Techshed and  there  was  no  evidence  of  his
    having paid fees to Techshed.

9.   The judge refers in paragraph 30 to the appellant's  own  evidence  and
    in paragraph 31 to a degree awarded by the University  of  Wales.   The
    judge makes the comment that it was difficult to see why the  appellant
    needed to submit the AABPS certificate in order to obtain leave for his
    current proposed course of study.  The degree itself  would  have  been
    enough.  Although that may be an observation by the judge that  may  or
    may not have merit, it is irrelevant because the disputed  certificates
    were submitted  and  it  was  on  the  basis  of  seeking  confirmation
    regarding the accreditation of those certificates that the  email  from
    AABPS was issued.

10.  The core finding by the judge is to be found in  paragraph  32  of  the
    determination where the judge states as follows:

         "The allegation that he submitted a forged certificate is of course
         a serious one.  As set out above it would require  cogent  evidence
         to satisfy me on the balance of probabilities that he was guilty of
         such an act.  In balancing as I must all of the evidence  including
         the oral evidence of  the  appellant  and  the  lack  of  any  real
         evidence from the respondent I am not satisfied to that standard."

11.  On reading of the grounds of challenge, which are effectively that  the
    judge erred in his treatment of the evidence  from  AABPS,  there  does
    appear on the face of it to be a challenge to the weight given  to  the
    various factors by the judge.  I referred earlier to  the  case  of  SS
    [2012] EWCA Civ 155.  That was a case involving former  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Spencer who considered a medical report in a Sri Lankan case  and
    made adverse findings against the appellant on the  basis  of  all  the
    evidence he had been asked to consider including the medical  evidence.
    The challenge before the Court of Appeal was the weight that the  judge
    had given to that particular piece of expert evidence.   The  Court  of
    Appeal reminded the Tribunal and all who read that report of the  basic
    principle that provided the judge has considered  the  evidence  before
    him with the required degree of anxious scrutiny and provided the judge
    has given adequate reasons for findings made the weight to be given  to
    that  evidence  is  a  matter  for  the  judge  and  unless   in   such
    circumstances it can be  shown  that  the  decision  is  irrational  or
    perverse on public law grounds there can be no basis for challenge.

12.  I refer earlier to the fact that the judge did look at and has set  out
    the nature of the wording of the AABPS certificate and has set out  the
    nature of  the  evidence  given  by  the  appellant  and  records  some
    discrepancies and concerns that he has within  and  arising  from  that
    evidence.  It appears therefore that the judge  did  consider  all  the
    evidence that was available as  set  out  in  the  determination  to  a
    certain extent.  The wording 'anxious scrutiny' is  very  important  in
    this appeal and indeed if one tries to see a definition of that term in
    case law, including that from a senior court, you  will  not  find  it.
    Using common parlance it is a requirement for a judge to  consider  the
    evidence with the required degree of analysis to  ensure  there  is  no
    possibility of a party feeling that the case  they  have  set  out,  or
    their evidence, has not been properly considered.

13.  In this case the judge makes  three  references  to  the  Secretary  of
    State's evidence.  In paragraph 32 the judge makes a  specific  comment
    that in light of the lack of real evidence from the respondent  he  was
    not satisfied that the respondent had discharged the  burden  of  proof
    upon her.  I asked Ms Glass in the course of the  proceedings  how  she
    interprets the phrase 'real evidence' and her interpretation is that it
    was evidence of sufficient weight to  discharge  the  burden  upon  the
    Secretary  of  State  to  the  required  standard  of  the  balance  of
    probabilities.  That is one possible interpretation but of  course  the
    judge did not define this term in the way that Ms Glass has defined  it
    before the court.

14.  Also somewhat disturbing are the contents  of  paragraphs  27  and  28.
    The judge notes that the  original  email  contains  the  name  of  the
    appellant together  with  his  date  of  birth.   That  gives  a  clear
    indication on the face of it that the email does  at  least  appear  to
    relate to a person with the appellant's name and  his  date  of  birth.
    The judge states:  "What is not before me, however, is the scan of  the
    award shown.  That was not available at the hearing."  In paragraph  28
    the judge then states:

         "The respondent called no live evidence.  Thus  the  only  evidence
         before me is that of the two emails.  There  is  no  evidence,  for
         example, of what checks were undertaken by AABPS  or  what  records
         they in fact hold."

    I have looked at the file in some detail  and  in  fact  this  specific
    point does not appear to have been used as the basis of  a  request  to
    obtain additional information by  the  appellant  before  the  hearing.
    Therefore before the hearing all the  judge  had  was  the  email,  the
    decision to refuse based upon that email and the  evidence  adduced  by
    the appellant.  It is not disputed that the appellant before the First-
    tier Tribunal produced these documents.  That is not  the  issue.   The
    issue is whether the documents are genuine and represent qualifications
    that had been properly awarded to him.

15.  What it appears from paragraphs 27 and 28 is that the  judge  seems  to
    have thought or indicated that he required more than had been produced,
    i.e. that he required some additional source of  corroboration.   AABPS
    are a reputable accredited  organisation  and  I  note  the  email  was
    specifically sent to a verification team within that  organisation.   I
    mentioned earlier that if one looks at the website of this organisation
    it  is  possible  if  the  appropriate  information  is   entered   for
    confirmation to be obtained as to whether a student is  registered  and
    to obtain confirmation as quickly as the internet  will  permit.   That
    exercise has not  been  undertaken  by  this  Tribunal  as  it  is  not
    appropriate to do so.

16.  The problem with the determination is simply that when  reading  it  it
    does appear arguable that the judge has erred in law in (i) failing  to
    define the term 'real evidence', (ii)  in  appearing  to  discount  the
    evidence from the Secretary of  State  without  adequate  reasons,  and
    (iii) appearing to have discounted that evidence as a result of lack of
    corroboration when it is quite clear that in cases of this nature there
    is no legal requirement for such corroboration to be given.

17.  The decision of the Secretary of State of 27 August  2013  was  not  an
    unlawful decision on the face of it  as  the  verification  email  from
    AABPS does appear to suggest to a reader  that  there  were  more  than
    sufficient grounds to support the conclusion false documents  had  been
    provided.  The purpose of the appeal process was  to  properly  examine
    whether the assertion made by AABPS was in fact factually correct or if
    it was correct whether the necessary mens rea, the mental element which
    it is submitted is required for 322(1A), was engaged.

18.  My primary finding therefore is that the error is  not  to  the  weight
    the judge gave to the evidence but to the way in which the judge  seems
    to have considered the Secretary of State's evidence which is  infected
    by a material error of law, and for that reason the determination  must
    be set aside.

19.  The advocates agreed this is a case in which further  evidence  may  be
    available to assist the Tribunal that is not before it today. As  there
    are elements upon which findings have not been made by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, such as the culpability  of  Mr  Rahman  or  another  if  the
    evidence as to falsity is accepted, the matter should  be  remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal at this stage.

Notice of Decision

20.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set aside the
    decision of the original Judge. The appeal shall be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal for further consideration.

Consequential Directions

     1. The appeal shall be remitted to Hatton Cross to be heard by a
        salaried judge of the First-tier Tribunal nominated by the Resident
        Judge on 29th May 2013 at 10.00am.

     2. Any additional document to be relied upon must be served upon the
        tribunal and the opposing party in an indexed and paginated bundle
        no later than 14 days before the hearing.

     3. No interpreter shall be provided unless specifically requested by
        Mr Rahman with reasons. The language and dialect sought must be
        stated.



Signed        Date 5th January 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

