
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37320/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 1 September 2014                             |On 24 September 2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                        walid sayed amin abou elhana
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Hart, Terence Ray, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Walid Sayed Amin Abou Elhana was born  on  28  September
    1974 and is a male citizen of Egypt.  By a  decision  dated  29  August
    2013,  the  respondent  refused  the  appellant's  application  for   a
    residence card as confirmation of a right  of  residence  as  a  family
    member of an EEA  national  exercising  treaty  rights  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The appellant is married to  a  Lithuanian  citizen,  Eligija
    Abou Elhana (hereafter Mrs Elhana).   The  appellant  appealed  to  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Powell)   which,   in   a   determination
    promulgated on 24 March 2014, dismissed the appeal.  The appellant  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Granting permission, Judge Grubb stated at [3]:

         It is, however, arguable that the judge erred in  law  in  reaching
         his adverse finding in respect of the period of the sponsor's self-
         employment.  The judge's findings may not be as clear as they might
         have  been  given  his  view  that  the  sponsor's   evidence   was
         contradictory on whether she started trading in September  2008  or
         September 2009.  However, it appears that the  judge  accepted  the
         sponsor was trading from 1 August/September 2009 but that there was
         no evidence of trading between March and August/September 2009.  In
         reaching that finding, he  does  not  appear  to  have  taken  into
         account evidence at page 258 of the bundle  which  relates  to  the
         rental of a 'catering van' from 1 March 2009.   That  evidence  was
         relevant to whether the sponsor was actively trading from  1  March
         2009 and, perhaps, whether in any event any preparation  or  set-up
         time counted towards the 5 years.

 3. The grant of permission quoted above encapsulates  the  issue  in  this
    case.  There appears to have been some disagreement on the part of  the
    appellant as to the judge's fixing of  the  date  prior  to  which  the
    appellant had to prove continuous residence in the United Kingdom for a
    period of at least five years.  However, that does  not  appear  to  be
    material given that, as Mr Wilding submitted,  a  problem  would  arise
    whenever the starting date was fixed because the judge found  that  the
    appellant had failed to prove that the sponsor had  been  self-employed
    in the period April-September 2009.  In any event, at [18],  the  judge
    recorded that it had been "common ground that the relevant date was the
    date of hearing.  As such, the appellant must show that his sponsor has
    been exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom continuously for  a
    period of 5 years."

 4. There is no dispute as to the judge's application of the law only as to
    his assessment of the evidence.  At [258] of the appellant's bundle  of
    documents, there is an "application for a payment"  issued  by  Savills
    Commercial Limited.  The invoice is addressed to the sponsor and refers
    to a "catering van".  The charges for rent for the catering van  appear
    on the document at monthly intervals during the period 1 March 2009  to
    1 March 2010.  It is the appellant's submission that the judge  ignored
    that evidence; if he had considered it then he would not  have  reached
    the finding set out at [35] of the determination:

         There is no evidence to show trading in the  form  of  invoices  or
         receipts before 1 August 2009.  The  Profit  and  Loss  account  is
         based on self-reporting and  is  not  accompanied  by  evidence  of
         trading.  It also stands at odds with the sponsor's evidence  about
         the start date of her self-employment  and  the  end  date  of  her
         employment.  There is no evidence to show the  payment  of  tax  at
         all; the payment of  a  direct  debit  for  self-employed  national
         insurance contributions is the only piece of  evidence  that  shows
         registration for self-employment from January 2009, and it  is  not
         evidence of actual self-employment.  I am not helped at all by bank
         statements.   There  is  no  evidence  of  caterers'  insurance  or
         business insurance or vehicle insurance  or  inspections  from  the
         local authority in 2009 to  help  me  to  find  in  favour  of  the
         sponsor.

         I am not therefore  satisfied  that  the  appellant  has  shown  on
         balance of probabilities that his  sponsor  was  exercising  treaty
         rights continuously from 17 March 2009, being the relevant date for
         a period of 5 years ending at the date of the hearing.

 5. The judge noted  at  [20]  that  the  appellant  and  the  sponsor  had
    purchased a mobile burger van in April 2009.  However,  he  found  that
    there was "a clear discrepancy" in the sponsor's  evidence  as  to  the
    year she claimed to have stopped working  for  her  previous  employer,
    Southern England Farms Limited.  There was also a  "clear  discrepancy"
    [23] between the date upon which the appellant's audited  accounts  had
    begun (1 September 2008)  and  the  sponsor's  evidence  that  she  had
    started her self-employment on 1 September 2009.

 6. It is true that the judge does not refer specifically to  the  Savills'
    invoice.  However, that invoice does  not,  as  Mr  Wilding  submitted,
    render inappropriate the findings as to discrepancies in  the  evidence
    to which the judge referred.  Those  discrepancies  remain  unresolved.
    Certainly, the Savills' invoice might have been taken by the  judge  as
    evidence of trading (or  preparation  for  trading)  in  the  "missing"
    period of April-September 2009 but it is, in my opinion, not a piece of
    evidence which compels that conclusion.  Significantly, the  judge  has
    been concerned by the lack of evidence in  the  form  of  invoices  and
    receipts or of the payment of income tax or business insurance prior to
    August 2009.  He does not suggest (nor do  I)  that  such  evidence  is
    required by necessity in cases such as these but, given that the  judge
    states in the determination [24] that he had  "looked  for  documentary
    evidence to assist me to resolve these discrepancies," there  seems  no
    reason to conclude that he has ignored the Savills' invoice; rather, it
    appears that he has concluded that neither it nor  any  other  item  of
    documentary evidence was sufficient to resolve the discrepancies in the
    evidence which had concerned him  nor  did  the  evidence  as  a  whole
    discharge the burden of proof which rested on  the  appellant  to  show
    that the sponsor was employed or self-employed throughout the five year
    period.  In the light of the discrepancies identified by the judge,  it
    simply cannot be said that, even if he had dealt  in  detail  with  the
    Savills' invoice, he would have concluded that it provided  (given  the
    inadequacy of the remaining evidence) sufficient proof of the sponsor's
    self-employment.

 7. Considering the determination as a whole, I find that the judge has not
    erred in law for the reasons asserted in the  grounds  or  at  all.   I
    would say, however, that there was nothing in either this determination
    or that of the First-tier Tribunal which would suggest  that  there  is
    anything dishonest or inappropriate in the appellant's application.  It
    is simply the case that he has failed, on this occasion,  to  discharge
    the burden of proof upon him.  As the judge notes at [33] there  is  "a
    wealth of documentary evidence" to show that the sponsor is now and has
    been for some time operating her own business.   There  is  nothing  to
    prevent the appellant making a further application although that is, of
    course, a matter for him and his advisers.



DECISION

 8. This appeal is dismissed.







Signed                              Date 22 September 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
