

                                [pic]

 Upper Tribunal
 (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

 Appeal Number: IA/37622/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

 Heard at Field House
                        Decision and Reasons Promulgated
 On 11 December 2015
                   On 23 December 2015


                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between


                                   MR MOHAMMAD ABDUL MOTIN MIA
                                 (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)







Appellant

                                                       And

                                 AN IMMIGRATION OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent

 Representation:

 For the Appellant:  Mr M Biggs, counsel instructed by Universal Solicitors
 For the Respondent: Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer



                        DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against the decision, promulgated on 23 February
       2015, of First-tier Tribunal Judge NMK Lawrence (hereinafter referred
       to as the FTTJ).

 Background

    2. The appellant was last granted leave to remain in the United  Kingdom
       as a Tier 4 (General) student on 17 March 2014. Following his  return
       to the United Kingdom on 4 August  2014  he  was  refused  entry  and
       granted temporary admission. Following an interview at  the  port  of
       entry, the appellant's leave to remain was cancelled. The date of the
       Immigration Officer's decision was 30 September 2014. The reason  for
       that decision is that an  immigration  officer  considered  that  the
       appellant had obtained his last grant  of  leave  to  remain  in  the
       United  Kingdom  by  deception.  Reference  was  made  to   a   TOEIC
       certificate from Educational Testing Service (ETS) submitted  by  the
       appellant in support of his previous Tier 4 application  following  a
       test taken at Queensway College on 20 November 2012. This information
       was said to amount to a significant change of circumstances  and  the
       decision to cancel leave was therefore made under 321A(1) of  HC  395
       (as  amended).  Additionally,  the  respondent  considered  that  the
       appellant had breached the conditions  of  his  leave  to  remain  by
       working in the United Kingdom and therefore cancelled his  leave  for
       this reason as well.


    3. At the hearing before the FTTJ, only the appellant gave evidence.  In
       dismissing the appeal, the FTTJ noted that, "the experts listened  to
       the audio recordings including the recording made when the  appellant
       claims he took the test himself." He concluded  that  the  respondent
       had discharged the  evidential  burden  of  proof  to  the  "required
       statement (sic)." The FTTJ  commented  that  the  appellant  had  not
       requested independent analysis of the audio recordings  or  contacted
       ETS but instead relied on his personal assertion  that  he  took  the
       test himself, which the FTTJ found did not displace the  respondent's
       "cogent" evidence. The FTTJ concluded that  the  appellant  "has  not
       discharged the legal burden of proof that he took the test  himself."
       The appeal was also dismissed on Article 8 grounds.

    4. In the grounds seeking permission, it  was  argued  that  the  FTTJ's
       decision was not one which could be rationally arrived  upon  on  the
       evidence before him; that the FTTJ had reversed the burden  of  proof
       by placing it on the appellant to prove  his  innocence  and  lastly,
       that  the  FTTJ  discounted  relevant  evidence  of  the  appellant's
       capability in the English language evidenced  by  his  IELTS  results
       from 2009 and that he had completed  a  BA  from  the  University  of
       Central  Lancashire  in  December  2013.  Complaint  was  also   made
       regarding the FTTJ's treatment of the appellant's private life claim.

    5. Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek granted permission to appeal,  finding
       that the FTTJ arguably erred in concluding that  the  respondent  had
       discharged the burden of proof in view of the limited evidence before
       him, which consisted solely of two witness statements. The grounds in
       relation to Article 8 ECHR were said to have little or no  merit  but
       were not ruled out.


    6. The respondent's Rule 24 response  opposed  the  appellant's  appeal,
       stated that the FTTJ properly directed himself and that  the  grounds
       amounted to no more than a disagreement with the negative outcome  of
       his appeal.


    7. At the hearing before me, Mr Biggs relied on JC  (Part  9  HC  395  -
       burden of proof) China [2007] 00027 and Wanjiku v  SSHD  [2011]  EWCA
       Civ 264. There were two grounds of appeal. Firstly, that the FTTJ had
       wrongly approached the issue of burden of proof  and  secondly,  that
       there was insufficient evidence before the FTTJ for him  to  conclude
       that the Secretary of State had discharged the burden  of  proof.  He
       expanded on these grounds with reference to what he described as  the
       FTTJ's somewhat confused self-direction as well as the absence of any
       evidence which linked the appellant's  English  test  result  to  the
       matters referred to in the respondent's generic witness statements.




    8. Mr Walker conceded the force of Mr Biggs argument regarding the first
       ground and accepted that the FTTJ erred materially in his application
       of the burden of proof. With regard to ground 2, he advised  me  that
       there was no specific evidence relating to  the  appellant  from  the
       Secretary of State. However, he asked me to have regard to  the  fact
       that the FTTJ had not consider the working in  breach  of  conditions
       point, regarding which the respondent had not cross appealed.

    9. In reply, Mr Biggs stressed that the central plank of the appellant's
       case was the allegation of cheating.  He  invited  me  to  allow  the
       appellant's appeal and remake it in favour of the appellant.


Decision on error of law

   10. The FTTJ's self-direction as to the burden of proof was erroneous. Mr
       Walker did not shy away from conceding this issue. At  [5]  the  FTTJ
       said; "The appellant bears the legal burden of proof  from  start  to
       finish..." At[6] he stated that the respondent bore "the  evidential,
       as opposed to the legal, burden of proof" and also  that  "the  legal
       burden of proof does not lie with the respondent at any  stage."  The
       FTTJ's analysis of the burden of proof fails to acknowledge that  the
       legal burden is on the Secretary of State and does not shift  to  the
       appellant. Indeed, the headnote of JC states as follows; "In relation
       to all the general grounds contained in part 9,  including  paragraph
       320(15), the burden of proof rests on the decision maker to establish
       any contested precedent fact."

   11. There was also no specific evidence before the FTTJ, which linked the
       appellant to the TOEIC fraud referred to in the two  generic  witness
       statements which were before the FTTJ. Indeed, neither representative
       had previously had sight of the respondent's bundle, which was served
       on the Tribunal on the day of the hearing or shortly before but  does
       not appear to have made its way to the appellant's case file in  time
       for  the  hearing.  In  these  circumstances,  it  is  difficult   to
       understand how the FTTJ considered the material before him to  amount
       to "cogent" evidence of deception.

   12. Owing to the above-mentioned errors, I set aside the decision of  the
       FTTJ.


   13. After hearing from  the  representatives,  I  accepted  that  it  was
       appropriate for me to proceed to re-make  the  decision.   There  was
       some discussion as to the working in breach issue, which had not been
       pursued  before  the  FTTJ,  according  to  the  latter's  record  of
       proceedings. Mr Biggs argued that it was inappropriate to  pursue  it
       now. He also objected to the re-making including consideration of the
       contents of the respondent's bundle, which he had yet to consider.

   14. Ultimately, I decided that in order to remake the decision, I  wished
       to consider the respondent's evidence,  which  while  not  served  in
       accordance with directions, was in the possession of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal by the date of the hearing before it. I  therefore  afforded
       the parties time to consider the material.  Thereafter  both  parties
       agreed that there was no evidence of substance  in  the  respondent's
       bundle, which related to either the deception allegation or  that  of
       working in breach of conditions and I was invited to  simply  re-make
       the decision by allowing the appellant's appeal.

   15. The burden of proving facts relied on in this case, in respect of the
       allegations of deception or  breach  of  conditions  rests  with  the
       respondent. In respect of all other matters the burden lies with  the
       appellant. The standard of proof in all matters is that of a  balance
       of probabilities.

   16. I have considered the witness statement  of  Peter  Millington  which
       indicates, at [47] that a test result could be invalidated  owing  to
       having been taken at a test centre where numerous other results  have
       been invalidated. While his statement indicates that such  cases  are
       clearly  identified,  an  examination  of  the   print-out   of   the
       appellant's details  gives  no  indication  of  the  reason  for  the
       invalidation of his test result.

   17. The immigration officer who refused  the  appellant  leave  to  enter
       alleges that his test certificate was  fraudulently  obtained.  While
       the appellant's  test  result  has  been  invalidated,  there  is  no
       evidence showing that the reason for this action was as a  result  of
       fraud or dishonesty. An unsupported allegation is not sufficient  for
       a finding of deception to be reached; RP(proof  of  forgery)  Nigeria
       [2006] UKAIT 00086 applies.

   18. The generic evidence contained in the statements of Peter  Millington
       and Rebecca Collings was described in Gazi as being "lean in  detail"
       and  produced  by  witnesses  who  "can  lay  claim  to  no  relevant
       credentials or expertise in the filed of voice recognition" and  were
       "self-serving."

   19. There was ample independent evidence before me, which  supported  the
       appellant's claim to be a high  level  speaker  of  English.  He  was
       awarded a 2:2 by the University of Central Lancashire in  his  degree
       in business administration around a year after he sat his TOEIC  test
       and a year prior to taking his TOEIC test, the appellant  attained  a
       Higher  National  Diploma  in  travel  and  tourism  management.   He
       previously took an IELTS test, prior to coming to the United  Kingdom
       and obtained a satisfactory result. Therefore not only  is  there  no
       evidence of the appellant having obtained a fraudulent  test  result,
       there is ample evidence before me which tends to show that  he  would
       have had no need nor motivation to take such a step.

   20. Considering all the evidence before  me,  even  where  not  expressly
       referred to in  this  decision,  I  conclude  that  it  supports  the
       appellant's account of personally taking the English language test in
       question and there is no support for the claim that a proxy was used.
       The Secretary of State has  not  discharged  the  burden  of  proving
       deception in this case.

   21. There is also the matter of the working  in  breach  allegation.  The
       appellant strongly denies having done so,  stating  that  he  stopped
       working in January 2012. He says that any pay received after that day
       was holiday pay, owed by his former  employer.   The  respondent  has
       provided no documentary evidence  to  show  that  the  appellant  was
       working when he was not permitted to do so. Nor has  the  appellant's
       account, as set out in his witness statement, been challenged by  the
       respondent.

   22. I find that the respondent has failed  to  discharge  the  burden  of
       proving that the appellant worked in breach of the conditions of  his
       grant of leave.

   23. It follows that I do not accept that  there  has  been  a  change  of
       circumstances which merits the cancellation of the appellant's  leave
       to remain in the United Kingdom.

   24. The appeal is allowed.

   25. No anonymity direction was made by the FTTJ and I can see  no  reason
       for making one now.




Conclusions


The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of  an  error
on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I re-make the decision by allowing the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make a  full  award
owing to the fact that the evidence before  me  was  sufficient  for  me  to
allow the appeal.


Signed                                         Date: 13 December 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara












