
IAC-PE-SW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37668/2013
                                                             & IA/37684/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


| Heard at Field House                           |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 20th January 2015                            |On 10th February 2015      |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                                  MFA & MIU
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Sayem, Solicitor Uzma Law
For the Respondent:    Mr Shilliday, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are mother and child, both are citizens  of  Bangladesh.
    These proceedings concern the interests and  welfare  of  a  child.  In
    order to protect the child I make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the appellants against the determination of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Lester promulgated on 15 October 2014, whereby  the
    judge dismissed the appellants' appeals against the  decisions  of  the
    respondent dated 15th August 2013. The decision by the  respondent  was
    to refuse the appellants further leave to  remain  in  the  UK  and  to
    remove the appellants to Bangladesh.

 3. By decision made on the 3rd December 2014 leave to appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal was granted. Thus the matter appears before me to determine in
    the first instance whether or not there is  an  error  of  law  in  the
    original determination.

 4. I would note within the grounds and reasons  for  the  application  the
    determination is challenged on the basis that the reasons given are too
    brief and inadequate. It is  not  suggested  that  the  judge  gave  no
    reasons for coming to the decision that she did.

 5. On 20 August 2010 the first appellant was granted leave  to  enter  the
    United Kingdom as a student. That leave was a valid until 30 June 2012.
    On 29 May 2012 the first appellant  was  granted  further  leave  as  a
    student which was  a  valid  until  13  January  2014.  However  on  20
    September 2012 the  first  appellant's  leave  was  curtailed  and  the
    curtailment resulted in the appellant's leave ceasing  on  19  November
    2012. Whilst it is asserted by the appellant that the  curtailment  was
    as a result of the college in which she was studying being removed from
    the register of approved colleges,  at  the  time  of  curtailment  the
    appellant could no longer continue as a student.

 6. Prior to 19 November 2012 the first appellant submitted an  application
    for further leave to remain in the United Kingdom. In  submitting  that
    application it was accepted that the appellant  could  no  longer  seek
    extension as a Tier 4 Student under  the  rules.  Extension  was  being
    sought under Appendix FM, paragraph 276ADE and Article 8 of the ECHR.

 7. Whilst in the United Kingdom as  a  student  the  first  appellant  had
    commenced a relationship with a Mr Mohammed Shiraj Uddin. As set out in
    paragraph 5 of the determination the parties began to live together and
    the appellant gave birth to the second appellant  on  22  August  2011.
    During the pregnancy Mr Uddin began to become abusive  and  soon  after
    the birth of the child he vanished leaving the appellants alone.

 8. The evidence before  the  judge  was  to  the  effect  that  the  first
    appellant's parents and family did not want to know the appellants  and
    would no longer support them. It was submitted that the first appellant
    would have problems returning to Bangladesh because she would  have  no
    job, no support and no finance. It was also submitted that  because  of
    the culture and Bangladesh she would have no respect. Even  though  she
    already had a degree in  order  to  obtain  a  job  the  appellant  was
    asserting that she would require a further  degree  and  money  to  pay
    bribes.

 9. In the United Kingdom the first appellant claims that she is  dependent
    upon the kindness of people with whom she is living, and  who  she  had
    known in her own village in Bangladesh. There was a letter  in  support
    and evidence before the judge from Mr Mohamed Jamil Uddin, that out  of
    charity he appears to have been assisting the appellants.

10. Within the  determination  the  judge  had  noted  that  there  was  no
    objective evidence before the tribunal to substantiate  that  a  single
    woman with a child would face difficulties  in  Bangladesh.  The  judge
    noted that it was only the assertion in the evidence of  the  appellant
    without any basis given for the assertion. It was also noted  that  the
    evidence with regard to support in the  form  of  a  letter  was  again
    lacking in detail.

11. Within the submissions attention was drawn to section 117B of the  2002
    Act as amended, which defined public interest and  the  maintenance  of
    immigration control and identified factors that have to be  taken  into
    account in assessing that.  The  judge  clearly  took  account  of  the
    matters therein set out.

12. Within the determination the judge noted that there was  a  significant
    lack of evidence to support many of the assertions made  by  the  first
    appellant. There was no background evidence as to the circumstances  of
    first and second appellant could expect on return to  Bangladesh  as  a
    single woman with a small child with no family support and no  apparent
    financial resources. Whilst the assertions had been made there  was  no
    background evidence to substantiate  those  assertions.  There  was  no
    evidence as to any insurmountable obstacles or unduly harsh  conditions
    or other factors rendering it unreasonable for the first  appellant  to
    return to Bangladesh with her child.

13. The judge was satisfied that the best interests of the  child  were  to
    remain with the mother.  The  judge  specifically  considers  the  best
    interests of the child in the  concluding  sentence  of  paragraph  35.
    Whilst clearly the child would benefit if in the  United  Kingdom  from
    free education and medical care, but the judge  was  clearly  satisfied
    that the best interests of the child were to be with the mother.  There
    was no evidence that the mother could not find employment in Bangladesh
    could not support herself and the child and could not provide  for  the
    education and other needs of the child.

14. The judge within the determination has given reasons for coming to  the
    conclusions that she has. The grounds of appeal assert that the reasons
    given are too brief and are inadequate in respect  of  the  child.  The
    grounds do not assert that the reasons given are not valid reasons.

15. It was for the appellant to produce evidence as to  the  circumstances,
    which the appellants would face on return to Bangladesh and  there  was
    no evidence before the judge. The judge took account  of  the  benefits
    that the child could enjoy within the United Kingdom but there  was  no
    evidence as to what would  face  the  parties  within  Bangladesh.  The
    appellants were both nationals of Bangladesh. There was  no  basis  for
    the  first  appellant  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  under  the
    Immigration Rules. The judge has properly assessed  the  provisions  of
    Appendix FM

16. The judge took account of the fact  that  the  first  appellant  was  a
    chemistry graduate with a United Kingdom degree in Business Studies and
    had been in the United Kingdom for short period of time. The judge  was
    satisfied that the first appellant has extended  family  in  Bangladesh
    and a network of friends. The judge was satisfied  therefore  that  the
    appellant did have ties to Bangladesh. Accordingly the  appellants  did
    not meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE.

17. The judge having considered all the evidence came to the decision  that
    the  decision  by  the  respondent  was  in   all   the   circumstances
    proportionate. That clearly was a finding of fact that  the  judge  was
    entitled to make. The judge had commented throughout about the lack  of
    evidence otherwise.

18. Taking all the circumstances into account the  judge  has  given  ample
    reasons for coming to the conclusions that she did. Whilst the  reasons
    are brief, the  judge  does  deal  with  the  cases  presented  by  the
    appellant and the issues in the case. In those circumstances the  judge
    has given sufficient reasons for coming to the conclusions and reaching
    the decision that she did.

19. There is a no material error of law in the determination.  I uphold the
    decision to dismiss these appeals on all grounds.



Signed        Date 23rd January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure
