
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37706/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 17th July 2014                               |On 18th July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN

                                   Between

                           MS ROSELY RANILLE CABUS
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not Represented
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Respondent with regard to a determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Buckwell) promulgated on  25th  April  2014.  For  the  sake  of
    clarity and continuity however,  I  shall  continue  to  refer  to  the
    Secretary of State as the Respondent and Ms Cabus as the Appellant.

 2. In his determination Judge  Buckwell  allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the Secretary of State's refusal to grant her leave  to  remain
    on Article 8 grounds.

 3. The background to this case is that the Appellant arrived in the United
    Kingdom on 20th June 2012 as a visitor with  leave  due  to  expire  on
    December 2012. She made an application for  leave  to  remain  on  10th
    December 2012, prior to the expiry of her leave.

 4. The Appellant was not eligible to remain under  the  Immigration  Rules
    due to the "no switching" provisions.

 5. The Appellant and her partner, Andrew Andrea, a British  citizen,  have
    been in a relationship for four years and eight months. Mr  Andrea  has
    health problems and the couple have a son,  Charles,  born  on  the  11
    December 2009 in the Philippines.  He is a British citizen.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal heard  evidence  from  the  Appellant  and  her
    partner to the effect that although the Appellant  has  family  in  the
    Philippines including nine siblings, who all live  in  the  same  area,
    their homes were destroyed by a typhoon which hit the Philippines after
    she had come to the UK. As a result the whole family is now  living  in
    camps.

 7. The Judge accepted that the Appellant been working in a  restaurant  in
    the Philippines, which is where  she  met  Mr  Andrea.  Mr  Andrea  had
    regularly travelled to the Philippines but his health issues meant that
    had become more difficult. Mr Andrea has an adult  daughter,  Charlotte
    to whom he is very close in the UK. She lives close to  Mr  Andrea  and
    the Appellant and they see each other several times a week. She has had
    mental health issues. Additionally, Mr Andrea has an elderly mother  in
    the UK.

 8. Candidly, in giving his evidence Mr Andrea told the First-tier Tribunal
    that his  physical  problems  would  not  prevent  him  living  in  the
    Philippines should that prove necessary. The issue would be  his  other
    family members such as his mother and his daughter and it was also  the
    couple's wish that their son should have the benefit  of  life  in  the
    United Kingdom.

 9. The Secretary of State's grounds  suggests  that  the  Judge  erred  in
    failing to take the correct approach in  considering  the  cases  which
    engage Article 8. The  grounds  suggest  that  failing  to  follow  the
    guidance in Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct  approach)  [2013]
    UKUT 00640 (IAC), Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin)  and  Shahzad  (Art  8:
    legitimate aim) [2014] UKUT 00085 (IAC) constituted a material error of
    law.

10. At paragraph 29 of the determination Judge Buckwell referred himself to
    the recent cases relating to Article 8 and the new  Immigration  Rules,
    in particular MF [2013] EWCA Civ 1192, Gulshan, Nagre [2013]  EWHC  720
    (Admin), Shahzad and Ahmed[2014] EWHC 33 (Admin).  However,  the  Judge
    also recognised the necessity for a two-stage  approach  and  case  law
    which remains binding form the House of Lords in terms of Huang  [2007]
    UKHL 11 and Razgar [2004] UKHL 27. The Judge  set  out  the  five-stage
    approach suggested in Razgar and found on all the facts before him that
    removal was disproportionate. He referred particularly to consideration
    of the welfare of the young child who is a British national and he also
    took  into  account  the  fact  that  the  family  relocating  to   the
    Philippines would adversely affect Mr Andrea's other family members  in
    the form of his daughter and mother.

11. While the Judge did not say in terms that there were compelling reasons
    to stray beyond the Immigration Rules, it is abundantly clear from  the
    determination that he was aware of the necessity to consider  both  the
    Rules and Article 8 under the ECHR. It is quite clear that he found the
    exceptional circumstance in this case was a natural disaster which  had
    befallen the Philippines and the Appellant's family in particular while
    she was in the UK as a visitor and he was thus entitled to come to  the
    conclusion that removal of this Appellant would be disproportionate.

12. It is now trite law that a court should be  wary  of  interfering  with
    credibility and proportionality findings that are properly reasoned and
    neither irrational nor perverse and made by a Judge  who  has  had  the
    benefit of hearing from the witnesses.

13. The Judge was entitled to find that the consequences  of  not  granting
    the Appellant leave in this case would be unjustifiably  harsh  in  the
    effect on all principal members of the Appellant's family  and  on  the
    Appellant herself and also that it is in  the  best  interests  of  the
    child for the family to remain together in the UK.

13.  I uphold the determination of the First-tier Tribunal  and  the  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Signed                              Date 17th July 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
