
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37361/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12 June 2014                               |On 27 June 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM

                                   Between

                            Mr Madawala Madawala

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Macdonald, Counsel instructed by Pinidiya
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka and his date  of  birth  is  19
    April 1981.

2.   On 18 July 2013 the appellant made an application for leave  to  remain
    in the  United  Kingdom  as  a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)  Migrant.   The
    application was refused by the Secretary of State in a  decision  of  3
    September 2013.

3.   The refusal was on the basis  that  the  appellant  did  not  submit  a
    Companies House current appointment register or any  other  advertising
    material for his company.  The appellant also did not submit  accounts.



4.   The appellant appealed against the decision of the respondent  and  his
    appeal was dismissed by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  (hereinafter
    "the FtT") Miles in a determination that was promulgated  on  14  March
    2014 following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 4 March 2014. The appellant
    applied for leave to  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  FtT  and
    permission was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Nicholson in
    a decision of 23 April 2014.  Thus the matter came before me.

5.   The FtT dismissed the appellant's appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules
    and under Article 8.   It came to light at the hearing before  me  that
    the FtT did not have before it a  complete  respondent's  bundle.   The
    appellant had submitted a substantial amount of documentation with  his
    application (with a covering letter of 17 July 2013).

6.   Mr Macdonald argued that it was a material error  because  there  is  a
    likelihood that had the Judge had before him  a  complete  respondent's
    bundle containing all the evidence that the  appellant  submitted  with
    his application, he  would  have  reached  a  different  conclusion  in
    relation to whether or not the appellant met the  requirements  of  the
    Rules and in relation to article 8. I considered this submission in the
    context of [9] and [10] of the appellant's witness statement before the
    FtT. The appellant conceded that he had not submitted certain documents
    with his application.  However, on balance, I accept that  there  is  a
    possibility  that  had  the  Judge  would  have  reached  a   different
    conclusion had he had a complete bundle.  I  note  that  the  appellant
    argued before the FtT that he met the requirement of the rules.

7.   In the circumstances the error of law is material and I remit the  case
    to the First-tier Tribunal pursuant to  paragraph  7.2  of  the  Senior
    President's Practise Statement of 25 September 2012.  The  matter  will
    be heard afresh.  I make the following directions:

    (1)  The respondent is to file and serve a complete  bundle  containing
         all those documents that were submitted by the appellant  with  his
         application.


    (2)  The appellant is to  serve  and  file  an  indexed  and  paginated
         appellant's bundle.


    (3)  The appellant is to prepare a skeleton argument  making  his  case
         clear.  It is to be made clear to the Tribunal what  documents  the
         appellant states were submitted with his  application  and  how  he
         would succeed under the Immigration Rules  on  the  basis  of  that
         documentation.


    (4)  Both parties are to attend the  next  hearing  with  the  relevant
         Rules in force at  the  date  of  the  decision  and  any  relevant
         guidance.


    (5)  The matter is listed at Hatton Cross on 26 November 2014.


Signed        Joanna McWilliam                        Date 17 June 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
