

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37735/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 December 2014                           |On 12 January 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE CARR DBE
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        CECILIA MERCEDES CHUICA RAMOS
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms L Targett-Parker, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1.   The respondent to this appeal, Ms Chuica Ramos, is a citizen of Peru
      born on 8 September 1979. The appellant is the Secretary of State  for
      the Home Department, who has appealed with the permission of the First-
      tier Tribunal against a decision of Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Scobbie, who allowed Ms Chuica Ramos's appeal  against  the  decision,
      dated 29 August 2013, to refuse to vary her leave on article 8 grounds
      and to remove her under section 47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
      Nationality Act 2006.


   2.   It is more convenient to refer to the parties as  they  were  before
      the First-tier Tribunal. We shall therefore refer to Ms  Chuica  Ramos
      from now on as "the appellant" and the  Secretary  of  State  as  "the
      respondent".


   3.   We were not asked and saw no reason to make an anonymity direction.


   4.   The appellant is the partner of Mr Luis Alfredo  Palacios  Ocles,  a
      British citizen. They have a child,  Avril  Dakotha  Palacios  Chuica,
      born on 6 March 2013. The appellant first came to the  UK  in  October
      2011 as a student. She returned to Peru before  her  visa  ended.  She
      came back to the UK on 12 October 2012 with leave as a  student  until
      13 August 2013. On 9 August 2013 she made an application  for  further
      leave on form FLR(O). The respondent gave reasons  for  refusal  in  a
      letter dated 29 August 2013. In short, the appellant  could  not  meet
      the requirements of Appendix FM of the rules or paragraph 276ADE(1) of
      the rules. There were no exceptional circumstances which might warrant
      consideration of a grant of leave.


   5.    Judge Scobbie allowed the appeal after a hearing on 19 August 2014.
      The appeal appears to have been pursued outside the rules.  The  judge
      found the appellant and  Mr  Palacios  Ocle  were  in  a  genuine  and
      subsisting relationship. He found that, if the appellant left the  UK,
      she would take the child, who was a British citizen, with her, thereby
      breaking up the family, at least in the short term. He also  found  it
      was not appropriate to  expect  Mr  Palacios  Ocle  to  accompany  the
      appellant to Peru because he is British and he has a good job here. He
      found the appellant was likely to be granted entry  clearance  if  she
      returned to Peru and found, applying Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL  40,
      that it would not be reasonable to send the appellant  home  for  this
      purpose. Removal would therefore be disproportionate.


   6.    The grounds seeking permission to appeal argued that the judge  had
      misdirected himself in law because  he  did  not  identify  compelling
      circumstances not recognised by the rules. The  judge  had  failed  to
      provide adequate reasons. He had not considered  why  the  appellant's
      partner could not care for the child while the appellant  returned  to
      apply for entry clearance. It was open for the appellant's partner  to
      relocate to Peru. This was a matter of choice for the appellant.


   7.   Permission to appeal was granted by Judge P M J Hollingworth on  all
      grounds.


   8.   The appellant has not filed a response opposing the appeal.

   9.   We heard submissions as to whether the judge  had  made  a  material
      error of law in his decision.  Ms  Isherwood  relied  on  the  written
      grounds seeking permission to appeal, particularly paragraphs 4 and 5.
      She argued that the couple had options  as  to  where  they  exercised
      their right to enjoy family life. She pointed to the  judge's  finding
      in paragraph 20 of his decision that  the  appellant  would  take  the
      child with her. She argued that the judge  gave  insufficient  reasons
      for that finding. She argued the judge  erred  by  applying  Chikwamba
      (supra)and also that the judge failed to give sufficient weight to the
      public interest  as  defined  by  section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act").


  10. In reply Ms Targett-Parker relied on her skeleton argument. She argued
      that the judge had identified compelling circumstances justifying  his
      decision to allow the  appeal  on  article  8  grounds.   He  had  not
      misdirected himself with regard to his approach to article  8  outside
      the rules. The  facts  found  by  the  judge  amounted  to  compelling
      circumstances entitling him to allow the appeal outside the rules.  In
      making his proportionality assessment the judge had proper  regard  to
      section 117B. Ms Isherwood made no reply.


  11. We reserved our decision as to whether the judge made a material error
      of law. Having done so, we find no  material  error  of  law  and  the
      judge's  decision,  allowing  the  appellant's  appeal  on  article  8
      grounds, shall stand. Our reasons for this conclusion are as follows.


  12. The first disputed matter is whether the judge erred in  his  approach
      to article 8 outside the rules. The grounds argue the judge failed  to
      apply the approach set out in R  (  Nagre)  v  SSHD  [2013]  EWHC  720
      (Admin) and Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach)  [2013]
      UKUT 00640 (IAC). Ms Targett-Parker argued the  correct  approach  had
      been applied. In R (Oludoyi & Ors) v SSHD (Article 8  -  MM  (Lebanon)
      and Nagre) IJR [2014] UKUT 00539 (IAC), the Tribunal  explained  there
      is no 'threshold test':


         "20. There is nothing in Nagre, Gulshan or  Shahzad  that  suggests
         that a threshold test was being suggested as opposed to  making  it
         clear that there was a need to look at the evidence to see if there
         was anything which has not already been  adequately  considered  in
         the context of the IRs and which could lead to a successful Article
         8 claim. If, for example, there is some feature which has not  been
         adequately considered under the IRs but which cannot  on  any  view
         lead to the Article  8  claim  succeeding  (when  the  individual's
         circumstances are considered cumulatively), there is no need to  go
         any further. This does not mean that a  threshold  or  intermediate
         test is being applied.  These  authorities  must  not  be  read  as
         seeking to qualify or fetter  the  assessment  of  Article  8.  The
         guidance given must be read in context and not construed as if  the
         judgments are pieces of legislation."


  13. In paragraph 8 of his decision the  judge  set  out  the  respondent's
      reasons for refusal, that the  rules  in  Appendix  FM  were  not  met
      because the appellant had not resided for two years prior to the  date
      of application with Mr Palacios Ocle so as to fall  for  consideration
      under the partner route. She could not succeed under the parent  route
      either because she did not have sole responsibility for the child.  He
      moved on to consider article 8 outside the rules. He  did  not  direct
      himself at all in terms of the Gulshan exercise. He certainly did  not
      set a threshold test. The remaining paragraphs of the decision (13  to
      24) give reasons why the appeal should be allowed outside  the  rules.
      In doing so the judge said  he  found  good  grounds  for  considering
      family life outside the rules (paragraph 21). He does not refer to the
      need to find compelling circumstances but, in the light of Oludoyi, he
      should not have fettered his assessment of article 8 in any event.  We
      find that the judge approached his task correctly in that he looked at
      the evidence as a whole to decide whether  there  were  matters  which
      were not covered by the application of the rules.


  14. As seen, Ms Isherwood took issue with the judge's assessment  in  this
      respect. Before considering her challenge, we shall identify  the  key
      findings made by the judge.  He  began  by  confirming  he  found  the
      appellant and her partner to be open and credible witnesses  and  that
      they were in a genuine and subsisting relationship (paragraph 14).


  15. The judge then referred to  the  principle  established  in  the  CJEU
      decision in Ruiz Zambrano (C-34/09). That  case  decided  that  an  EU
      citizen must have the freedom to enjoy the right to reside in the  EU,
      genuinely  and  in  practice.  For  a  minor,  that  freedom  may   be
      jeopardised if, although legally entitled to reside in the EU, she  is
      compelled to leave EU territory because  an  ascendant  relative  upon
      whom she is dependent is compelled to leave. The judge  in  this  case
      correctly directed himself  that  the  test  resolved  itself  to  the
      critical question of whether the appellant's British daughter, aged 18
      months, was dependent on the appellant for the exercise of her  rights
      (see paragraph 15). As  seen,  he  decided  towards  the  end  of  his
      decision that the appellant would take her daughter with her. He found
      that her partner would not have time to look after the  child  on  his
      own because he would have to give up a good job (see paragraph 20). In
      the first sentence of paragraph 24 of his decision the judge  referred
      to the idea of the appellant taking her British daughter with  her  as
      "not something which the courts favour."


  16. Although the judge's reasoning is short, it is not inadequate so as to
      render the decision vitiated by legal error. We note  he  referred  to
      the case of Sanade and others (British children - Zambrano  -  Dereci)
      [2012] UKUT 48 (IAC), in which the Presidential panel  considered  the
      effect of the Zambrano principle in the context of an article 8  claim
      in deportation proceedings. The appellant in this case was not seeking
      to show she had a derivative right of residence for  the  purposes  of
      Community law. However, the application of Zambrano would  plainly  be
      highly influential in the assessment of proportionality in the context
      of an article 8 claim. We are satisfied from our reading of  paragraph
      15 of the decision that the judge had the essential  elements  of  the
      Zambrano test in mind.


  17. We also note that the judge referred to ZH (Tanzania)  v  SSHD  [2011]
      UKSC 4, in which it was held that the fact a child  is  British  is  a
      strong pointer towards her future lying in the UK.


  18. Ms Isherwood sought to attack the judge's assessment of the facts  and
      suggested the facts found did not justify his conclusion. It  is  true
      to say the decision is short and lacks the detailed  assessment  which
      would generally be  expected.  However,  we  are  persuaded  that  the
      judge's reasoning is adequate. He heard oral evidence  and  found  the
      appellant and Mr Palacios Ocle credible. The judge may  have  taken  a
      generous view when he found that the consequence  of  the  appellant's
      removal would be that the child was compelled to leave the UK as  well
      because the alternative would mean Mr Palacios Ocle giving up  a  good
      job. However, it was a finding which was open to him to  make  on  the
      evidence before him. The judge accepted that the cousins identified by
      the presenting officer would not be able to help out with  child  care
      because the appellant's evidence on this was not challenged.


  19. The judge also considered, albeit  briefly,  the  possibility  of  the
      appellant returning with entry clearance so that the interference with
      family life would only be temporary. He  stated  his  reasons  in  the
      second sentence in paragraph 24 of his decision  that  an  application
      was likely to be successful in view of Mr  Palacios  Ocle's  level  of
      earnings (see paragraph 18). He also noted  that  it  was  likely  the
      appellant would qualify as a partner due to the length of time she had
      cohabited with him. In effect,  applying  Chikwamba(supra),  he  found
      that there was little  public  interest  in  insisting  the  appellant
      return to Peru to apply for entry clearance due to the  disruption  to
      family life  which  this  would  engender.  He  noted  she  could  not
      reasonably be expected to take her husband (sic) with her.  Again  the
      judge took a generous view but it was one which was open  to  him.  In
      Chikwamba (supra) Lord Brown of  Eaton-under-Heywood  said  that  "the
      prospective length and degree of family disruption involved  in  going
      abroad for an  entry  clearance  certificate  will  always  be  highly
      relevant." The judge was entitled to find there was no sensible reason
      for requiring the appellant to leave just for the sake of deterrence.


  20. We note that the judge appears to have had the public interest factors
      set out in section 117B of the 2002 Act  in  his  mind,  as  shown  by
      paragraph 23 of his decision. We see no error  in  his  approach.   In
      light of his findings, an application of subsection (6)  would  appear
      to support the conclusion reached by the judge.


  21. The judge's decision does not disclose any material error of  law  and
      shall stand.

NOTICE OF DECISION

     The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not make a material error  on
    a point of law and his  decision  allowing  the  appeal  on  article  8
    principles shall stand.


    No anonymity direction has been made.


                               Signed                 Date 18 December 2014






                               Judge Froom, sitting as a Deputy Judge of
                               the Upper Tribunal
