
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/37531/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 November 2015                   |On 19 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                             MR JUSTICE PHILLIPS
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                ANWAR UL HAQ
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr P. Naith, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State, with  permission,  against
    a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Higgins, promulgated on 4  June
    2015, allowing the  respondent's  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to refuse to grant the  respondent,  a  national  of
    Pakistan married to a Polish  national,  an  EEA  residence  card.  The
    Secretary of State's decision was  based  on  her  determination  that,
    although the respondent had married an EEA national,  Miss  Siderowicz,
    on 11  May  2014,  that  marriage  was  not  genuine  but  was  one  of
    convenience.

2.   The Secretary of State formed that view on the basis of  an  inspection
    visit by the West London Arrest Team to what was understood to  be  the
    marital home at 6 [ - ]. Although the report of the visit  states  that
    it took place on 31August 2014, it is common ground that the true  date
    was 1 August 2014. On that date the Immigration Officers were  admitted
    into the property by a Mr Daryana. The report records that  Mr  Daryana
    told them (i) that the appellant and his brother had  lived  there  for
    about a year, but that they had moved out the previous evening and (ii)
    that two female Romanians had visited about three times a week, but did
    not reside there.

4.   The appellant appealed that decision. He submitted with his  notice  of
    appeal witness statements made by Miss Siderowicz and Mr Daryana and  a
    letter from  the  appellant's  former  landlord  at  6  [  -  ],  a  Mr
    Haralambous. He also relied on a tenancy agreement evidencing that  the
    appellant and Miss Siderowicz had been tenants of  their  new  property
    since 30 July 2014, together with copies of bank statements  evidencing
    that they have  both  resided  at  that  new  address  since  at  least
    September 2014.

5.   The statements from Miss Siderowicz and  Mr  Daryana  contradicted  the
    report of the Immigration Officers' visit. In  particular,  Mr  Daryana
    stated that his conversation with  them  on  1  August  2014  had  been
    misreported. He said that he had been asked if any females live in  the
    house. He had said yes. He could hear them sometimes talking at  night,
    about three or four times a week. He had not  said  they  came  to  the
    property three to four times a week.  He had  been  asked  if  he  knew
    where the females were from and he had said Eastern Europe. He had  not
    been sure if they were Romanian, Polish or Ukrainian - he had not  said
    they were Romanian.  He told the Immigration  Officers  the  respondent
    and his wife and brother had moved to  another  property  the  previous
    night.

6.   Mr Haralambous said in a  letter  that  the  respondent  had  been  his
    tenant at 6 [ - ], until his tenancy agreement had expired on  30  June
    2014. He confirmed that Miss Siderowicz had lived  with  the  appellant
    since September 2013.

7.   At the hearing of the appeal on 22  April  of  this  year  neither  the
    appellant nor the respondent were present or represented. Judge Higgins
    was satisfied that the respondent had been given proper notice  of  the
    hearing and, having regard to the overriding objective,  he  considered
    it was in the interests of justice to proceed with the hearing  in  the
    absence of both parties. He reminded himself of  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    decision in Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage  of  convenience)  Greece
    [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC) which provides that there is no  obligation  on
    an applicant to demonstrate his marriage to an EEA national  is  not  a
    marriage of convenience when he makes his application. If, however, the
    Secretary of State puts forward reasonable grounds for suspecting  that
    the marriage was entered into for the predominant purpose of securing a
    right of residence, there is an evidential burden on the  applicant  to
    address those suspicions.  Judge Higgins stated that  the  question  he
    had to determine was whether he was satisfied,  in  the  light  of  the
    totality of the evidence and information before him, that it  was  more
    probable than not that this was a marriage of convenience.

8.   His answer to that  question  was  "no".  He  considered  the  evidence
    before  him  and  concluded  that  he  was  not  satisfied   that   the
    respondent's  marriage  was,  more  likely  than,  not  a  marriage  of
    convenience.

9.   On this  appeal  the  Secretary  of  State  contends  that  the  judge'
    decision contained errors of law.  The  first  error  suggested  by  Mr
    Naith, who appeared for the Secretary  of  State  (the  respondent  not
    appearing and not being represented), is that it was wrong in principle
    not to adjourn the hearing in circumstances where the parties  had  not
    appeared and there were disputed facts in issue. We do not accept  that
    contention. The question of whether to grant an adjournment is a matter
    of discretion and it  cannot  be  said  that,  in  circumstances  where
    neither  party  had  attended  and  neither  party  had  requested   an
    adjournment, that it was wrong for the judge to have continued with the
    hearing. We doubt whether the Secretary of State would have  complained
    that the matter was not adjourned if  the  decision  had  been  in  her
    favour. It is certainly not the case that a Tribunal judge must adjourn
    a hearing before determining on the evidence that the  case  should  be
    decided against the Secretary of State.

10.  Mr Naith's second contention  was  that  the  judge  erred  in  law  by
    finding against the Secretary  of  State  in  circumstances  where  the
    evidence put forward by the respondent had not been tested.  Again,  we
    see no merit in that contention. The  evidence  before  the  judge  was
    admissible and he was entitled and obliged to determine the  matter  on
    the basis of his assessment of that evidence if he  did  not  otherwise
    adjourn the case. The reason why evidence was not  tested  was  because
    the Secretary of State did not appear to test it. Had the Secretary  of
    State attended and argued that she  had  not  been  able  to  test  the
    evidence because the respondent had not appeared, the matter might have
    been determined differently. But in the event the  judge  assessed  the
    evidence before him as he was bound to do and we can see  no  error  in
    his approach, nor in his decision.

Notice of Decision

11.  In those circumstances this appeal is dismissed.

12.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 18 November 2015

Mr Justice Phillips




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The fee award made by the First-tier Judge stands.


Signed   Date 18 November 2015

Mr Justice Phillips
