
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/37704/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th July, 2016                            |On 10th August, 2016          |
|Signed and sent for                           |                              |
|Promulgation 4th                              |                              |
|August, 2016                                  |                              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                                    A E U
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Jibowu of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr McVitie a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant was born on [ ] 1977 and is a national  of  Nigeria.   He
    appealed  against  the  decision  of  the  respondent  taken  on   12th
    September, 2014 to direct his removal from  the  United  Kingdom.   His
    appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Meah at Taylor  House  on
    15th October, 2015 and in a determination promulgated on 26th  October,
    2015 he dismissed his appeal under the Immigration Rules and  dismissed
    his appeal under Article 8.

2.   The appellant had sought to remain in the United Kingdom on  the  basis
    of his relationship with a Ugandan national who enjoys  refugee  status
    in the United Kingdom and who together have a child who  has  leave  to
    remain in line with the child's mother.  The appellant and his  partner
    have two children together.

3.   Permission was granted on the basis  that  it  was  arguable  that  the
    judge had erred by taking a distorted approach to Article 8, as set out
    in paragraph 16 of the determination and had failed to  set  out  in  a
    sufficiently rigorous manner the criteria pursuant to Section 117.   At
    paragraph 16, the judge said that she  found  that  there  was  nothing
    which was significant enough to make her depart  from  the  Immigration
    Rules, which she found to be a complete code.

4.   Unfortunately the determination is  confused.   The  judge  appears  to
    have ignored the fact that it should be possible for anyone  reading  a
    determination to know all the reasons why the  judge  has  reached  the
    decision that he or she has reached.  It is necessary to set out at the
    very least a summary of the evidence  heard,  otherwise  it  is  simply
    impossible to know whether the judge has  made  adequate  findings  and
    given adequate reasons for those findings. It should not  be  necessary
    to look at the Record of Proceedings, (which the parties  do  not  have
    access to in any event, unless they appeal) because  the  determination
    should be a complete record in itself.  Only then can both parties know
    why they have won or lost the appeal.

5.   An example of the difficulty which occurs  when  a  determination  does
    not set out the evidence is highlighted by  paragraph  22.   The  judge
    noted that the couple moved in to live together  properly  in  December
    2015, when they started full-time cohabitation and noted that prior  to
    this the  couple  spent  time  with  each  other  at  their  respective
    residences, although, "they were living together" as both had their own
    accommodation, which she took to be an indication that they were living
    apart during these times.  With very great respect  to  her,  the  fact
    that a couple do not live full-time together does not  mean  that  they
    are not in a genuine relationship.  There are  other  examples  of  the
    difficulty caused by the failure of the judge to set  out  at  least  a
    summary of the evidence she heard, but it is not necessary  for  me  to
    refer to them.

6.   With the agreement  of  Counsel  and  the  Presenting  Officer  I  have
    concluded that the determination must be set aside and the  appellant's
    appeal be reheard afresh by a  judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Meah.  I respectfully suggest that two hours be allowed  for  the
    hearing.

Notice of Decision

The determination is set aside and the appeal remitted  to  the  First  Tier
Tribunal for a de  novo  hearing  before  a  judge  other  than  First  Tier
Tribunal Judge Meah.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

The First Tier Tribunal directed that the appellant  is  granted  anonymity.
I have not been asked to vary or alter that direction. No  report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly  identify  him  or  any  member  of
their family.  This direction applies both  to  the  appellant  and  to  the
respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
