
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38561/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16th July 2014                             |On 24th July 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE

                                   Between

                                 MAE DRAPER
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a female citizen of the Philippines born  20  October
      1972.

   2. The appellant had been granted entry clearance as a visitor  until  31
      July 2013.  She arrived in the United Kingdom in February of that year
      and on 23 July 2013 applied for variation of leave to  remain  as  the
      spouse of a person present and settled in the  United  Kingdom.    The
      respondent had decided on 11 September 2013 to reject the  application
      on the basis that the appellant did not qualify for  leave  to  remain
      under Appendix FM of the Rules and  that  there  were  no  exceptional
      circumstances justifying the  grant  of  leave  outside  those  rules.
      Removal directions were also given under Sect 47 of the Immigration  ,
      Asylum & Nationality Act 2006.

   3. The appellant appealed that decision and in doing so did  not  request
      an oral hearing.  The appellant indicated  she  was  content  for  the
      matter to be dealt with "on the papers".

   4. The matter came before Judge of the  First-Tier  Tribunal  Sangha  who
      dismissed the appeal both under the Rules and  in  respect  of  "human
      rights grounds".  The determination is dated 24 February 2014.

   5. In the judge's determination  the  appellant's  case  is  set  out  at
      paragraphs 8 to 14 which also contains details of how  the  respondent
      reached her conclusions upon the original application.

   6. The judge reached a conclusion that  the  appellant  did  not  qualify
      under the Immigration Rules and the judge then went on to consider the
      guidance given in the Upper  Tribunal  reported  decision  of  Gulshan
      [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) before dismissing that aspect of the appeal.

   7. The appellant then sought leave to appeal that decision.  The  grounds
      indicated that the judge may  have  erred  in  law  in  a  failure  to
      consider the appellants human rights in  line  with  the  case  of  MF
      (Article 8 - New Rules) Nigeria [2012] UKUT 00393.  The  grounds  also
      allege that the judge had erred in failing to take proper  account  of
      the medical condition of the appellant's mother-in-law and in  respect
      of  all  parties  affected  by  the  respondent's  decision  and  that
      insurmountable obstacles prevented the appellants return  to  make  an
      application in her home country.

   8. The application came before another judge of the  First  Tribunal  who
      refused the application in a decision dated 19 March 2014.

   9. Giving reasons for this refusal that judge said this:

         "1.  By a determination promulgated on  3  March  2014,  First-Tier
      Judge Sangha dismissed the appellant's appeal against  a  decision  of
      the respondent.  Having assessed the  evidence,  the  judge  concluded
      that the appeal did not succeed pursuant  to  the  Immigration  Rules,
      HC395; or through  the  application  or  Article  8  of  the  European
      Convention on Human Rights.

     2.  Realistically, the grounds on which the appellant seeks  permission
      to appeal do not suggest that the judge was not entitled to  determine
      this appeal on the papers (paragraph 5 of the determination refers).
     3.  In my assessment the grounds do  not  establish  that  a  grant  of
      permission would be appropriate.  It seems  to  me  that  the  judge's
      reasoning in his paragraphs 15 to 24 very adequately explains why this
      is not an appeal that should have succeeded pursuant to the  Rules  or
      Article 8.  Amongst other things, the judge pointed out that there was
      nothing to stop the appellant from returning to  the  Philippines  and
      applying for entry clearance to join her husband  and  daughter  again
      after a temporary separation.  There  would  be  no  question  of  the
      appellant's (British) daughter having  to  leave  her  school  or  the
      United Kingdom.  Given, amongst other things, what the  appellant  has
      told  the  UK  Immigration  Authorities  (see  paragraph  17  of   the
      determination), the judge was properly  satisfied  that  it  would  be
      appropriate for this appellant to return to the Philippines  in  order
      to apply for entry clearance to rejoin her husband and child  in  this
      country (his paragraph 22).

     4.  In other  words,  the  grounds  do  not  establish  any  irrelevant
      factors that the judge took into account, nor establish  any  material
      factors that he did not  take  into  account.   Given,  amongst  other
      things, the determination in Gulshan [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC), circulated
      on 20 December 2013, the judge did not need to explain any further why
      the appeal fell to be dismissed by reference to all the  grounds  that
      were before him.

     5.  The grounds do not identify any arguable error of  law.   There  is
      no basis upon which to interfere with the decisions of the  First-Tier
      Tribunal Judge".

  10. The appellant's application for leave  was  then  renewed  before  the
      Upper Tribunal itself.  The reasons given suggested a  material  error
      of law in dealing with the question of human rights and in failing  to
      consider the health issues suffered by the appellant's husband (whilst
      the appellant was absent from the UK) and again the condition  of  the
      appellant's mother-in-law.

  11. In granting leave a judge of the Upper Tribunal said this:

         "It is arguable that the judge failed to carry  out  an  Article  8
      ECHR Assessment having found that the appellant  did  not  qualify  to
      remain in the United Kingdom under the Article  8  Provisions  of  the
      Immigration Rules".

  12. Hence the matter came before me sitting in the Upper  Tribunal  on  16
      July 2014.

  13. There was  no  attendance  or  appearance  by  or  on  behalf  of  the
      appellant.  I note that on 11 June 2014 due notice of the hearing  was
      sent to the appellant at the address given by  her.   No  notification
      has been received from the appellant indicating she would be unable to
      attend.  I considered it appropriate to proceed with  the  hearing  in
      the absence of the appellant by reason of Rule  38  of  the  Procedure
      Rules (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in that it is within  the  interests
      of justice to proceed with the hearing.

  14. Following the grant of leave the respondent submitted a response under
      Rule 24 of the above mentioned procedure rules indicating that in  the
      respondents  view  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  judge  directed  himself
      appropriately especially bearing in mind the guidance in  Gulshan  and
      that the judge came to a reasoned  finding  and  that  there  were  no
      exceptional circumstances that would make it  unjustifiably  harsh  to
      remove the appellant.

  15. For the reasons given below I do not consider that the judge made  any
      material error of law in reaching  the  conclusions  set  out  in  the
      determination mentioned above.

  16. No challenge has been made to the judge proceeding  to  determine  the
      appeal "on the papers".  This was at the  request  of  the  appellant.
      Her consent to this course of action being contained within the notice
      of appeal that she initially lodged against the respondent's decision.

  17. No challenge has been made to way the  judge  dealt  with  the  matter
      under the Immigration Rules.  The challenge is to the  way  the  judge
      dealt with the matter under Article 8  ECHR.   It  is  of  course  the
      situation that certain aspects that form the basis of  Article  8  are
      themselves contained within the Immigration Rules.   It  is  a  matter
      then for a "stand alone" consideration of Article 8  to  be  conducted
      only if there are particular compelling or  exceptional  circumstances
      that exist in an individual case.

  18. In my view it is clear that from paragraphs 15 to 24  of  the  judge's
      determination he fully set out why the appeal could not  succeed  both
      under the Rules and by reason of Article 8 ECHR.

  19. The grounds seeking leave refer to the case of MF Nigeria in the Upper
      Tribunal.  That case has of course been the subject of  an  appeal  to
      the Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 and there are
      then other cases both in the High Court (Nagre [2013] EWHC 720) and in
      the Upper Tribunal in the case of Shahzad (Article 8: Legitimate  Aim)
      [2014] UKUT 00085 (IAC).

  20. The judge properly referred to the case of Gulshan which very  clearly
      sets out the guidance  with  regard  to  a  proper  assessment  of  an
      appellant's claim both under the  Rules  and  Article  8.   The  judge
      refers to that case and it is clear from  the  determination  that  he
      followed that guidance.  The conclusions he reached  were  that  there
      were no circumstances that would preclude the appellant  from  leaving
      the United  Kingdom  for  her  home  country  in  order  to  make  the
      appropriate application for settlement.  When  read  as  a  whole  the
      determination shows that the judge concluded (for the  reasons  shown)
      that there were no particular compelling or exceptional  circumstances
      and that there were no (paragraph 21) insurmountable obstacles.


  21. In all these circumstances I find that no arguable  error  of  law  is
      contained within the  judge's  determination  and  the  findings  must
      stand.

  22. The appeal of the appellant is accordingly dismissed.

  23. No application has  been  made  to  me  in  respect  of  an  anonymity
      direction and I do not make such a direction.





Signed                                  Date:  23/7/14


Upper Tribunal Judge Poole


