
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38757/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 January 2016                   |On 17 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MRS SASIPAT NILNATE
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Sreeramam. Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms C Record of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals, with permission, against  the  decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Phillips dated 23 June 2015.   The  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge allowed, under the Immigration Rules, the appeal of
    Mrs Nilnate against a decision dated 23 September 2014 by the Secretary
    of State.  The appellant's application dated 2 April 2014 for variation
    of leave to enter or remain as a spouse under Appendix FM  was  refused
    by the Secretary of State  and  a  decision  was  made  to  remove  the
    appellant under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum  and  Nationality
    Act 2006.

 2. Hereinafter, I will refer to Mrs  Nilnate  as  the  appellant  and  the
    Secretary of State as the respondent as they were in  turn  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The appellant is 32 years old born on 4 March 1983 and  a  national  of
    Thailand and on 14 April 2008 she entered the United Kingdom with entry
    clearance as a student from 14 April 2008 until 30 June 2009.  She  was
    subsequently granted leave as a Tier 4 (General) Student from  22  June
    2009 until 30 September 2010 and again from 12  October  2010  until  1
    January 2012.  She was then granted leave to remain as a Tier 1  (Post-
    Study) Migrant from 17 April 2012 until 17 April 2014 and  on  2  April
    2014 she applied for leave to remain as a spouse and it is the  refusal
    of that application which is the subject of this appeal.

 4. On 13 September 2014 the respondent carried out  a  marriage  interview
    and found that there were many discrepancies  between  the  appellant's
    account and that of her British national spouse Abdul Karim  Ilyas  and
    thus the respondent was not satisfied that the marriage was genuine and
    subsisting and the parties intended to  live  together  permanently  as
    husband and wife.  The application was therefore refused under Appendix
    FM E-LTRP.1.7 (the relationship between the applicant and their partner
    must e genuine and subsisting).  Consideration was also  given  to  her
    private life under paragraph 276ADE but found that there  would  be  no
    very significant obstacles to the appellant's integration  in  Thailand
    should she return.  The reasons for  refusal  letter  states  that  the
    majority of the questions posed in the  interview  were  around  recent
    events but she and  her  sponsor  were  unable  to  provide  consistent
    answers about their situations when they were both  together  and  this
    cast serious doubt that their marriage was genuine and they intended to
    live permanently as husband and wife.  There was no question  that  the
    appellant met the income threshold under Appendix FM.

 5. The Secretary of State made the application for permission to appeal on
    the basis that the judge had erred in law because she had reversed  the
    burden of proof and applied the wrong standard of proof.  The  question
    before the judge was a simple one: had  the  appellant  discharged  the
    burden of proof to  demonstrate  this  was  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    marriage?  The judge's conclusions on the genuineness of  the  marriage
    were set out at paragraph 79  and  were  convoluted  and  although  the
    balance of probabilities was mentioned the judge stated

         "Noting that a decision that the marriage is one of convenience  is
         a matter of some moment".

    The Secretary of State submitted that this appeared to have been lifted
    from a headnote in Miah  (interview's  comments:  disclosure:  fairness
    [2014] UKUT (IAC).  This  decision  was  irrelevant  because  Miah  was
    dealing with EEA cases where there was a burden  on  the  Secretary  of
    State to demonstrate reasonable grounds for suspicion that the marriage
    was not genuine but the question before this judge was not  whether  it
    was  a  marriage  of  convenience  but  whether  it  was  genuine   and
    subsisting.  The judge also referred to Miah  in  paragraph  57.   Miah
    refers to procedural fairness in EEA marriages and this was not an  EEA
    case and as the judge states at paragraph 58 there  was  no  procedural
    unfairness.

 6. The Secretary of State submitted that there was a lack of reasoning  in
    the judge's analysis of the discrepancies referred to  in  the  refusal
    letter.  For example at  paragraph  61  the  judge  recorded  that  the
    sponsor had stated that the appellant banks with HSBC when in fact  she
    banked with Lloyds but he found no adverse weight could be attached  to
    this in isolation.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal.

 8. At the hearing before me Ms Sreeraman relied on the written grounds for
    permission to appeal averring that  the  judge  had  erred  in  law  by
    reversing the burden of proof and applying the wrong standard of proof.
     The one question before  the  judge  was  whether  the  appellant  had
    discharged the burden of proof to demonstrate that this was  a  genuine
    and subsisting marriage.  It was submitted that the judge's conclusions
    set out at paragraph 79 were convoluted and  although  the  balance  of
    probabilities was mentioned  the  judge  also  states  "noting  that  a
    decision that the marriage is one of convenience is a  matter  of  some
    moment" and this was completely irrelevant and  appears  to  have  been
    lifted from Miah (interviewers comments: disclosure:  fairness)  [2014]
    UKUT (IAC).  Miah dealt with EEA cases where there is a burden  on  the
    Secretary of State to demonstrate that there are reasonable grounds for
    suspicion and also because the question before the judge was not if  it
    was a marriage of convenience but if it  was  genuine  and  subsisting.
    That he had taken the wrong approach was reinforced by his reference to
    Miah in paragraph 57, this was not an EEA case and as the judge  stated
    at paragraph 58, there was no procedural fairness issue.

 9. In addition there was a lack of reasoning in the  judge's  analysis  of
    the discrepancies referred to in the refusal letter.   For  example  in
    paragraph 61 the  judge  recorded  the  sponsor  had  stated  that  the
    appellant banked with the HSBC where in fact she banked with Lloyds but
    found no adverse weight could be attached to this in  isolation.   Even
    if the sponsor did not  ask the appellant private questions as a couple
    one would expect them to have some discussion of their  finances  as  a
    couple living together.  It would be expected for  them  to  have  some
    basic knowledge of each other and if the sponsor did not know  who  the
    appellant banked with he should have said so.

10. Ms Sreeraman reiterated that the judge  placed  reliance  on  Miah  and
    misdirected herself in law as this was an appeal  in  relation  to  the
    Immigration Rules,  not  an  appeal  under  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006.  Paragraph 79 implied that  the  judge
    considered it was the respondent's responsibility  to  establish  proof
    and that was not the case.  In addition there was no  real  explanation
    for the judge's decision and as such the decision was legally in error.



11. Ms Record submitted that at paragraph 45 the judge had set out all  the
    evidence and had the benefit of seeing and hearing the sponsor and  the
    appellant.  She referred to  the  consistent  thread  of  evidence  and
    although the judge may have expressed herself clumsily at paragraph 79,
    looked at as a whole, the judgment was sound.

12. In conclusion, I find it is clear from the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge that she was applying the Immigration Rules and not  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.  At paragraph 45
    she directed herself appropriately in  relation  to  the  standard  and
    burden of proof.  She stated

         "... in immigration appeals the onus of proof is generally  on  the
         appellant and the standard is on the balance of probabilities".

13. It is right to say  that  there  is  a  certain  amount  of  irrelevant
    material included in the determination particularly with  reference  to
    case law such as JC  (China)  [2007]  UKAIT  00027  and  RP  (Proof  of
    forgery) Nigeria [2006] UKAIT 00086 but the judge is nonetheless  clear
    that the issue in this particular case is  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    focused on the subsistence and the genuineness of the relationship.

14. It could be argued that Miah was referred to  on  the  basis  that  the
    interviewer's comments should be disclosed as a  matter  of  course  in
    relation to an interview in order that the appellant has a right  to  a
    fair hearing and  at  paragraph  57  the  judge  identified  that  Miah
    concerned the 2006 EEA Regulations but nonetheless considered that the

         "... same general principles apply in that there is a need to fight
         abuse but equally a need to ensure that the decision making process
         is procedurally fair and the  decisions  reached  are  the  correct
         ones".

    but, in this case, it was the responsibility of the appellant to obtain
    that interview record. The judge noted that the full transcript of  the
    interview prior to the hearing was not provided by the  respondent  but
    by the appellant who managed to obtain a  copy  via  a  Subject  Access
    Request.   It appears that it is this that  the  judge  is  commenting.
    The judge ultimately accepted  that  there  was  no  issue  taken  with
    procedural fairness here but not, it would seem, without comment on the
    process.

15. The judge did address her mind to the marriage  interview  because  she
    stated this formed the substantive basis of the  refusal  and  was  the
    focus of the submissions on the appellant's behalf.  In particular  the
    judge noted at paragraph 59 the comment made by the  interviewer,  when
    asked by the sponsor if he had given the right answers, "there  were  a
    few differences but nothing major".  As the judge pointed  out  it  was
    not clear how this could be reconciled with a comment  in  the  subject
    access papers that the marriage interview had been  conducted  and  the
    marriage found to be one of convenience.

16. Although the judge  uses  the  term  "one  of  convenience"  which  was
    normally ascribed to EEA marriages there is no doubt that the judge was
    considering this as a shorthand for whether the  marriage  was  genuine
    and subsisting.  The judge does address the  discrepancies  within  the
    interview noting that with regards to the bank statements  the  sponsor
    confirmed that he did not  ask  the  appellant  private  questions  and
    therefore was not clear about how much she earned.  The judge's  reason
    for refusing to place weight on this was because this was a discrepancy
    in isolation.  The judge also noted at paragraph 62 that the  full  and
    correct answer given by the sponsor in relation to the studies  of  his
    wife had not been given and that in fact the  sponsor  had  not  stated
    that she only came to the UK to study English but he also  referred  to
    her having "done erm like management business or something".  The judge
    noted that she studied project management.

17. At paragraph 63 the judge also notes in relation to the fact  that  the
    sponsor did not know where the appellant's  family  lived  in  Thailand
    that the sponsor had in fact replied by adding further detail saying it
    was about eight hours from Bangkok and he could not remember  the  name
    of the city.

18. Once again at paragraph 64 the judge notes that  the  refusal  had  not
    recorded the full answer of the sponsor and that the sponsor  gave  the
    name of the restaurant and the fact that it was a Thai restaurant as to
    where he met his wife.  The judge recorded at paragraph 64  that  there
    was a further discrepancy in relation to  the  marriage  but  that  the
    question was vague and appeared to have mixed up  the  question  as  to
    when the sponsor married and when his marriage ended.

19. At paragraph 68 the judge specifically found that the discrepancy as to
    when they  began  living  together  was  inconclusive  and  further  at
    paragraph 69 addressed the issue of the discrepancy in regards to where
    they  lived  and  photographs  had  been  provided  to  show  that  the
    description of the outside was ambiguous as to the  number  of  windows
    because one of them was a bay window comprising three windows.  One  of
    them said it was four windows  visible  and  the  other  said  two  and
    according to this, both could be  correct.   The  judge  also  recorded
    further what he concluded to be minor discrepancies  at  paragraphs  71
    and 72 but as an overarching conclusion at paragraph 73 stated

         "I have had the benefit of seeing and  hearing  the  appellant  and
         sponsor and had the benefit of studying the replies  given  at  the
         marriage interview including those not replied upon in the  refusal
         which were the large number of consistent answers, not  simply  the
         inconsistent ones.  I note that there was a  consistent  thread  in
         the answers at interview and the evidence at the hearing."

20. It is quite clear that the judge  noted  that  there  is  a  consistent
    thread in the answers at the interview  and  at  the  evidence  at  the
    hearing.  The judge addressed her mind to the question  as  to  whether
    these were two incredible witnesses  who  had  fabricated  a  claim  or
    whether they had entered into a genuine  and  subsisting  marriage  and
    intended to live permanently together.  It was also noted that

         "It was not suggested to them that they are not living together  at
         the moment and they did attend to provide oral  evidence  with  the
         two additional witnesses noted above whose  evidence  I  have  been
         given no reason to doubt."

21. Therefore the judge clearly accepted  the  evidence  not  only  of  the
    appellant and the sponsor having analysed the  discrepancies  but  also
    the evidence of the other witnesses.

22. The judge also addressed the concerns of the respondent in relation  to
    the differences between the appellant and sponsor and noted that it did
    seem strange that the sponsor's children were not at his wedding but  I
    note that the sponsor  had  identified  that  he  did  not  invite  his
    children to the wedding because one of the children was hyperactive and
    could not be left alone and he did not have a  good  relationship  with
    his son's wife.  I do not find that because the judge found it  strange
    that the sponsor continued to pay council tax for his  second  wife  or
    that the sponsor took sugar when the appellant was not  aware  that  he
    did, fundamentally undermined the findings of  the  judge.   Indeed  at
    paragraph 76, she found that there were  significant  consistencies  in
    the evidence and the interview notes did not  show  evidence  that  the
    appellant and sponsor were not making their best efforts to answer  the
    questions.

23. At paragraph 77 the judge  correctly  identifies  that  the  issues  of
    concern in the refusal letter and the submissions  should  be  balanced
    against the weight of the other replies during  the  lengthy  interview
    and, answers given at the hearing, where detailed questions were  asked
    and about which no discrepancy issues had been taken.  Specifically the
    judge noted that the documentary evidence was not anything  other  than
    consistent with the couple living together and "enjoying  a  close  and
    loving relationship which shows a  genuine  and  subsisting  marriage".
    Further, at paragraph 78 the judge recorded that the sponsor was  taken
    ill when the appellant was at home within 2011 and  there  was  a  past
    history and a bond because of the heart attack and that they were  also
    making plans for the future.

24. Lord Justice Richards in the Court of Appeal emphasised in Rosa v  SSHD
    [2016] EWCA Civ 14, the difference between  the  tests  to  be  applied
    regarding  relationships  under  the  Immigration  Rules  (genuine  and
    subsisting marriage) and those under the EEA Regulations  (marriage  of
    convenience) by stating at paragraph 41

         "I accept that the tribunal's language was loose. It may be  useful
         to contrast a marriage of convenience  with  a  "genuine"  marriage
         (indeed, Underhill LJ treated them as antonyms at  paragraph  6  of
         his judgment in Agho), but the focus in relation to a  marriage  of
         convenience should be on the intention of the parties at  the  time
         the marriage was entered  into,  whereas  the  question  whether  a
         marriage is "subsisting" looks to whether the marital  relationship
         is a continuing one. I am satisfied,  however,  that  the  tribunal
         understood that the ultimate question was whether it was a marriage
         of convenience, not whether the marriage was subsisting,  and  that
         its findings provided a proper basis for the conclusion it  reached
         that the marriage was one of convenience. The tribunal was  correct
         to look at the evidence concerning  the  relationship  between  the
         appellant and her husband after the marriage itself  (both  before,
         during and after the husband's period of imprisonment), since  that
         was capable of casting light on the intention of the parties at the
         time of the marriage. The tribunal's finding that "it is a marriage
         of convenience and always has  been"  (paragraph  26)  covered  the
         position at the time of the marriage. The wording suggests that the
         tribunal had in mind the possibility that a marriage of convenience
         might turn into a genuine marriage in the course of time,  but  the
         finding that it had always been a marriage of convenience makes  it
         unnecessary to consider that potentially interesting issue  in  the
         present case."

25. The approach by the judge as outlined above did address the  nature  of
    the relationship both before the marriage [62] and after  the  marriage
    and whether it was genuine and subsisting using the  correct  test.   I
    accept that paragraph 79 is inelegantly phrased stating that

         "...  the  inconsistencies  and  circumstances  identified  in  the
         refusal and submissions are sufficient to  raise  a  suspicion  but
         this is not enough"

    and it does suggest the judge might be reversing the burden  of  proof.
    When reading the decision as a whole, however, and bearing in mind this
    was  the  last  paragraph  in  a  relatively  detailed   analysis   and
    conclusion, reached at paragraph  77,  and  prior  to  the  unfortunate
    phrasing at paragraph 79, I am not persuaded that there is an error  of
    law and I find  that  the  judge  further  to  Shizad  (sufficiency  of
    reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  00085  (IAC)  has  given  sufficient
    reasoning for his findings and resolved the discrepancies raised in the
    reason for refusal.

26. This was the only challenge in relation to the decision and I therefore
    dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal and challenge.

27. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  contains  no  material
    error of law and shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 10th February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

