
[pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38489/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9th October 2015                  |On 23rd October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                              mr Raziq Hussain
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Imamovic of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal against a determination of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge A L B Nixon) promulgated  on  30th  December
    2013.  In that determination  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal against a decision of 18th  September  2014  to  the
    effect that his application for leave to remain as a Tier  4  (General)
    Student Migrant was to be refused.

The Background

 2. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan.  He was born on  27th  January
    1990.  He came to the UK, having obtained entry clearance as a student,
    in 2012 and he had valid leave until 22nd August 2014.   Unfortunately,
    he failed the speaking and listening elements of an English test  which
    he had taken with a view to obtaining  further  leave.   Having  failed
    once, he had obtained a new test date  for  2nd  September  2014,  but,
    seemingly as a result of his having failed  the  initial  test  and  no
    longer satisfying the requirements for stay as a student, he had had to
    give up his passport to the Home Office.  It  appears  that  he  sought
    return of his passport the day prior to the date his  test  was  booked
    (at least that was the finding of the First-tier Tribunal) but that  it
    was not returned to him and that, as a result, he was not able to  take
    the test at all.  His  application  for  further  leave  was  deficient
    because, as a result of his failing his test, he had not been  able  to
    provide, with that application which he had made on 21st August 2014, a
    Confirmation of Acceptance for  Studies  (CAS).   On  that  basis,  the
    Respondent concluded that his application did not meet the requirements
    of the relevant Immigration Rules,  in  particular,  paragraph  117  of
    Appendix A to those Rules.  The Appellant appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal and Its Decision

 3. The First-tier Tribunal held an oral hearing of the Appellant's  appeal
    on 19th December 2014.  He attended and gave  oral  evidence.   He  was
    represented by Mr Sarwar of Counsel and  the  Secretary  of  State  was
    represented by Mr Hussain, a  Presenting  Officer.   It  is  noted,  at
    paragraph 3 of the determination, that it was conceded  by  Counsel  on
    behalf of the Appellant that he did not meet the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  The appeal, therefore, proceeded  on  human  rights
    grounds only.  It is important to  note  that  concession  as  made  by
    Counsel because the  original  Grounds  of  Appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had sought to contend that the decision under appeal  was  not
    in  accordance  with  the  Immigration  Rules  and  there  had  been  a
    suggestion along  similar  lines  in  the  subsequent  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal and at  paragraph  11  of  a
    skeleton argument filed for the purposes of the hearing before me by Ms
    Imamovic.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal, in light of the  concession,  did  only  focus
    upon the human rights aspects of the appeal.  The  Tribunal  considered
    Article 8 in the  context  of  the  Immigration  Rules  by  looking  at
    paragraph 276ADE of Appendix FM.  The judge  found,  uncontroversially,
    that the requirements contained therein were not met  bearing  in  mind
    that the Appellant had spent all of  his  life  in  Pakistan  prior  to
    coming to the UK in 2012 and that no reason had been advanced as to why
    he could not return to Pakistan or why there might be  any  significant
    obstacles to his integration resulting from any return.  Indeed,  there
    has been no subsequent challenge to that  conclusion.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal then went on to say this;

         "13. I have borne in mind the decisions in Nagre  [2013]  EWHC  720
             and Gulshan (Article 8 - New Rules - correct approach)  [2013]
             UKUT 00640, and the case of Shahzad (Art  8:  legitimate  aim)
             [2014] UKUT 00085 and these  cases  make  it  clear  that  the
             Appellant   must   raised   (sic)   arguably   compelling   or
             compassionate grounds to cause me to go on  to  consider  this
             appeal under Article 8.  I find that the Appellant has  failed
             to out (sic) forward any such grounds.  I have  seen  evidence
             to show that he failed the listening  and  speaking  test  and
             then made an application in the full knowledge that  he  could
             not meet the Rules.  It is right to say that he  informed  the
             Respondent of the new test date on the application form and  I
             have seen evidence to show that he was not permitted entry sit
             (sic) the test as he was not in possession of his passport.  I
             note from his witness statement that he requested  its  return
             the day before the exam date and accordingly, it was  unlikely
             that he would have ben (sic)  given  the  passport  with  such
             short notice, even it (sic) were the  Respondent's  policy  to
             return travel documents when the applicant failed to meet  the
             Rules.  He complains that he asked for his passport  following
             the refusal.  I note that a letter was sent to  the  Appellant
             dated 1st September 2014  explaining  that  it  would  not  be
             returned to him.  I do not find this to be unfair.   It  seems
             clear to me that the Appellant left  his  application  to  the
             last minute and knew full well that  he  had  failed  relevant
             elements of the English requirements.  The burden  was  always
             upon him to ensure that he satisfied  the  legal  requirements
             before making his application and the Respondent cannot in  my
             judgment be criticised for not bending  the  Rules  to  assist
             him.   The  policy  of  not  returning   documents   when   an
             application fails or is bound to fail is a common  sense  one.
             I do not agree with Mr Sarwar that he met the Rules otherwise.
              I find the Appellant, not only did not have a valid  CAS,  he
             also failed to have  the  requisite  English  certificate  and
             there was no guarantee that he would have passed the test  had
             he retaken it on 2nd September.  I find therefore that he  has
             failed to show that he has arguable compelling grounds.

         14.  Had I gone on to consider Article 8, my  decision  would  have
             been the same, the Appellant having failed to  show  that  the
             decision  was  disproportionate  to  the  need  for  effective
             immigration control.  I would have had regard to Section  117B
             of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  as  an
             additional part of the proportionality assessment and noted in
             particular that the Appellant failed the speak element of  the
             English test.  This appeal must fail accordingly."

 5. The First-tier Tribunal then went on to confirm that it was  dismissing
    the appeal.

The Application for Permission to Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The grounds, as  originally  drafted,  have  been  built  upon  in  the
    skeleton  argument  referred  to  above.   Essentially,   though,   the
    complaint is, aside from the small point about the Immigration Rules  I
    have touched upon above, that the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law
    because it applied a threefold test to its consideration of  Article  8
    being

      a) a consideration of the Immigration Rules and what might be referred
         to as the Article 8 related Immigration Rules;

      b) a consideration as to whether there were any arguably compelling or
         compassionate grounds such as  to  justify  going  on  to  consider
         Article 8 outside the Rules;

      c) an actual consideration of Article 8 outside the Rules.

 7. It was contended there were only two steps  being  (a)  and  (c),  that
    there was no intermediate test, reliance being placed primarily  though
    not exclusively upon MM Lebanon [2014]  EWCA  985  and  that  this  had
    resulted in the First-tier Tribunal either not  considering  article  8
    outside the Rules or doing so only perfunctorily.   There  was  also  a
    contention there was little to show it was in the public  interest  not
    to grant the Appellant what he was seeking. Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal in these terms;

         "Even though the judge's decision and reasons was adequate  on  the
         basis of the Immigration Rules, it is nonetheless arguable that  in
         relation to argue Article 8 the judge should have borne in mind the
         decisions of MM Lebanon [2004] EWCA 985 and MK (Pakistan)".

 8. Permission having been granted, the appeal was listed before the  Upper
    Tribunal on 10th June  2015.   It  appears  that,  as  a  result  of  a
    misunderstanding, the Deputy Upper Tribunal who had been allocated  the
    appeal dealt with it on the papers despite the fact that the  Appellant
    and his representatives had been informed that the hearing  was  to  be
    adjourned to a different date.  There is no doubt that that amounted to
    procedural unfairness as was recognised in a short  decision  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Jordan of 27th August 2015,  setting  aside  the  papers
    determination which had been adverse to the Appellant.

 9. Accordingly, when matters came before me, it was to  consider  whether,
    in light of the grounds and the application for permission, the  First-
    tier Tribunal had erred in law.

The Hearing Before Me

10.  The  Appellant  was  represented  by  Ms  Imamovic  of  Counsel.   The
    Respondent was represented  by  Mr  Mills,  a  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer.  Ms Imamovic made submissions in line with the contents of the
    grounds  and  her  skeleton  argument.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    misdirected itself.  It had looked at Article 8 outside the  Rules  but
    only in a cursory manner.  There is no intermediate test as the  First-
    tier Tribunal had mistakenly thought.  The Appellant  had  pursued  his
    education in  the  UK  and  built  up  a  private  life.   It  was  the
    Respondent's fault that the Appellant found  himself  in  the  position
    that  he  was  in.   That  was  a  relevant  factor  when   considering
    proportionality and should have been taken into account by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  His future is now jeopardised.

11. Mr Mills accepted that there was  no  intermediate  test  as  such  but
    contended that it was simply  the  case  that,  with  respect  to  many
    appeals, there would be nothing to consider after an  assessment  under
    the Rules.  In this case  nothing  of  a  persuasive  nature  had  been
    advanced.  Even if the First-tier Tribunal had erred  in  law  such  an
    error could not be material.  Article 8  is  not  there  to  protect  a
    person's right to study in the UK.

My Decision

12. First of all, I have to say that there is  nothing  in  any  contention
    that the First-tier Tribunal erred with respect to  its  deciding  that
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules concerned with the  extension
    of leave for the purpose of studies were not met.  For one  thing,  the
    Rules do require a CAS to be provided and, on any view,  that  was  not
    done here.  Perhaps more importantly even  than  that,  Mr  Sarwar  had
    clearly acknowledged that the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    were not met and the First-tier Tribunal cannot be  criticised  at  all
    for accepting that concession and for then focussing  solely  upon  the
    arguments under Article 8 either within or outside the Rules.

13. It may be that the First-tier Tribunal should  have  simply  considered
    the matter under the Immigration Rules and then moved  straight  to  an
    Article 8 assessment outside of the Rules.  However, its  determination
    has to be read as a whole.  When that is done it is apparent that  much
    of what it had to say when  considering  whether  there  were  arguably
    compelling or compassionate  grounds  to  justify  a  consideration  of
    Article 8 was relevant to  such  a  consideration  outside  the  Rules.
    Thus, it noted that the Appellant had failed his English language test,
    it noted that with respect to his intended re-sit he had only requested
    the return of the passport a single day prior to  the  date  which  had
    been set  for  that  examination,  it  noted  that  when  he  made  his
    application he had done so knowing  it  was  defective,  it  took  into
    account the provisions of 117B  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 and it thought the Respondent's policy of not returning
    documents when an application had failed or was bound to  fail  was  "a
    common sense one".  It is not right to say, therefore, that the Article
    8  consideration  was,  on  a  full  reading  of   the   determination,
    perfunctory at all.  No error of law was made.

14. There is, in any  event,  a  further  point.   The  Appellant  had  not
    contended any more than that he wanted to remain in the  UK  to  pursue
    his studies.  It had been stated in Nasim & Others (Article  8)  [2014]
    UKUT 25 (IAC) that Article 8 had only limited utility in  private  life
    cases which, like this one, were far removed  from  the  issue  of  the
    protection of an individual's moral and physical integrity.  The  Upper
    Tribunal said this;

         "19. It is important to bear in mind that the 'good reason',  which
             the state must invoke is not a fixity.  British  citizens  may
             enjoy friendships, employment and  studies  that  are  in  all
             essential respects the same as those enjoyed by  persons  here
             who  are  subject  to  such  controls.   The  fact  that   the
             government  cannot  arbitrarily  interfere  with   a   British
             citizen's enjoyment of those things,  replicable  though  they
             may be, and that, in practice, interference is  likely  to  be
             justified only be strong reasons, such as imprisonment  for  a
             criminal offence, cannot be used to restrict the  government's
             ability to rely on the enforcement of immigration controls  as
             a reason for  interfering  with  friendships,  employment  and
             studies enjoyed by a person  who  is  subject  to  immigration
             control.

         20.  We therefore agree with Mr Jarvis that [57] of Patel &  Others
             is a significant exhortation from the Supreme Court to refocus
             attention on the nature and  purpose  of  Article  8  and,  in
             particular, to recognise its limited utility to an  individual
             where one has moved along the continuum, from  that  Article's
             core area of operation towards what might be described as  its
             fuzzy penumbra.  The limitation arises, both from what will at
             that point normally be the tangential effect on the individual
             of the proposed interference and from the  fact  that,  unless
             there are particular reasons to reduce the public interest  of
             enforcing   immigration   controls,   that    interest    will
             consequentially  prevail  in  striking   the   proportionality
             balance (even assuming that stage is reached)."

15. Against that background, even if I  had  decided  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law, and I  expressly  have  not,  I  would  have
    concluded that any such error could not be  material  because,  on  the
    facts, given the approach set out in  Nasim,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    would have inevitably decided that Article 8 was not engaged.

Decision

There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal.  Its determination shall, therefore, stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Dated

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

