
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38604/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 18th June 2014                               |On 25th June 2014          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between

                         miss Rosemary Mbeere njogu
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Lourdes, Counsel, instructed by Edward Marshall
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, Miss Rosemary Mbeere Njogu date of  birth  4th  November
    1973 is a citizen of Kenya.  This is an appeal by the Appellant against
    a decision by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Burnett  promulgated  on  7th
    April 2014.

 2. I have considered whether any of the parties to the present proceedings
    requires the protection of an anonymity direction.  Taking into account
    all the circumstances I  do  not  consider  it  necessary  to  make  an
    anonymity direction.

 3. The Appellant  on  9th  May  2013  applied  for  a  residence  card  as
    confirmation of a right to reside in the United Kingdom as an  extended
    family member of an EEA qualified person exercising  treaty  rights  in
    the United Kingdom. It is the Appellant's case that she is an  extended
    family member of a Mr Visaho.  It is not challenged that Mr  Visaho  is
    an EEA national from Germany exercising treaty  rights  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Mr Visaho is in employment.

 4. The Appellant first came to the United Kingdom on 2nd November 2004  on
    a visa granting entry to the United Kingdom as  a  Student  Nurse.   At
    various stages that leave was extended.  In October 2006 the  Appellant
    sought further leave on the basis  of  being  a  Student  Nurse.   That
    application was granted but there was no further application after that
    date and the Appellant's leave to be in the United Kingdom came  to  an
    end with the passage of time.   The  Appellant  then  applied  on  13th
    September 2011 for a residence card.  That application was rejected.

 5. The Appellant further applied on 9th May 2013 for a residence card  and
    by decision served on 11th July 2013 that application was refused.   It
    is against that decision that the Appellant now appeals.

 6. In the main the facts are not in  dispute.   It  is  accepted  that  Mr
    Visaho is a German national and is working.  It is also  accepted  that
    the Appellant is now resident with Mr Visaho  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Thus it is accepted that she is currently a member of the household and
    dependent upon Mr Visaho as a family member.

 7. The issue in the appeal is whether or not the Appellant  was  dependent
    upon Mr Visaho when she was living in Nigeria and at a time when he was
    an EEA national.

 8. The evidence was that Mr Visaho became a German national in 2002.   The
    issue therefore before the Tribunal was whether or not for  the  period
    of 2002 to November 2004, the date when the Appellant came to  the  UK,
    the Appellant had been dependent upon Mr Visaho.

Legislative Framework

 9. Directive 2004/38/EC sets down the conditions governing the exercise of
    rights of free movement and residence in  the  territory  of  a  Member
    State of the EU for citizens and their family members.   Article  2  of
    the Directive provides for family members and it is accepted  that  the
    Appellant does not qualify under that criteria.  It is asserted however
    that the Appellant falls for consideration under Article 3.

10. Article 3 provides:-

    3.   (1) This Directive shall apply to all Union citizens who  move  to
             or reside in a Member State other than that of which they  are
             a national, and to their family members as defined in point  2
             of Article 2 who accompany or join them.

         (2) Without prejudice to any right to free movement and  residence
             the person concerned may have in their  own  right,  the  host
             Member  State  shall,  in   accordance   with   its   national
             legislation, facilitate entry and residence for the  following
             persons:

              (a)   any  other  family  members,  irrespective   of   their
                  nationality, not falling under the definition in  point  2
                  of Article 2 who, in the  country  from  which  they  have
                  come, are dependants or members of the  household  of  the
                  Union citizen having the primary right of residence . . .

                  The  host  Member  State  shall  undertake  an  extensive
                  examination  of  the  personal  circumstances  and   shall
                  justify any denial of entry or residence to these people.

11. Thus by Article (3) the obligations set out within  the  Directive  are
    extended to other family members who meet the conditions stated.

12. Those obligations are set out in  Recital  6  of  the  Directive  which
    provides:-

    (6)  In order to maintain the unity of the family in  a  broader  sense
         and without prejudice to the prohibition of discrimination  on  the
         grounds of nationality, the situation of those persons who are  not
         included in the definition of family members under this  Directive,
         and who therefore do not enjoy an  automatic  right  of  entry  and
         residence in the host Member State, should be examined by the  host
         Member State on the basis of its own national legislation, in order
         to decide whether entry and residence should  be  granted  to  such
         persons, taking into  consideration  their  relationship  with  the
         Union citizen or any other circumstance, such as their financial or
         physical dependence on the Union citizen.

13. The issue in the present appeal is whether or not the  Appellant  falls
    for consideration as other family  members.   Assistance  is  given  in
    understanding that term within the Immigration (European Economic Area)
    Regulations 2006.  Regulation 8 which uses  the  term  extended  family
    member rather than other family member provides as follows:-

    8.   (1) In these Regulations extended family member means a person who
             is not a family member of an  EEA  national  under  Regulation
             7(1)(a), (b) or  (c)  and  who  satisfies  the  conditions  in
             paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).

         (2) A person satisfies the condition  of  this  paragraph  if  the
             person is a relative of an EEA national,  his  spouse  or  his
             civil partner and

             (a)  the person is residing in a country other than the United
                  Kingdom and is dependent upon the EEA  national  or  is  a
                  member of his household;

             (b)  the person satisfied the condition in paragraph  (a)  and
                  is accompanying the EEA national to the United Kingdom  or
                  wishes to join him there; or

             (c)  the person satisfied the condition in (a), has joined the
                  EEA national in the United Kingdom  and  continues  to  be
                  dependent upon him or to be a member of his household.

14. As a final matter I note that during the course of  making  submissions
    the representative for the Appellant sought to assert  that  Regulation
    17 specifically Regulation 17(4) and (5) created an  independent  right
    to have their cases considered as extended family members.   Regulation
    17 provides as follows:-

    Issue of residence card

    17.  (4) The Secretary of State must  issue  a  residence  card  to  an
             extended family member not falling within Regulation 7(3)  who
             is not an EEA national on application if:

         (a)  the relevant EEA national in relation to the  extended  family
                  member is a qualified person or an  EEA  national  with  a
                  permanent right of residence in Regulation 15; and

         (b)  in all the circumstances it appears to the Secretary of  State
                  appropriate to issue the residence card.

     (5)  Where  the  Secretary  of  State  receives  an  application  under
             paragraph (4) he shall undertake an extensive  examination  of
             the personal circumstances of the applicant and if he  refuses
             the application shall  give  reasons  justifying  the  refusal
             unless this is contrary to the interests of national security.
             . .

The Appellant's Appeal

15. In the submissions the Appellant seeks to rely upon the case of SSHD  v
    Rahman [2012] (EUECJ.C.83/11), Aladeselu v SSHD [2013} EWCA Civ 14  and
    the case of Dauhoo [2012] UKUT 79 (IAC).

16. Within the Grounds of Appeal no challenge has been made to the findings
    of fact made by the judge.   At  the  commencement  of  the  hearing  I
    pointed out to the Appellant's representative that there was a specific
    finding by the judge  at  paragraph  50  that  the  Appellant  was  not
    dependent upon the Union citizen before she came to the United Kingdom.
     The Appellant's representative at that stage sought to challenge  that
    finding of fact.  He sought to rely  upon  a  number  of  matters.   He
    asserted that there was evidence from the  Appellant  and  the  Sponsor
    which confirmed the dependency and there was supporting evidence by way
    of an affidavit from a Mr Mungu.  There was also a series  of  receipts
    showing money transfers from  London  to  the  Appellant  allegedly  in
    Kenya.

17. The judge has carefully considered all of the evidence  presented.   He
    makes specific comment within paragraph 46  about  the  money  transfer
    receipts.  He points out certain discrepancies.  He was  not  satisfied
    in the circumstances that he could place any reliance upon the same.

18. Other than that the judge considered the evidence  otherwise  presented
    as to the alleged support given by the Sponsor Mr Visaho to his  cousin
    the Appellant.  He found it in the circumstances vague and  lacking  in
    real detail.  There was no evidence as to the frequency of payments and
    when and how much was being sent was also vague and uncertain.

19. The judge thereafter, in all the personal circumstances  in  which  the
    Appellant had been living in Kenya, had noted that she had been  living
    with her parents who had been paying all the household bills before the
    Appellant came to the United Kingdom.   He  noted  that  the  Appellant
    otherwise for a time had been working and that she had been using  that
    money solely for herself.  Given the lack of any  substantial  evidence
    to support the contention that Mr Visaho had on a  regular  basis  been
    supporting the Appellant the judge concluded that he was not  satisfied
    that the Appellant had been dependent upon Mr Visaho  at  the  relevant
    time.  Those were clear findings of fact  made  by  the  judge  on  the
    evidence that was before him.  The judge has given  valid  reasons  for
    concluding that on the basis of the  evidence  the  Appellant  was  not
    dependent upon Mr Visaho before she came to the United Kingdom.

20.  The  Appellant  has  sought  to  rely  upon  the  case  of  Dauhoo(EEA
    Regulations -reg 8(2)) Mauritius [2012] UKUT 79(IAC).  That case  makes
    plain that in order to succeed under the Directive and Regulations  the
    Appellant has to prove that she was either a member of the household of
    the Sponsor prior to her coming  to  the  United  Kingdom  or  she  was
    dependent upon the Sponsor prior to her coming to the Unite Kingdom.

21. It was the Appellant's case that she was dependent upon the Sponsor not
    that she was a member of the household.  The judge  has  clearly  found
    that she was not dependent.  Accordingly the Appellant  does  not  meet
    the requirements of the Directive and does not meet the requirements of
    Regulation 8 to be  considered  as  an  extended  family  member.   The
    Appellant therefore is not to be treated as "other family member".

22. In the light of that there was no obligation on the Secretary of  State
    to go on to consider the issue of a residence card.   That  was  not  a
    matter of a discretion but rather that the Appellant did not  meet  the
    primary requirement that she be an  extended  family  member  or  other
    family member.

23. The Appellant's representative has sought  to  assert  that  Regulation
    17(4) and (5) creates some independent right  to  be  considered  apart
    from Regulation 8.  That is clearly not the case.  Regulation 17 at the
    very beginning refers to the  requirement  that  an  individual  be  an
    extended family member in order for consideration to be  given  whether
    or not a residence card should be given.  It is not a case  that  there
    is a free standing right to have a case considered merely by reason  of
    some relationship but rather that a person that is an  extended  family
    member is entitled to have the process within Regulation 17(4) and  (5)
    undertaken by the Secretary of State.  However a pre-condition  of  the
    requirement of the Secretary of State to undertake that process is that
    the person be an extended family member.

24. The judge has given  valid  reasons  for  making  a  finding  that  the
    Appellant is not an extended family member or other family member.   On
    that basis alone the  application  for  a  residence  card  had  to  be
    dismissed.

25. The Appellant's representative confirmed that  the  Appellant  did  not
    otherwise have a partner or children within the  United  Kingdom.   She
    was living with her cousin.  However it was accepted that she  did  not
    meet the requirements of Appendix  FM.   No  other  serious  aspect  of
    private life has been advanced other than the fact that  the  Appellant
    has been in the United Kingdom since 2004 albeit apparently  from  some
    time after 2006 unlawfully.  No aspect of private life engaging Article
    8 has been advanced.

26. The Appellant could not succeed under  the  Immigration  Rules  in  any
    event.

27. As to whether Article 8 is engaged consideration has to be given to the
    cases of Gulshan 2013 UKUT 640, Nagre [2013] EWHC 720  and  Haleemudeen
    [2014] EWCA Civ 558. The Appellant has to show that there  are  factors
    within her case which warrant consideration of Article  8  outside  the
    rules.

28. The Appellant has advanced no significant aspect of family  or  private
    life such as to engage  Article  8  and  there  were  no  circumstances
    warranting consideration of this case outside Article 8 in any event.

29. Thus for the reasons set out the judge has made findings of fact  based
    on the evidence.  He has considered the evidence  and  has  highlighted
    those parts of the evidence to support his conclusion.   He  has  given
    adequate reasons for coming to the conclusions that he did.   There  is
    no material error of law within the determination.

Decision

30. The appeal by the Appellant against the decision of First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Burnett is therefore dismissed.   The  decision  to  dismiss  the
    appeal stands.

Signed                              Date 24.06.2014







Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure


