
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38789/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 July 2015                      |On 10 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             HUBERT OSEI WELBECK
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Pulman, Counsel, instructed by Toltops
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In a determination sent on 2 October  2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Norton-Taylor allowed the appeal  of  the  respondent  (hereafter  "the
    claimant") on Article 8  grounds  against the decision by the appellant
    (hereafter "the Secretary of State or SSHD") refusing to vary his leave
    to remain. The SSHD challenges the determination  of  the  FtT  on  two
    grounds only, both of which are carefully drawn.

2.   The first ground  maintains  that  the  judge  misdirected  himself  in
    wrongly treating s.117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 as a determinative fact rather than  one  among  a  number  of
    factors in a holistic assessment.   The  second  ground,  expressed  as
    being in the alternative, avers that the  judge  erred  in  considering
    that the claimant stood to benefit from the "Chikwamba ([2008] UKHL 40)
    principle".

3.   The first ground cannot succeed for the simple reason that even  though
    the  judge  did  say  that  the  approach  of  treating  s.117B(6)   as
    determinative was  "the  right  one",  he  expressly  went  on  in  the
    alternative at [82]-[85] to find that even if s.117B(6) was  "only  one
    factor among others" it remained in his assessment  that  the  decision
    would be disproportionate. At [83] he referred  back  to  his  previous
    findings that it was reasonable to expect that the  claimant's  British
    citizen wife and children would remain in the  UK.   In  [83]  he  also
    found that it would be unreasonable to expect the claimant and his wife
    and children to relocate to Nigeria. The  SSHD  made  no  challenge  to
    these findings, and no steps have been taken to amend the grounds.

4.   As regards the second ground, it must also fail for the reason that  it
    challenges what was  an  additional  reason  for  why  the  appeal  was
    allowed, namely that on Chikwamba principles it would not be reasonable
    to expect the claimant to return abroad and apply from there for  entry
    clearance. But that additional reason did not  impact  on  the  judge's
    finding  that  the  decision  under  challenge  ws  in  any   event   a
    disproportionate one because the claimant's removal in  consequence  of
    the decision would violate Article 8.  What he said about Chikwamba was
    superfluous.

5.   I would observe that in the course of submissions  Mr  Whitwell  sought
    to identify a number of shortcomings in the judge's  determination  and
    did so with some  cogency.  However,  as  he  himself  accepted,  these
    required him to go outside the grounds on which the  SSHD  had  brought
    her appeal.  No good reason has been  advanced for permitting the  SSHD
    to go beyond those grounds and indeed Mr  Whitwell did not even request
    that I do so.

6.   For the above reasons the SSHD's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Storey
