

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38584/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 March 2016                               |On 6 April 2016              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

                           MR CHAUDHRY WAQAS AHMAD
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Benton of Counsel instructed by Synthesis
Chambers Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan. He  had  been  granted  leave  to
enter the UK as a multiple entry general visitor valid  from  December  2010
until 19 December 2015. On 20 December 2012  he  applied  for  variation  of
leave to enter or remain. This was refused in March  2013.  His  application
for leave to remain of family and private life grounds  was  refused  on  12
September 2014. In that application the  appellant  submitted  that  he  had
established family and private life on the basis of having  entered  into  a
relationship with his brother's former wife with whom  he  was  living  with
her 7 children. The appellant said that  he  had  converted  to  the  Ahmadi
faith and as a result his father had  publicly  disowned  him.  His  father,
brother and other family members had threatened him on  many  occasions  and
therefore it would not be safe for him to return to Pakistan.

2. This appeal arises from the appellant's  challenge  to  the  decision  of
First-tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese made on 10 September 2015 to dismiss  his
appeal against the decision by the respondent to refuse him leave to  remain
and removal to Pakistan, decisions made on 12 September 2014.

3. At the hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  the  appellant's
representative accepted that the appellant could not meet  the  requirements
of the Immigration Rules but maintained that his appeal  should  be  allowed
outside  the  Rules  on  the  basis  of  exceptional  circumstances.  Whilst
accepting that the appellant had established a private and  family  life  in
the UK, the judge did not find that there would  be  grave  consequences  if
the appellant were to be returned to  Pakistan.  The  judge  gave  two  main
reasons for this conclusion. First of all, the judge stated that

    "... the Tribunal does not find his evidence regarding the treatment to
    be credible regarding the treatment of his family due to change of  his
    religious beliefs. The appropriate forum for this  claim  to  be  heard
    would be within the context of asylum but the appellant  had  not  made
    such a claim. The appellant claims that he is being ignored by the rest
    of his family but there is nothing to stop him from living  in  another
    part of the country even if his evidence was deemed to be credible. The
    appellant could also in any event seek protection  from  the  state  in
    respect of the threats which he claims  he  has  received,  it  is  not
    credible that the appellant has on the facts  been  persecuted  by  the
    state. "


4. Second, despite accepting the appellant had a  partner  settled  in  this
country with 7 children the judge did not consider that  his  removal  would
be disproportionate. As set out in [19}:

    "The  Tribunal  finds  that  the  decision   of   the   respondent   is
    proportionate in that the appellant and his partner were both aware  of
    the repercussions of their relationship and the fact that they  decided
    to enter into the relationship when the appellant was in  this  country
    as a visitor. The appellant has not complied with the  Rules  and  they
    may continue their relationship outside of the  country  with  Pakistan
    being an option which is open to them. It is not credible based on  the
    medical evidence before the Tribunal that the appellant's partner would
    not be ab le to cope without him she has the support  of  her  children
    the eldest of which is 24. The Tribunal  does  not  consider  that  the
    relationship of the appellant with his partner's children  is  adequate
    in the circumstances for weight  to  be  given  to  the  provisions  of
    section  55  of  the  Border,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009
    regarding the duty of the court to consider the best interests  of  the
    children ..."


5. The respondent in her Rule 24 notice stated that she opposed the  appeal.
She also expressed her view that  the  First  tier  Tribunal  did  not  have
before her the appellant's bundle.  This was seemingly a  reference  to  the
comment made by the First tier Tribunal judge  who  had  granted  permission
that he was unclear whether the  appellant's  bundle  before  him  had  been
filed with the Fist-tier Tribunal in  advance  of  the  hearing  which  took
place on 4 August 2016. The Rule 24 notice concluded  at  paragraph  4  that
"[g]iven  that  there  was  very  limited  evidence   of   the   Appellant's
relationship with his  partner's  children  it  was  properly  open  to  the
[judge] to find that the relationship was not adequate in the  circumstances
for the weight to be given to the provisions of s. 55". On 4 March 2016  the
appellant's solicitors wrote saying that they wished  to  confirm  that  the
appellant's bundle was submitted via recorded post on 13 July 2015 and  they
enclosed copies of this bundle along with a copy of their letter of 13  July
2015t and proof of postage.

6. I should first of all clarify that having  considered  the  copy  of  the
letter sent by the appellant's solicitors  on  13  July  and  the  proof  of
postage by recorded delivery I am  satisfied  that  (i)  the  appellant  had
served a bundle of documents on the respondent prior to  the  hearing  which
took place on 4 August; and  (ii) the judge appears not to have seen or  had
regard to this bundle.

7. That gets the respondent's defence of the judge's decision off to  a  bad
start because her  Rule  24  response  places  particular  reliance  on  the
"limited evidence" adduced by the  appellant  as  regards  his  family  life
circumstances  in  the  UK,  whereas  the   appellant's   bundle   contained
significant details of the same. It is  impossible  to  rule  out  that  the
judge may have taken a different view of the  s.55  considerations  in  this
case if he had seen or had regard to these further details.

8. That alone is sufficient to satisfy me that the judge erred in  law.   It
is also sufficient for me to  conclude  that  he  materially  erred  in  law
because even given the well-established principles governing  assessment  of
Article 8 claim outside the Immigration Rules I  cannot  exclude  that  this
further detail may have had a  material  bearing  on  the  outcome  of  that
assessment.

9. In any event, there are other serious flaws in the judge's reasoning.  As
regards his approach to the appellant's claim that he would be  at  risk  on
return because his family had disowned him and threatened him  for  becoming
an Ahmadi, the judge appeared to want to have it both ways. On the one  hand
his response  was  that  he  would  not  consider  this  claim  because  the
appellant had chosen not to make an asylum claim.  On  the  other  hand  his
response was to find such a claim not credible: see e.g. the  closing  words
of [16]: "... it is not credible that the appellant has on  the  facts  been
persecuted by  the  state."  He  also  appears  to  have  decided  that  the
appellant's claim could not succeed on asylum grounds anyway  because  "[he]
could also in any event seek protection from the state  in  respect  of  the
threats  which  he  claims  he  has  received".  That  proposition  is   not
consistent with Tribunal country guidance on risks  facing  certain  Ahmadis
on return to Pakistan: see MN and others (Ahmadis  -  country  conditions  -
risk) Pakistan CG [2012] UKUT 00389 (IAC)

10. Were this a judicial review application I would have some sympathy  with
the approach of seeking to respond to the appellant's claims regarding  risk
on return by virtue of having become an Ahmadi by pointing out that  he  had
chosen not to make  an  asylum  claim  which  afforded  him  an  alternative
remedy. In this appeal the appellant raised no asylum grounds in  his  s.120
notice. Nevertheless I cannot  find  fault  at  a  general  level  with  the
submissions made in his application and repeated  before  me  by  Mr  Benton
that just because an appellant chooses not to  apply  for  asylum  does  not
preclude him from asking that assessment of his Article 8 claim  takes  into
account all relevant factors, including his  concerns  and  fears  regarding
risk on return to Pakistan. Article 8 requires  a  holistic  assessment  and
the Strasbourg  Court  has  recognised  the  country  conditions  can  be  a
relevant factor: see e.g. JAKUPOVIC v. AUSTRIA - 36757/97 [2003] ECHR 67  (6
February 2003. Of course, at a general level it  may  be  said  that  for  a
judge to consider asylum grounds in an Article  8  context  leaves  open  to
abusive applicants to have two bites at the cherry contrary to the  one-stop
philosophy reflected in  the  legislation  -  first  by  raising  Article  8
grounds in a non-asylum appeal and second, if they are rejected,  by  making
an asylum claim. However, against that,  if  there  is  a  judicial  finding
rejecting any sound basis to the asylum grounds in an Article 8  context  it
may well be open to the respondent to certify any  subsequent  asylum  claim
as clearly unfounded on the basis of those findings of fact.

11. In any event, the judge in this case did  not  proceed  to  analyse  the
Article 8 claim in a coherent or consistent way and that in  itself  betrays
an error of law. Again, I am satisfied that it is material  because  if  the
judge had considered the appellant's asylum grounds on their  merit  and  in
the light of Tribunal country guidance it cannot be  excluded  that  he  may
have taken a different view about the level of  obstacles  and  difficulties
that would face the appellant on return. This error was  compounded  by  the
fact that the appellant's wife was also said to be someone who  had  changed
to the Ahmadi faith. This renders equally problematic  the  judge's  finding
at [17] that "[t]he objections from his family does not  mean  however  that
they are not able to continue their relationship in  Pakistan  ..."  And  at
[19] that "they may continue their relationship outside of the country  with
Pakistan being an option which is open to them. ".

12. Further errors on the part of the judge were:  incorrectly  applying  at
[15] the relevant tests set out in the Immigration Rules;  failing  to  take
into account the evidence relating to the appellant's  partner's  disability
( it was simply not enough to say  that  this  was  not  a  relevant  factor
because there was a child who was 24); appearing to apply a legality  rather
than a merits approach to the  appeal  at  [18];  and  construing  ss.117A-D
considerations as duties resting on the Secretary of State.

13. For the above reasons I conclude that the decision  of  the  First  tier
Tribunal was materially wrong in law  and  must  be  set  aside.  I  see  no
alternative in this case but to remit the appeal to be heard afresh  by  the
First-tier Tribunal whose composition must exclude Judge Abebrese.






                               Signed   [pic]
                                   Date




                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
