
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38279/2014
                                                               IA/41624/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 October 2015                    |On 12 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between
                        MS ADETOLA MORAYO ODUFARASIN
                        MISS FATHIA TEMITOPE FATEGBE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Canter of counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble a Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. In this appeal, the appellants appeal against a decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing their appeals against decisions  taken  on  13
    September 2014 to refuse to issue residence cards as confirmation of  a
    right of residence as the family member of an  European  Economic  Area
    ('EEA') national who is exercising treaty rights.

Background Facts

 2. The appellants are citizens of  Nigeria.  Mrs  Odufarasin  ('the  first
    appellant') was born on 2 October 1972 and Miss  Fategbe  ('the  second
    appellant') was born on 24 December 2000.  The appellants  applied  for
    residence cards as confirmation of a right of residence as  the  family
    member of  an  EEA  national  who  is  exercising  treaty  rights.  The
    Secretary of State refused their applications. In relation to the first
    appellant the reasons for refusal were that the Secretary of State  was
    not satisfied that the first appellant and the sponsor were in a  valid
    marriage or that they were in a durable relationship.  In  relation  to
    the second appellant the Secretary of State was not satisfied that  she
    had produced sufficient  evidence  to  show  she  was  related  to  the
    sponsor.

The Appeal

 3. The appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a determination
    promulgated  on  22  December  2014,  Judge  Grimmett   dismissed   the
    appellants' appeals.  The First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the  first
    appellant had not shown that she was lawfully married  in  Nigeria  and
    that there was no evidence to show  that  the  marriage  was  valid  in
    Portugal (the member state of the sponsor). The judge was not satisfied
    that the first appellant and the sponsor were in a durable relationship
    or any kind of relationship.

 4. The judge  then  went  on  to  consider  Article  8  finding  that  the
    appellants could not succeed under Article 8 of the European Convention
    on Human Rights.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 5. The appellants sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.   On
    16 February 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge Martin (sitting as  a  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge) refused permission to appeal.  On  11  March  2015  the
    appellants applied to the Upper Tribunal. On 1 June 2015 Upper Tribunal
    Judge Mandalia granted the appellants permission to appeal.  Thus,  the
    appeal came before me.

Summary of the Submissions

 6. The grounds of appeal are concerned solely with Article  8.  No  appeal
    was made against the First-tier Tribunal findings that the marriage was
    not valid nor the finding that the first appellant and the sponsor were
    not in a durable relationship.

 7. At the hearing Mr Canter made a number of  submissions  asserting  that
    the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law in the approach  and  findings
    on Article 8. I do not propose to set out those  submissions  given  my
    findings on the jurisdiction of the First-tier Tribunal, set out below.

 8. I asked both Mr Canter and Mr Bramble to address  me  on  the  case  of
    Amirteymour and others (EEA appeals; human rights)  [2015]  UKUT  00466
    (IAC).

 9. I asked for confirmation that  there  had  not  been  any  EEA  removal
    decisions. It was  confirmed  that  there  had  been  no  such  removal
    decisions. Mr Canter raised the issue that the Secretary of  State  had
    not raised the Amirteymour case in a  cross  appeal.  However,  it  was
    agreed that, as permission to appeal was granted on 1st June  2015  and
    the case was not decided until sometime after that  (now  confirmed  as
    promulgated on 4 August 2015), the Secretary of  State  was  not  in  a
    position at that time to have raised the case.

10. Mr Canter submitted that a section 120 of the Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 notice had been served in this case. He referred to
    the original application - EEA2 - of 6/2/14 at page 31 where  questions
    are asked about ties to  family  and  connections  in  the  country  of
    nationality. He submitted that the words in the  application  echo  the
    old paragraph 276 of the Immigration Rules  HC395  (as  amended)  which
    gave people leave to remain on Human Rights grounds if  there  were  no
    ties to the country of origin. This section of the application form was
    in effect a s120 Notice. Mr Canter referred me to the text of s120.  He
    submitted that the statutory regime was designed to facilitate one stop
    appeals. There was no point  in  asking  for  the  information  in  the
    application form if it was not to facilitate a complete assessment.  He
    submitted that on that basis the case of Amirteymour does not apply.

11. Mr Bramble submitted that the starting point was that this is an appeal
    concerning refusal of an EEA application.  The  refusal  letter  of  16
    September 2014 states if the applicant wishes the Secretary of State to
    consider any Article 8 application then a separate application must  be
    made. There was no s120 notice and he submitted no merit in Mr Canter's
    arguments that the question in the application form infers that a  s120
    Notice has been served. He submitted that the Upper  Tribunal  decision
    in Amirteymour was now good law. When no s120 notice has been served or
    EEA removal decision has been made an appellant cannot  bring  a  Human
    Rights claim before a First-tier Tribunal.

12. He referred to the specific decisions in the Amirteymour case in Izvira
    (at page 27 of the decision) and HF &  AN  (at  page  28).  Mr  Bramble
    submitted that these decisions were similar to the  instant  case.  The
    First-tier Tribunal judge had gone on to consider  Article  8  in  both
    appeals. The Upper Tribunal held that the First-tier Tribunal had erred
    in law by going on to consider Article 8.

Discussion

13. I do not accept Mr Canter's submission that the questions on page 31 of
    the application form EEA2 amount to a s120 Notice or that  such  Notice
    can be inferred from the inclusion of questions concerning ties to  the
    country of origin. The application  made  by  the  appellants  was  for
    confirmatory documents. They were not applications for leave to  remain
    in the UK. As set out in paragraph 26 of the  decision  in  Amirteymour
    those having a right to enter or reside under European Community Law do
    not require leave to enter or remain in the UK. A decision to refuse  a
    confirmatory document is conceptually different to a decision to refuse
    or grant  leave  under  the  Immigration  Rules.  At  paragraph  31  in
    Amirteymour the Upper Tribunal held:

         'Rights granted under EU law and leave granted under the  Rules  or
         Immigration  Acts  are  conceptually  and  legally  distinct.   Any
         assertion of a right to leave to remain or under the  Human  Rights
         Act is thus made on a different judicial basis...'

14. As a request for a document that provides confirmation of  a  right  to
    reside in the UK the application for a  confirmatory  document  is  not
    concerned with permission to enter or remain  in  the  UK  as  no  such
    permission is required. Section 120 applies to a person who has made an
    application to enter or remain or where a decision within  the  meaning
    of s82 of the Immigration Acts has been made. As set out  in  paragraph
    36 of Amirteymour Schedule 1 paragraph 1 of the EEA Regulations do  not
    provide that an EEA decision is an immigration decision under the  2002
    Act. Despite Mr Canter's valiant attempt to distinguish the appellants'
    case the questions on page 31 of  the  application  form  EEA2  do  not
    amount to a s120 Notice.

15. As no s120 notice was served and no EEA removal decision has been  made
    the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law  in  considering  whether  the
    decision  amounted  to  a  disproportionate   interference   with   the
    appellants' Article 8 rights as it had no jurisdiction  to  consider  a
    ground which was different from  the  subject  of  the  decision  under
    appeal. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal did  not  challenge
    the findings made in respect of the EEA Regulations.  It  follows  that
    the error in the First-tier Tribunal judge's consideration of Article 8
    could not be material to the outcome of the appeal.  On  that  basis  I
    consider that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of a material error of law and is therefore upheld.

16. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously. Having
    considered all the circumstances and evidence  I  do  not  consider  it
    necessary to make an anonymity direction.

Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
    material error of law such that the decision should be set aside.


Signed   P M Ramshaw   Date 9 October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

