
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38989/2014
                                                               IA/38991/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27th January 2016                 |On 1st February 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between
                          MR YASIR HALEEM SULEHRIA
                                MR KASHIF ALI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No attendance
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. This is an appeal by the appellants against a decision of the  First-
       tier Tribunal dismissing their appeals. The  appellants'  claims  are
       almost identical and the respondent refused their  claims  on  almost
       identical terms. Their appeals were heard jointly before  the  First-
       tier Tribunal. The appellants each appealed against a decision  taken
       on 16 September 2014  refusing  their  applications  for  a  European
       Economic Area residence card as confirmation of a right of  residence
       under European Community law as the dependant cousin  of  a  European
       Economic Area National exercising treaty rights in the UK.

Background Facts

    2. The first appellant is a citizen of  Pakistan  who  was  born  on  26
       December 1983. The second appellant is also a citizen of Pakistan. He
       was born on 14 July 1985.  The first appellant entered the  UK  on  a
       student visa in October 2010. His leave was curtailed in May 2011. In
       July 2013 he sought leave to remain under Article 8.  The  respondent
       refused his application. The second appellant entered  the  UK  on  4
       March 2011 on a student visa. On 9 May 2011 his leave was  curtailed.
       On 3 August 2012 he applied for leave to remain under Article 8. That
       application was refused by the  respondent.  On  14  July  2014  both
       appellants applied for an European Economic  Area  ('EEA')  residence
       card as confirmation of a right of residence under European Community
       law as the dependant cousin of an European Economic Area National (Mr
       Hassan Butt) exercising treaty rights in the UK.  Those  applications
       were refused because  the  respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  the
       appellants had provided sufficient evidence to demonstrate that  they
       were dependent on Mr Butt prior to entering the United  Kingdom  and,
       as the appellants entered the UK on  student  visas,  the  respondent
       considered that they  did  not  enter  the  UK  in  order  to  remain
       dependent on their EEA family member  as  required  under  regulation
       8(2)  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)   Regulations   2006   (the   '2006
       Regulations'). The respondent  considered  that  the  appellants  had
       failed to provide sufficient evidence that they were  dependent  upon
       and were residing with the  sponsor  prior  to  entering  the  United
       Kingdom and that since entering the United Kingdom have continued  to
       be dependent upon and were residing with the sponsor.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

    3.  The  appellants  appealed  to  the  First-tier   Tribunal.    In   a
       determination promulgated on 27 July 2015, Judge Mayall dismissed the
       appellants' appeals.  The First-tier Tribunal found that there was no
       reliable evidence that the appellants  were  either  members  of  the
       sponsor's household or that he was financially supporting them before
       they arrived in the UK. The  judge  did  not  consider  that  he  was
       satisfied either that they had been dependent upon the sponsor  since
       they arrived in the UK.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

    4. The appellants sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  On
       19 November 2015 First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Grant-Hutchison  granted
       the appellants permission to appeal. The grounds of appeal suggest it
       is arguable that a) the judge has misdirected  himself  by  attaching
       very little weight to the contents of the witness  statements  before
       him because the appellants had opted for a  paper  hearing  which  is
       their choice and b) for making no findings on the  evidence  produced
       to show that they were dependent on their sponsor before the  arrival
       in the UK. Thus, the appeal came before me.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

    5. The appellants did not attend the hearing. They sent a letter, signed
       on 22 January 2016, requesting that the Upper Tribunal  decide  their
       case on the papers as, owing to a death in the family, they could not
       attend. The indicated that they wanted the tribunal to apply the case
       of Dauhoo (European Economic  Area  Regulations  -  Regulation  8(2))
       Mauritius [2012] UKUT 79 (IAC) to their  claim.  They  also  asserted
       that the First-tier Tribunal judge was not entitled to  consider  the
       income of the sponsor. I proceeded to hear the appeal in the  absence
       of the appellants on the basis of this request.

Summary of the Submissions

    6. The grounds of appeal assert that the First-tier Tribunal  judge  has
       failed to put weight on evidence provided on that basis that it was a
       paper hearing. The appellants are entitled to pursue their appeals by
       paper  or  oral  hearing.  The  appellants'  and  sponsor's   witness
       statements must be given proper weight as they contain a statement of
       truth. Witness statements were not the only evidence in this  matter.
       The appellants referred to the recent  cases  of  ETS  (TOEIC)  cases
       where Immigration officer's statements are given full weight  without
       cross-examination. It is asserted that non-acceptance  of  statements
       is against fairness.

    7. It is asserted  that  proof  of  remittances  and  cohabitation  were
       produced but the judge did not admit them. This is not a points-based
       decision. It is rather an appeal under Regulations 2006 which  allows
       parties to admit new evidence after the date of decision.

    8. The grounds submit that the  judge  focuses  on  the  income  of  the
       sponsor but it is clear  from  recent  case  law  that  there  is  no
       threshold of income specific to the  residence  card  application.  A
       residence card application must not be based on the necessity of  the
       applicant for a level of dependency on a  sponsor  as  determined  in
       case Reyes v Migrationsverket (Directive 2004/38/EC) Case C-423/12.

    9. It is submitted that at paragraph 21  the  judge  refused  to  accept
       dependency in the UK although  there  is  a  bundle  of  evidence  of
       dependency and cohabitation and the only issue  was  dependency  back
       home. The appellant relies on the test applied in the case of Oboh  &
       Ors v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2013]  EWCA  Civ
       1525.

   10. The respondent served a rule 24 (of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
       Tribunal) Rules 2008) response. It is submitted in the response that,
       taking an all-round view and holistic approach, it is clear that what
       the judge was stating at paragraph 14 is  that  the  appellants  have
       voluntarily declined to take full advantage of the  appellate  system
       and thus forfeited the opportunity to address many of the credibility
       issues in this appeal. The judge found he was unable to  attach  much
       weight to the witness statements. This finding cannot be looked at in
       isolation but also with the other adverse findings at  paragraphs  15
       to 21 of the determination. The respondent asserts that  the  grounds
       have no merit and merely disagree with the  adverse  outcome  of  the
       appeal.  The  judge  considered  all  the  evidence  and  came  to  a
       conclusion based on that evidence.

   11. Ms Fijiwala relied on the Rule 24 response. She submitted that it was
       a matter for the judge as to what weight to  attach  to  the  witness
       statements. By analogy she argued  that  at  an  oral  hearing  if  a
       witness did not turn up  to  be  cross  examined  a  judge  would  be
       entitled to attach little  weight  to  the  witness  statement.  With
       regard to the second ground of appeal she submitted  that  the  judge
       did admit the evidence of the remittances. The problem was  that  she
       could not ascertain the date on them. There was no  evidence  placing
       the appellants and the sponsor at  the  same  property  in  Pakistan.
       Regarding the third ground of appeal she submitted that the income in
       paragraph 18 referred to by the judge was not a  consideration  of  a
       minimum threshold but was a consideration of evidence to support  the
       claim to dependency on the sponsor. She submitted that there  was  no
       evidence in support of dependency in 2015.

Relevant Legislative provisions

   12. Regulation 8 of the 2006 Regulations provides:

           "Extended family members". At Regulation 8(2) provides:

           "(2)   A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if the
           person is a relative of an EEA national, his spouse or his civil
           partner and-

                (a)    the person is residing in a country  other  than  the
                United Kingdom in which the EEA national also resides and is
                dependent upon the EEA  national  or  is  a  member  of  his
                household;

                (b)    the person satisfied the condition in  paragraph  (a)
                and is accompanying the EEA national to the  United  Kingdom
                or wishes to join him there; or

                (c)    the person satisfied the condition in paragraph  (a),
                has joined the  EEA  national  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
                continues to be dependent upon him or to be a member of  his
                household."

Discussion

   13. In order to satisfy the requirement that they are an extended  family
       member the appellants in this case  must  show  prior  dependency  or
       membership  of  the  sponsor's  household  in  Pakistan  and   either
       dependency or membership of the sponsor's household in the UK. As set
       out in Dauhoo (EEA Regulations - reg 8(2)) [2012]  UKUT  00079  (IAC)
       ('Dauhoo'):

           "10.   ... Under the reg 8(2) scheme, a person  can  succeed  in
           establishing that he or she is an "extended  family  member"  in
           any one of four different ways, each of which requires proving a
           relevant connection both prior to arrival in the UK and  in  the
           UK:

                i. prior dependency and present dependency

                ii.     prior  membership  of  a   household   and   present
                membership of a household

                iii.    prior  dependency  and  present  membership   of   a
                household;

                iv.     prior  membership  of  a   household   and   present
                dependency.

           11.    It is not necessary, therefore, to show prior and present
           connection in  the  same  capacity:  dependency-  dependency  or
           household membership-household  membership,  i.e.  (i)  or  (ii)
           above. A person may also qualify if able to show (iii) or (iv)."

   14. The basis of the appellants' claim was  that  they  were  financially
       dependent on the sponsor whilst they were living in Pakistan and that
       they are living in the UK as a member of the sponsor's household  and
       are financially dependent  on  the  sponsor.  They  potentially  fall
       within the category identified as i) and/or iii)  of  the  categories
       identified in Dauhoo. The  respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  the
       appellants met any of the categories. The reasons for refusal  letter
       sets out, 'For the reasons stated above you have  failed  to  provide
       sufficient evidence that you were dependent upon and or residing with
       your sponsor prior to entering the UK and that since you entered  the
       UK you have continued to be dependent  upon  and  residing  with  you
       sponsor'

   15. In relation to ground one the judge considered all the evidence  that
       was available. The judge clearly considered the evidence contained in
       the witness statements as he set out  in  some  detail  the  evidence
       contained in the  witness  statements  of  both  appellants  and  the
       sponsor in paragraphs 6-12  of  the  decision.  When  assessing  what
       weight should be placed upon the witness statements  the  judge  took
       into consideration that the credibility of the appellants with regard
       to dependency was very much in issue. It is quite  correct  that  the
       appellants are entitled to pursue their appeals by paper. However, as
       set out in SM (Iraq) [2004] UKIAT 00279, if doubts have  been  raised
       about the credibility of certain evidence, and the facts  related  by
       that evidence are not supported by other evidence, the  position  may
       be that the fact finder remains in doubt if  an  appellant  does  not
       attend to  give  evidence.  I  accept  the  submission  made  by  the
       respondent that what the judge was stating at paragraph  14  is  that
       the appellants have voluntarily declined to take  full  advantage  of
       the appellate system and thus forfeited the  opportunity  to  address
       the credibility issues in this appeal.  The  judge  was  not  placing
       little weight merely because the appellants had  opted  for  a  paper
       hearing. The judge considered that credibility was in issue.  In  the
       circumstances the judge was entitled to place very little  weight  on
       the witness statements.

   16. The appellants did not attend the hearing before  this  Tribunal  and
       again have not availed themselves of the opportunity to address these
       issues.

   17. In relation to ground two the judge did admit  the  remittances  into
       evidence.  The  appellants'  case  was  that  they  were  financially
       dependent on the sponsor and members of his household. The judge  was
       unable to ascertain the date on any of the remittances because of the
       poor quality of the copies. This was the  only  documentary  evidence
       submitted by the appellants in relation to  financial  dependency  in
       Pakistan. This was a core issue in the  appeal.  The  respondent  had
       raised the issue of insufficiency of  evidence  in  the  reasons  for
       refusal  letter.  Unless  the  appellants   could   prove   financial
       dependence prior to coming to  the  UK  the  appeal  could  not  have
       succeeded.

   18.  The  appellants  rely  on  Reyes   v   Migrationsverket   (Directive
       2004/38/EC) Case C-423/12 ('Reyes'). In that case the court  held:

           "20    In that regard, it must be noted that,  in  order  for  a
           direct descendant, who is 21 years old  or  older,  of  a  Union
           citizen to be regarded as being a 'dependant'  of  that  citizen
           within the meaning of Article 2(2)(c) of Directive 2004/38,  the
           existence of a situation of real dependence must be  established
           (see, to that effect, Jia, paragraph 42).

           21 That dependent status is the result of  a  factual  situation
           characterised by the fact that material support for that  family
           member is provided by the Union citizen who  has  exercised  his
           right of free movement or by his spouse (see,  to  that  effect,
           Jia, paragraph 35).

           22 In order to determine the existence of such  dependence,  the
           host Member State must assess  whether,  having  regard  to  his
           financial and social conditions, the direct descendant,  who  is
           21 years old or older, of a Union citizen, is not in a  position
           to support himself. The need for material support must exist  in
           the State of origin of that descendant or the  State  whence  he
           came at the time when he applies to join that citizen  (see,  to
           that effect, Jia, paragraph 37)."

   19. In Jia Migrationsverket Case C -1/05, as referred to  in  Reyes,  the
       European Court considered:

           "43    In those circumstances, the answer to Question  2(a)  and
           (b) must be that Article 1(1)(d) of Directive 73/148  is  to  be
           interpreted to the effect that  dependent  on  them  means  that
           members of the family of a  Community  national  established  in
           another Member State ...  need  the  material  support  of  that
           Community national ... in order to meet their essential needs in
           the State of origin ..."

   20. The ratio from those judgments is that the appellants  were  required
       to prove that there was 'a situation of real dependence',  that  they
       needed the financial assistance in 'order  to  meet  their  essential
       needs'. Even if  the  2  isolated  remittances  in  respect  of  each
       appellant were legible to the judge it is  very  doubtful  that  they
       would have been sufficient to establish real dependence. In this case
       the judge was bound, given that the  appellants  had  opted  for  the
       appeal to be decided on the papers, to find that the  appellants  had
       not provided the evidence required to prove financial  dependence  by
       the appellants on the sponsor when they were in Pakistan.

   21. The third ground contends that the judge  erred  by  considering  the
       income of the sponsor. In the sponsor's witness statements he asserts
       that he paid for the appellants' tuition fees and that they are fully
       dependent on him for accommodation and maintenance. In his  affidavit
       of sponsorship he asserts that the appellants  are  currently  living
       with him and that he bears all their expenses including tuition fees,
       living, accommodation and all  other  expenses.  In  support  of  the
       financial dependency in the UK the appellants submitted  evidence  of
       their and the sponsor's bank accounts. They also  submitted  evidence
       of the sponsor's income for his self-employment. The applications for
       the residence permits were based on  the  sponsor  exercising  treaty
       rights as a self-employed person. In order to consider  the  veracity
       of the claim that the appellants are both  financially  dependant  on
       the sponsor the sponsor's declared earnings from his  self-employment
       are a relevant factor. The judge was not imposing a  minimum  income.
       He took into account the fact that the sponsor made only a net profit
       of �6,720 in the tax year ending 2014 when considering whether or not
       the appellants' had provided sufficient evidence to demonstrate  that
       they were dependant financially on the sponsor. This was  a  relevant
       consideration and went directly to the credibility of  the  assertion
       that the appellants are both financially dependent on the sponsor.

   22. In relation to ground four it was asserted that the judge refused  to
       accept dependency in the UK although there is a bundle of evidence of
       dependency and cohabitation and the only issue  was  dependency  back
       home. The appellants rely on the case of Oboh & Ors  v  Secretary  of
       State for the  Home  Department  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1525.  That  case
       concerned the sole question as to whether the  appellants  can  bring
       themselves within Article 3(2)(a) of the  2004  Directive  where  the
       dependency on the EU citizen or membership of his  or  her  household
       arose only after their arrival in the United Kingdom. It was not  the
       appellants' case that their dependency arose only  after  arrival  in
       the UK. It is not clear on what basis the  appellants  rely  on  this
       case. The issue of dependency in the UK was in dispute,  as  set  out
       above, as the respondent did not  accept  that  the  appellants  were
       dependent on the sponsor as  set  out  in  the  reasons  for  refusal
       letter. On the evidence available the judge was entitled to arrive at
       a conclusion that the appellants had not satisfied him that they were
       dependent on the sponsor as set out in paragraph 21 above.

   23. For the above reasons I find that there was no material error of  law
       in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

   24. I have considered whether any parties require the  protection  of  an
       anonymity direction. No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously.
       Having considered  all  the  circumstances  and  evidence  I  do  not
       consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.





Decision

   25. There was no material error of law in the decision of the  First-tier
       Tribunal. The appellants' appeals  are  dismissed.  The  respondent's
       decision stands.


Signed   P M Ramshaw   Date 30 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw


