

                                    [pic]
Upper  Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Number: IA/38358/2013




                                                    THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House
       Determination Promulgated
On 29 July 2014
             On 7 August 2014

Before

                      DESIGNATED TRIBUNAL JUDGE DIGNEY


                                   Between

                            KWABENA NKETIA DARDOM


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the respondent: Mr Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the appellant:   Ms Okyere-Darko

                                DETERMINATION

   1. The appellant, a citizen of Ghana, applied on 16 October  2012  for  a
      residence card as confirmation of a right of residency in  the  United
      Kingdom. The right  was  claimed  on  the  basis  of  the  appellant's
      marriage to a German national exercising treaty rights in  the  United
      Kingdom. The application was refused because it was not accepted  that
      the documents relating to  the  marriage  were  genuine,  it  was  not
      accepted  that the parties were in a durable  relationship  and  there
      was no evidence that the "wife" was  exercising treaty rights in  this
      country.


   2. An appeal aginst the decision was dismissed. The judge  concluded,  in
      the light of the case of Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT
      00024(IAC) that it was necessary where a proxy marriage is relied  on,
      as is the case here,  that the  marriage is  valid under the  national
      law of the EEA citizen; in this case the law  of  Germany.  The  judge
      concluded that the appellant could not prove  that  the  marriage  was
      valid under  German law and therefore the appellant could not rely  on
      it for the present purposes.


   3. It was also argued that the judge's findings on the durable nature  of
      the relationship were flawed and it is said that the judge  took  into
      account irrelevant considerations in reaching this conclusion.


   4.  In granting permission and concluding that  the  ground  as  a  whole
      raised an arguable issue, Judge Chohan said:

             In essence, the grounds submit that the judge failed to  apply
             the principles as set out in the Tribunal decision in the case
             of Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014]  UKUT  00024(IAC).
             The grounds argue that the judge erred  in  finding  that  the
             proxy marriage  was  not  valid  in  Germany,  which  was  not
             required as a consideration; and reference  is  made   to  the
             judge's  findings at paragraph 78 where it is stated that  the
             proxy marriage may be one that may be regarded as valid in  UK
             jurisdiction.



   5. The case is set out in paragraphs 4 to 7 of the grounds. The  argument
      is that this case falls under paragraph 68 (b)[1] of Kareem and not 68
      (d). This is a case where there was a marriage certificate  issued  by
      the competent authorities in Ghana,  and  therefore  the  question  of
      validity under German law does not arise.


   6. The trouble with this agreement is that it has been dealt with in  the
      recent  reported  Upper  Tribunal  case  of   TA  and  others  (Kareem
      explained) Ghana [2014} UKUT 00316 (IAC). The case  explains  why  the
      argument in that case, which is the same as that put  forward  in  the
      grounds  here, is misconceived. The head note of that case reads:

             Following the decision in Kareem (proxy marriages  -  EU  law)
             [2014] UKUT 24,  the  determination  of  whether  there  is  a
             marital relationship for the purposes of the Immigration (EEA)
             Regulations 2006 must always [underlined in the  original]  be
             examined in accordance with the laws of the Member State  from
             which the Union citizen obtains nationality.


   7. Paragraph 20 of the determination reads:

             Given that which I set out above, it is difficult to  see  how
             the Upper Tribunal in Kareem could have been  any  clearer  in
             its conclusion that  when  consideration  is  being  given  to
             whether an applicant has undertaken a valid marriage  for  the
             purposes of the 2006 Regulations, such consideration has to be
             assessed by reference to the laws of the legal system  of  the
             nationality  of  the  relevant  Union  citizen.  Mr  Akohene's
             submissions to the contrary are entirely misconceived and  are
             born out of a failure to read the determination in Kareem as a
             whole.


   8. At the hearing Ms Okyere-Darko did  not  seek  to  argue  that  either
      Kareem or TA were  wrongly  decided  but  sought  to  argue  that  the
      marriage was valid under German law. She relied on a  document  headed
      International Marriages which was handed in at  the  earlier  hearing.
      This document, which was last updated in 2003, is a  very  generalised
      statement about marriage and it is not clear what body produced it  or
      what are the qualifications of  the author. More to  the  point  proxy
      marriages are not mentioned at all. Ms Okyere-Darko had to admit  that
      the most one can say about the document is that it  does  not  suggest
      that proxy marriages are incapable of being recognised by German  law,
      but the document is certainly not evidence that  they  are.  No  judge
      could have accepted that Ghanaian proxy marriages  are  recognised  in
      Germany on the strength of this document and in particular  that  this
      particular marriage would have been accepted. There is no error of law
      in the judge's conclusion in paragraph 77 of  the  determination  that
      the appellant has not  discharged  the burden of establishing that the
      proxy marriage he entered into was recognised in Ghana

   9. Ms Okyere-Darko also argued that the judge's conclusions on a  durable
      relationship are flawed. It is said that the judge took  into  account
      irrelevant matters. I can see no error of law in either his  reasoning
      or his conclusions on this point. The two points criticised, that some
      of the letters had the couple's previous address and that Noah's birth
      certificate had not  been  produced,  where  both  matters  that  were
      generally relevant. It cannot  be  said  that  the  judge  gave  these
      matters weight that they could not bear. The conclusion that the judge
      reached was clearly  open to him on the evidence and his reasoning  is
      clear and logical.

  10. The original determination did not contain an error of law  and  shall
      stand.

The appeal is dismissed

Designated    Judge   Digney         Judge    of    the    Upper    Tribunal
   29 July 2014







                                  APPENDIX



     a. A person who is the spouse of an EEA national who  is  a  qualified
        person in the United Kingdom can derive rights of free movement and
        residence if proof of the marital relationship is provided.

     b. The production of a marriage  certificate  issued  by  a  competent
        authority (that is, issued according to the  registration  laws  of
        the  country  where  the  marriage  took  place)  will  usually  be
        sufficient.  If not in English (or Welsh in relation to proceedings
        in Wales), a certified translation of the marriage certificate will
        be required.

     c. A document which calls itself a marriage certificate will not raise
        a presumption of the marriage it purports to record unless  it  has
        been issued by an authority with legal power to create  or  confirm
        the facts it attests.

     d. In appeals where there is no such  marriage  certificate  or  where
        there is doubt that a marriage certificate has  been  issued  by  a
        competent authority, then the marital relationship may be proved by
        other evidence.   This  will  require  the  Tribunal  to  determine
        whether a marriage was contracted.

     e. In such an appeal, the starting point will be to decide  whether  a
        marriage was contracted between the  appellant  and  the  qualified
        person according to the national law of  the  EEA  country  of  the
        qualified person's nationality.

     f. In all such situations, when resolving issues that arise because of
        conflicts of law, proper respect must be  given  to  the  qualified
        person's rights as provided by the European Treaties, including the
        right to marry and the rights of free movement and residence.

     g. It  should  be  assumed  that,  without  independent  and  reliable
        evidence about the recognition of the marriage under  the  laws  of
        the EEA country and/or the country where the marriage  took  place,
        the Tribunal is  likely  to  be  unable  to  find  that  sufficient
        evidence has been provided to discharge the burden of proof.   Mere
        production of legal materials from the EEA country or country where
        the marriage took place will be insufficient evidence because  they
        will rarely show how such law is understood  or  applied  in  those
        countries.  Mere assertions as to the effect of such laws will, for
        similar reasons, carry no weight.



-----------------------
[1] Paragraph 68 is set out in the appendix.

