

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
Ia/38980/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Determination Promulgated       |
|On 14 October 2015                        | On 30 March 2016                |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL

                                   Between

                                AKLIMA JAHAN
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                    Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M B Hussain, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            REMITTAL AND REASONS

1.    This appeal is not subject to an anonymity order by the First-tier
    Tribunal. I have not been asked to make one and see no public policy
    reason for doing so and none is made.

Background

2.    The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 5 November 1989.  She
    arrived in the UK with entry clearance conferring leave to enter  as  a
    Tier 4 (General) Migrant on 8 February 2010. Her leave was subsequently
    extended in the same capacity until 31 August 2013. On 23  August  2013
    the Appellant made an in-time application for further leave  to  remain
    on the basis of her family  and  private  life.  That  application  was
    refused on 30 September 2014.

3.    The Appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  appeal  was
    heard by Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal A Majid on 29 April 2015.  In
    a decision promulgated on 6 May 2015, the Judge dismissed the appeal.

4.    The Appellant sought permission to appeal and on 15 July  2015,  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Reid granted permission to appeal.

5.    Thus, the appeal came before me.

6.     At  the  outset  of  the  hearing,  Mr  Duffy,  who  represented  the
    Respondent, accepted that the Judge's decision could not stand. It  was
    thus conceded that the Judge materially erred in law. In light  of  the
    Respondent's  concession,  I  announced  at  the  hearing  that  I  was
    satisfied that the Judge's decision contained material  errors  of  law
    for the following reasons.

7.    Whilst the Judge stated that he had "outlined the evidential  elements
    of the evidence adduced on behalf of the Appellant" [8],  the  decision
    is bereft of any detail of the Appellant's circumstances; the basis  of
    the application and decision under appeal. The Judge did note  at  [16]
    that the Appellant and her husband came to the UK as students and could
    not therefore expect to be allowed to remain in the UK with their child
    born on 12 July 2013, his reasons for dismissing the  appeal  are  with
    respect somewhat  difficult  to  discern.  What  the  Judge's  decision
    amounts to is a recital of basic legal principles not directly material
    to the issues before him. I find that the decision  is  devoid  of  any
    meaningful analysis of the evidence  and  lacks  reasoning  and  proper
    conclusions. I am thus satisfied that the  Respondent's  concession  is
    properly made.

Decision and Disposal

8.    On that basis, and in light of  the  Respondent's  concession,  I  set
    aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. With the consent of  the
    parties, I remit the appeal for a de novo rehearing before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to be heard by a judge other than Judge A Majid.




Signed:                                      Dated: 30 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral
