
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38351/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 1st April, 2014                            |On 15th May, 2014            |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MS PATRICIA MELO

                                                                  Respondent




Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Kingham, a Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Rest, David Gray Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The Secretary of State for the Home  Department  is  the  appellant  in
    this appeal but to  avoid  confusion  I  shall  refer  to  her  as  the
    "claimant".

2.   The respondent is a citizen of Brazil, who  was  born  on  27th  April,
    1974, and who on 17th December, 2012, applied to the Secretary of State
    for the Home Department for  a  residence  card  as  the  former  civil
    partner of an EEA national  exercising  treaty  rights  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

3.    The  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home   Department   refused   the
    respondent's application  on  8th  August,  2013,  and  the  respondent
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

Immigration History

4.   The respondent first applied for a student visa on 22nd  January,  2004
    which was granted on 29th January, 2004.  On 26th  February,  2005  the
    respondent applied for a further student visa which was granted on 11th
    April, 2005.  On 13th February,  2008  the  respondent  applied  for  a
    certificate of approval for a civil partnership  which  was  issued  on
    28th February, 2008.   On 29th March, 2008 the respondent entered  into
    a  civil  partnership  with  Marlia  Cristina  Borges  Dos  Santos   at
    Hammersmith  Registry  Office.   On  1st  March,  2012,  a  conditional
    dissolution order was made in Newcastle-upon-Tyne County Court provided
    that unless sufficient cause be shown to the court within six weeks the
    conditional order should be made final.

6.   The claimant's Reasons for Refusal Letter of 8th August, 2013  made  it
    clear that in order to  qualify  for  a  retained  right  of  residence
    following divorce from an EEA national in  accordance  with  Regulation
    10(5) of the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006
    ("the Regulations") evidence that was  required  that  the  former  EEA
    spouse was continuing to exercise free movement rights at the  date  of
    dissolution.  The respondent provided with her application payslips for
    her former civil partner up to 10th March, 2012, but  since  the  civil
    partnership was not dissolved until 12th April, 2012, this did not show
    that her civil partner was exercising treaty  rights  at  the  date  of
    dissolution.

7.   The respondent appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and her  appeal  was
    considered by First-tier Tribunal Judge K Henderson on  16th  December,
    2013, at Bradford.  In a determination promulgated  on  23rd  December,
    2013, the Immigration Judge found that the respondent had sought to  be
    frank concerning her  relationship  with  the  events  surrounding  the
    separation from her civil partner and found that the respondent had  no
    contact with her former  partner,  who  is  a  citizen  of  Italy.   At
    paragraph 27 the judge  found  that  the  civil  partnership  had  been
    dissolved and at paragraph 31 of the determination he found that  there
    was no evidence to show that the respondent had  made  any  efforts  to
    obtain the relevant information,  other  than  by  directly  trying  to
    contact her partner.  The judge  said,  "I  have  sympathies  with  her
    reasons for not wishing to be  in  communication  but  pursuit  of  the
    required information was necessary for her to show that  the  condition
    of the Regulations had been met."  The required information referred to
    was evidence that the sponsor, an Italian citizen,  was  still  in  the
    United Kingdom and exercising treaty rights.  In paragraph 32 the judge
    said this:-

         "My conclusion therefore is that the [respondent] has not  provided
         sufficient evidence to show that she retained rights  of  residence
         after her civil partnership was finally dissolved on 12th September
         2012."

8.   The judge went on to note that the respondent had made  an  application
    to the claimant on the basis that she fulfilled the requirements of the
    long residence Rules, but the  correct  form  on  which  to  make  that
    application was a Form EEA 4.  The  judge  found  that  the  claimant's
    refusal letter did not address important additional assertion  made  by
    the respondent concerning her long residence  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    She did not make an application in the  correct  form  but,  found  the
    judge, ought to have been informed  that  if  she  wished  to  make  an
    application under paragraph 276B of the Immigration  Rules,  then  that
    was an option open to her without reference to a parent of partner  She
    concluded  that  the  principles  outlined  in  Rodriguez  (flexibility
    policy) [2013] UKUT 0042 (IAC) must apply and at paragraph 37 said "the
    [respondent] has been told to leave because she has no basis to  remain
    here but there has been no consideration of the additional factors  she
    raised prior to the [claimant's] decision,  that  decision  then  being
    that she had no basis remaining in this country.  She had been told  in
    the notice accompanying the Reasons for Refusal Letter make  an  appeal
    on grounds including that "the decision is not otherwise in  accordance
    with the law".  It is arguable that she did say citing  both  her  long
    residence and private life in this country".  The judge then  purported
    to allow the respondent's appeal to the extent that  the  decision  was
    not in accordance with the law.

9.   The claimant challenged the decision, pointing out that the  judge  had
    already found in her determination that the respondent had not provided
    sufficient evidence to show  that  she  met  the  requirements  of  the
    Regulations.  It appears that, applying Rodriguez, the judge  concluded
    that the Secretary of State's decision was not in accordance  with  the
    law, because the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  did  not  address  the
    additional assertion that  the  respondent  qualified  under  the  long
    residence provisions.  The grounds suggest that  the  judge  had  given
    inadequate reasons why Rodriguez should apply where  the  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department made the decision on the application  and
    submitted by the respondent.

10.  Ms Rest, who appeared on behalf of the respondent,  told  me  that  her
    client's instructions are that she does not wish to pursue her  appeal.
    Miss Rest told me that her client was currently living in Brazil  where
    she was again making application for a visa as a  spouse.   Mr  Kingham
    told me that the Secretary of State wished to pursue  the  appeal.   On
    the basis of the findings by the judge at paragraph 32, she should have
    simply found that  the  respondent  was  not  a  qualified  person  and
    dismissed the appeal.

11.  Ms Rest confirmed that it cannot be right  that  the  Home  Office  are
    required to advise respondents to make applications under  a  different
    route on receipt of an application.

12.  I concluded that the judge had erred. There was no basis for her to  go
    on and consider assertions made by the respondent  that  she  qualified
    for leave to remain in the United Kingdom on a basis entirely different
    from that which she applied to the Secretary of State.  On the basis of
    her finding at paragraph 32 the judge's decision, the judge should have
    proceeded to dismiss the respondent's appeal.  I set aside the  judge's
    decision.  I substitute my decision for hers.  The respondent's  appeal
    is dismissed.






Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
