
                                                                [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
IA/38252/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 2 February 2016                       |     On 16 February 2016            |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                          Mr Abolore Oludare BAKARE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Praisoody, Counsel instructed by Supreme
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Alice Holmes, Specialist Appeals Team

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge M P W Harris sitting at Hatton Cross  on  29
    June 2015) dismissing on the papers his appeal against the decision  of
    the Secretary of State to refuse to issue him with a residence card  on
    the ground that his marriage to his  EEA  sponsor  was  a  marriage  of
    convenience.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity
    direction, and I do not consider that  the  appellant  requires  to  be
    accorded anonymity for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

The Reasons for Granting Permission to Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 2. On 4 November 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley gave her  reasons  for
    granting permission on a renewed application for permission to  appeal.
    It was arguable, as contended in the grounds of appeal, that the First-
    tier Tribunal erred by not following Papajorgji (EEA Spouse -  Marriage
    of Convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 38 in effectively placing the burden
    of proof on the appellant; secondly because the decision failed to give
    sufficient reasons for its conclusions; thirdly the First-tier Tribunal
    wrongly gave little weight to the evidence of the appellant as  it  was
    not oral but did not apply the same standard to  the  evidence  of  the
    absent Immigration Officer; fourthly, the First-tier Tribunal  did  not
    have regard to the documentary evidence  showing  cohabitation  of  the
    couple;  fifthly,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not   consider   the
    appellant's skeleton argument.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The appellant originally elected for an  oral  hearing  of  his  appeal
    against the refusal decision.  His legal representatives then wrote  to
    the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross to say that  their  client  had
    elected for a paper appeal, due to limited financial resources.

 4. As summarised by Judge Harris in his subsequent decision  at  paragraph
    [3], the respondent's case was based on the outcome of  an  enforcement
    visit to the claimed marital home.   In  an  IS126  report,  Pat  Dale,
    Immigration Officer, said that he and another officer had  conducted  a
    pastoral visit to the appellant's home address on  13  August  2014  at
    2.45pm.  The door was opened by a young boy, who woke up his father  to
    speak to them.  The man stated  that  his  name  was  M  S,  a  British
    national (date of birth [                  ]), who  had  lived  at  the
    property with his children  for  the  last  ten  years.   He  had  five
    children.  The report continues:

         There was no trace of Mr Abolore Oldura Bakare or his  EEA  partner
         staying at this place.

 5. The judge's findings on the marriage of convenience issue were set  out
    in paragraphs [6] to [18], which I reproduce below:

         6.   In  assessing  documentary  evidence  put  before  me  I  have
             followed the guidance given in  Tanveer  Ahmed*  [2002]  UKIAT
             439.

         7.   It is not disputed  that  the  appellant  and  Ms  Maria  were
             married on 10 January 2013.  It is the claim of the  appellant
             that they have been living as a married couple.

         8.    The  respondent  has  produced  a  witness   statement   from
             Immigration Officer Dale one of the officials who visited  the
             claimed marital address on 13 August  2014.   IO  Dale  states
             that having gained access to  the  premise  they  spoke  to  a
             gentleman present  and  that  there  were  no  traces  of  the
             appellant or Ms Maria staying at the address.

         9.   The appellant in his grounds of appeal and  witness  statement
             claims, in effect, that the statement is not accurate.  It  is
             said that the gentleman who was spoken to is  the  appellant's
             uncle and that he did explain to the officers that his  nephew
             and wife used a converted lounge as a bedroom.   The  officers
             failed to identify through questioning that the nephew is  the
             appellant.  The appellant and  Ms  Maria  in  their  statement
             assert that their marriage is not one of convenience.

         10.  Even on the appellant's account, neither he nor his wife, were
             present at the time of the visit by officials.

         11.  It is not claimed by either appellant or his wife  that  there
             were clothing or other goods belonging to them present at  the
             address that would have been obvious to the officers and would
             have shown their residence there.

         12.  In the circumstances, I am satisfied that the  respondent  has
             shown that the burden arises  for  the  appellant  to  address
             evidence justifying reasonable suspicion that the marriage was
             entered into for the predominant purpose of securing residence
             rights: Papajorgji (EEA  spouse  -  marriage  of  convenience)
             Greece [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC).

         13.  The appellant's uncle in his witness statement says that  both
             the appellant and his wife were out at work at the time of the
             visit.  However, Ms Maria gives no explanation in her  witness
             statement for why she was absent to match this.  Nor does  the
             appellant give any explanation about his absence to match  the
             account of his uncle.  I find this very surprising.   I  would
             have expected reliable witnesses to  provide  such  detail  in
             their statements.  I find this discrepancy raises  significant
             doubt in my mind about the reliability of  what  is  said  not
             just by the appellant and Ms Maria but  also  the  appellant's
             uncle.

         14.  Neither the appellant nor Ms Maria mention in their statements
             about journeying  to  Liverpool  for  a  spouse  interview  as
             claimed in the grounds of appeal.  I attach little  weight  to
             this claim.

         15.  None have presented themselves for an  oral  hearing  to  have
             their evidence tested in cross-examination, which  might  have
             clarified matters.

         16.  I prefer to believe the account of IO Dale.

         17.  In the circumstances, although  there  are  photographs  of  a
             marriage ceremony and some evidence of the  appellant  and  Ms
             Maria using the same address for  correspondence,  considering
             matters in the round, given the doubts already  raised,  I  do
             not place great weight on this evidence as demonstrating  that
             the marriage is anything other than a marriage of convenience.

         18.  On the evidence  before  me,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
             appellant has demonstrated on  the  balance  of  probabilities
             that he is a spouse within the meaning of the 2006 Regulations
             and entitled to a residence card.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 6. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, both the appellant and his EEA sponsor  were  in  attendance.   Ms
    Praisoody developed the arguments raised in the grounds of appeal.   Ms
    Praisoody submitted that the couple had a  right  to  have  the  appeal
    determined on the papers, and it was perverse of the judge to  find  on
    the papers that the Secretary of State had  discharged  the  burden  of
    proof, as the weight of documentary evidence was firmly  in  favour  of
    the appellant.  In reply, Ms Holmes submitted that it was clearly  open
    to the judge to find on the papers that the respondent had made  out  a
    case that the marriage between  the  appellant  and  his  EEA  national
    sponsor was one of convenience.  By electing for a paper hearing,  they
    had deprived the Secretary of State of the opportunity  to  test  their
    evidence, and the evidence of M  S,  in  cross-examination.   Also,  by
    electing for a paper hearing, they could not complain that the evidence
    of the Immigration Officer had not been tested at an oral hearing.

Discussion

 7. Ground 1 gains some traction  as  the  judge  nowhere  clearly  directs
    himself that the legal burden of proof  at  all  time  rests  with  the
    respondent to make out a case that the marriage is one of  convenience.
    However, at paragraph [12] the judge correctly summarised the  guidance
    given in Papajorgji, and went on to apply it.  It was open  to  him  to
    find, for the reasons which he gave in paragraphs [8] to [11], that the
    evidence justified reasonable suspicion that the marriage  was  entered
    into for the predominant purpose  of  securing  residence  rights,  and
    accordingly that the evidential burden  shifted  to  the  appellant  to
    "dispel the reasonable suspicion:" see Papajorgji at paragraph [33].

 8. As stated at Papajorgji at paragraph [39], the  ultimate  question  for
    the judge was whether in the light of the totality of  the  information
    before him, "including the assessment of the claimant's answers and any
    information provided," he was satisfied that it was more probable  than
    not that this was a marriage of convenience.

 9. At paragraph [18] the judge wrongly placed the legal burden of proof on
    the appellant, rather than the respondent.  But I do not consider  that
    the error is material as the  judge's  line  of  reasoning  would  have
    produced the same answer if he had correctly directed himself as to the
    incidence of the legal burden of proof.

10. As is encapsulated in Ms  Praisoody's  oral  submission  which  I  have
    recorded above, the crucial issue is whether the judge's conclusion  is
    perverse or not supported by adequate reasoning.

11. I address Ms Praisoody's perversity argument in the context  of  ground
    3.  In effect, it is contended that it was not open  to  the  judge  to
    prefer the evidence of Immigration Officer Dale over  the  evidence  of
    the appellant, his sponsor and his  uncle,  M  S,  as  the  Immigration
    Officer's evidence had not been tested at an oral hearing any more than
    had the evidence of the appellant  and  his  supporting  witnesses.   I
    reject this submission.  By electing for a paper hearing, the appellant
    took upon himself the risk that the written evidence of the Immigration
    Officer would be preferred to the written evidence of himself  and  his
    supporting witnesses.  Conversely, if the appellant had proceeded to an
    oral hearing, as originally envisaged, he would have had  a  reasonable
    expectation that the very fact that he  and  his  supporting  witnesses
    were willing to give oral evidence, and to have such  evidence  tested,
    would materially assist in dispelling the suspicion of  a  marriage  of
    convenience which arose from the report of  Immigration  Officer  Dale.
    In short, it was not perverse of the judge to prefer  the  evidence  of
    Immigration Officer Dale, and to conclude that the marriage was one  of
    convenience.

12. Ms Praisoody mentioned Agho v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 1198 in passing, but
    did not rely on it in support of  her  submission  of  perversity.  The
    facts of Agho are similar to the present case,  in  that  the  evidence
    relied on by the SSHD was a single enforcement  visit  to  the  claimed
    marital home. The Court of Appeal held at [45] that the SSHD's evidence
    about this visit was not capable of overcoming, "the inference  to  the
    contrary that plainly arises  from  the  contemporary  documents".  The
    features which distinguish the present case from Agho include the  fact
    that the claimant in Agho attended an oral hearing  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal at which he gave evidence, and that the detailed report of the
    enforcement visit prepared by a police officer was only produced at the
    hearing, so that the claimant (and his representative)  were  taken  by
    surprise and there was no opportunity for the claimant  to  respond  to
    the details:

         I do not believe it was right for  the  Judge  to  make  a  serious
         finding of the kind  that  he  did,  flatly  contradictory  to  the
         documentary evidence, on the basis of the  late-disclosed,  second-
         hand and confused evidence relied on by UKBA (per Underhill  LJ  at
         [41]

13. Turning to ground 2 (adequacy of reasons) I  consider  that  the  judge
    gave adequate reasons for resolving the disputed issue in favour of the
    Secretary of State.  He took  into  account  the  evidence  which  rang
    counter to the allegation  of  a  marriage  of  convenience,  which  he
    summarises in paragraph [17].  He took into account the evidence in the
    witness statements of the appellant and his supporting witnesses, which
    he refers to at paragraph [9] and [13].  It was open to  the  judge  to
    find that the evidence tendered by the appellant was not reliable,  for
    the reasons that he gave.

14. There is no merit in ground 4, as the  judge  expressly  addresses  the
    probative  value  of  the  documentary  evidence  of  co-habitation  at
    paragraph [17] of his decision.

15. Ms Praisoody did not address me on ground 5, which in any event is  too
    vague as to engender a sustainable ground of appeal.  There has been no
    attempt to identify the specific point or series of points advanced  in
    the skeleton argument which are not covered by grounds 1 to 4.

16. The attendance of the appellant and his EEA  national  sponsor  at  the
    hearing before me indicates that the judge may have reached a factually
    wrong conclusion; as does the information  which  is  held  on  a  Home
    Office database.  The Home Office  database  entry  confirms  that,  as
    alleged in the  grounds  of  appeal,  the  appellant  and  the  sponsor
    travelled to Liverpool for a  marriage  interview.   Unfortunately  the
    interview was cancelled because the  appellant  had  not  confirmed  in
    advance that he and his sponsor would be  attending  the  interview  to
    which they had been invited.

17. On the evidence that was available to the First-tier Tribunal Judge,  I
    am not persuaded that he erred in law  in  resolving  the  marriage  of
    convenience issue in favour of the Secretary  of  State.   Neither  the
    appellant nor his EEA sponsor is facing removal, and it is open to  the
    appellant to make a fresh application for a  residence  card,  relying,
    among other things, on the Secretary of State's acceptance (through  Ms
    Holmes) that the appellant  and  his  EEA  national  sponsor  presented
    themselves   for   a   marriage   interview    on    29    May    2014.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  stands.   This
appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson








