








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38802/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 7 August 2014                             |On 1 September 2014          |
|Prepared:  28 August 2014                     |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Mrs Laila Begum
                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Kalam, Solicitor (Kalam Solicitors)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. For the sake of convenience I shall refer  to  the  appellant  as  the
      "secretary of state" and to the respondent as "the claimant."


   2. The claimant is a national of Bangladesh, born on  9th  January  1964.
      Her appeal against the decision of the secretary of  state  dated  6th
      September 2013 refusing her application for variation of her leave  to
      enter or remain in the UK on the basis of her family and private  life
      under the rules.


   3.  The  Judge  found  that  the  claimant  had  failed  to  satisfy  the
      requirements under E-LTRP1.2-1.12 as she came to the UK in 2012  as  a
      family visitor. That was fatal to her claim for leave to remain  under
      the rules.


   4. There is no challenge by the claimant to that finding which is clearly
      correct.


   5. However the claimant's appeal was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Dean under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.


   6. The  secretary  of  state  appeals  with  permission  from  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Carruthers dated 10th June 2014.


   7. It is contended in the reasons for appealing that Judge Dean had noted
      the guidance set out in the case of Gulshan (Article 8 - new  rules  -
      correct approach) [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC), namely, that it is only where
      there are arguably good grounds for granting leave to  remain  outside
      the Immigration Rules that it would it  be  necessary  for  Article  8
      purposes  to  go  on  to  consider  whether   there   are   compelling
      circumstances not sufficiently recognised under the rules.


   8. The secretary of state noted  that  the  Judge  stated  that  she  had
      considered the facts of the case carefully and found  that  there  are
      arguably good grounds for granting leave to remain outside  the  rules
      because of the  compelling  circumstances  presented  by  the  factual
      matrix in this case.


   9. The secretary of state complained however that Judge Dean had not made
      any "case specific findings" addressing the issue  of  "arguably  good
      grounds and compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised under
      the rules." Accordingly, there was not an adequate basis justifying  a
      departure  from  the  Immigration  Rules   leading   to   a   "further
      consideration of Article 8." Judge Carruthers found the grounds to  be
      arguable.


        The hearing on the 7th August 2014


  10. Mr Duffy relied on the grounds of appeal presented. He noted that  the
      complaint was really "a question of form rather  than  substance."  He
      made no further submissions.


  11. Mr Kalam, who represented the claimant at the hearing before the First-
      tier Tribunal Judge, submitted that the circumstances  justifying  the
      finding that there were arguably good grounds for  granting  leave  to
      remain outside the rules had been set out by the Judge  at  paragraphs
      21  and  22  of  the  determination.  She  has  had  regard   to   the
      documentation submitted including the claimant's witness statement and
      a statement from her cousin.


  12. The Judge accepted that the claimant's husband was a British  citizen,
      aged 78 and that she is the mother of their two children aged  10  and
      14 respectively, who are both British citizens.


  13. She had further accepted the evidence  submitted  in  respect  of  the
      child Jihan, aged 10, revealing that  he  has  a  serious  disability.
      Following assessments in accordance with s.324 of  the  Education  Act
      1996, he is now in receipt of special needs education.


  14. At paragraph 21  of  her  determination,  the  Judge  found  that  the
      claimant's husband had medical  conditions  such  that  he  would  not
      choose to return to Bangladesh. Further, her younger son  is  autistic
      and has special educational needs which are being addressed in the UK.




  15. She found that because of this unusual "factual matrix" this is not  a
      case where the claimant's family would return  to  Bangladesh  if  the
      claimant were removed. Her husband and  children  have  the  right  to
      remain here and  to  benefit  from  all  the  educational  and  health
      advantages that the UK offers. They also have a protected right  to  a
      family life with the claimant.


  16. Judge Dean had regard to Beoku Betts [2008] UKHL 39  when  considering
      the best interests of her two children as well as those of her elderly
      husband. She found that it would be in all their  interests  that  the
      claimant remained as part of the family in the UK.


  17. She referred to the age, medical history and recent  cancer  diagnosis
      of the claimant's husband as well as the significant care needs of the
      younger son. These cumulatively establish that the family unit  needed
      to be maintained and that the  claimant's  proposed  removal,  weighed
      against the public interest, would not be proportionate.


  18. At the hearing before me, Mr Kalam referred to  the  medical  evidence
      regarding the condition of the claimant's husband, Mr Noor. There is a
      report from Dr David Propper,  a  consultant  medical  oncologist,  in
      which he stated in his assessment that he had a carcinoma  of  unknown
      primary which was relatively indolent. He advised that he should  have
      investigations to delineate whether there is an  isolated  metastasis.
      An urgent PET scan was therefore arranged.


  19. Mr Kalam produced at the hearing  on  the  7th  August  2014,  without
      objection, a booklet as well as appointment cards indicating  that  in
      fact Mr Noor is indeed currently in receipt of chemotherapy. This  has
      been ongoing for a number of months and is to continue.


  20. In summary Mr Kalam submitted that the basis for the  Judge's  finding
      that there were good grounds for granting leave to remain outside  the
      rules as a result of compelling circumstances were in fact set out  at
      paragraphs 21 and 22.


  21. In response, Mr Duffy simply stated  that  the  secretary  of  state's
      submission relates to the form as opposed  to  the  substance  of  the
      decision.


     Assessment


  22. It is correct that the Judge did not set out with precision  referable
      to 'case specific findings', the basis upon which she found that there
      were arguably good grounds for granting leave to  remain  outside  the
      rules.


  23. However, as fairly and properly noted by Mr Duffy, that really amounts
      to a matter of form rather than substance.


  24. In fact there is no difficulty identifying the basis for Judge  Dean's
      conclusion when regard is had to the "unusual features" in  this  case
      referred to in paragraphs 21 and 22 of her determination.


  25. I have also had regard to the evidence available at the time regarding
      the finding that the claimant's husband had recently been diagnosed as
      having cancer [22]. His care needs, together with those  of  her  son,
      Jahin, combine to establish  the  need  for  the  family  unit  to  be
      maintained in the UK.


  26. Mr Duffy did not contend that the Article 8 decision was  in  any  way
      irrational or perverse.


  27. Although the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  might  have  identified  more
      concisely what the "arguably good grounds" were, I find that there has
      been no material error of law in the circumstances.


     Decision


        The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a              material  error  on  a  point  of  law  and  shall
accordingly stand.


     No anonymity order made.





                               Signed                 Date 28/8/2014








