
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38449/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 23rd May 2014                                |On 6th June 2014           |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE
                                   Between

                            MRS LINDA LISA KHUNGA
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Ahmed of Bankfield Heath Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, Mrs Linda Lisa Khunga, date of birth 23rd January  1972,
    is a citizen of Malawi.  The Appellant applied for leave to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom under paragraph 276ADE and Appendix FM.  As part  of
    the application the Appellant has a dependent son.  The facts pertinent
    to the son are relevant to the issues in the present proceedings.

 2. I have considered whether any of the parties to the present proceedings
    requires the protection of an anonymity direction.  Taking  account  of
    all the circumstances I  do  not  consider  it  necessary  to  make  an
    anonymity direction.

 3. This is an appeal by the Respondent against the determination of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Ransley who  by  a  decision  promulgated  on  27th
    January 2014 allowed the Appellant's  appeal.   In  essence  the  judge
    found that the child dependent  qualified  under  paragraph  276ADE(iv)
    because  he  was  under  18  and  have  lived  in  the  United  Kingdom
    continuously for over seven years since his entry in 2005.  Having made
    that finding with regard to the dependent the judge went on to consider
    the Appellant's qualification under Appendix  FM  and  found  that  the
    Appellant met the requirements of Appendix FM but  that  she  fell  for
    consideration within paragraph EX.1(a)(ii).

 4. It is against that that the appeal is currently brought.  In the  first
    instance the Respondent is alleging that it is reasonable to expect the
    Appellant's  child  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  and  as  such  the
    requirements of EX.1 of Appendix FM are not met.

 5. The application in this matter was made in August  2012  and  therefore
    the relevant provision of paragraph 276ADE provided as follows:-

         "The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain  on
         the grounds of private life.

         276ADE.  The requirements to be met by an applicant  for  leave  to
                  remain on the  grounds  of  private  life  in  the  United
                  Kingdom  are  that  at  the  date  of   application,   the
                  applicant:-

              (i) does not fall for refusal under  any  of  the  grounds  in
                      Section S-LTR 1.2 to S-LTR  2.3.  and  S-LTR.3.1.  in
                      Appendix FM; and

              (ii)     ...

              (iii)    has lived continuously in the UK for at least  twenty
                      years (discounting any period of imprisonment); or

               (iv)      is  under  the  age  of  18  years  and  has  lived
                      continuously in the  UK  for  at  least  seven  years
                      (discounting any period of imprisonment); or

              (v) is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has spent
                      at least half of his life living continuously in  the
                      UK (discounting any period of imprisonment); or

              (vi)     is aged 18 or above, has lived continuously in the UK
                      for less than twenty years (discounting any period of
                      imprisonment) but  has  no  ties  (including  social,
                      cultural or family) with  the  country  to  which  he
                      would have to go if  required  to  leave  the  United
                      Kingdom."

 6. Accordingly within the original provisions of 276ADE(iv) there  was  no
    issue with regard to reasonableness.  The son did not fall for  refusal
    under any of the grounds specified in sub-paragraph (i) of  276ADE  and
    had lived continuously in the United Kingdom for at least seven  years.
    Accordingly the son succeeded under paragraph 276ADE.

 7. Thereafter the Appellant currently  under  consideration  falls  to  be
    considered under Appendix FM, Section R-LTRPT requirements for  limited
    leave to remain as a parent.  The provisions provide as follows:-

         "Section R-LTRP ..."

 8. The provisions of relationship requirements under E-LTRPT.2.2  indicate
    that a child has lived continuously in the  United  Kingdom  for  seven
    years immediately preceding the date of the application  and  paragraph
    EX.1 applies.  Paragraph EX.1 provides as follows:-

         "EX.1. This paragraph applies if :
        (a) (i) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting parental
        relationship with a child who-

        (aa) is under the age of 18 years;
        (bb) is in the UK;
        (cc) is a British Citizen or has lived in the UK continuously for
        at least the 7 years immediately preceding the date of application
        ;and

        (ii) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
        UK; or

        (b) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a
        partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled in the
        UK or in the UK with refugee leave or humanitarian protection, and
        there are insurmountable obstacles to family life with that partner
        continuing outside the UK.


         ..."

 9. Therefore whilst there is  no  requirement  to  assess  whether  it  is
    reasonable for the child to leave the  United  Kingdom  in  considering
    paragraph 276ADE in  considering  the  parent  it  was  within  EX1  in
    considering the position of the parent  that  consideration  ad  to  be
    given as to whether it was reasonable for the child to leave the UK.

10. An amendment subsequently to the provisions  of  paragraph  276ADE  did
    bring into the provisions with regard to reasonableness.

11. In assessing whether or not the parent should be allowed to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom there is under EX.1 sub-paragraph  2  a  requirement
    that it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United
    Kingdom.

12. Accordingly in looking at the assessment made  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Ransley consideration has to be given to  the  careful  structure
    that the judge adopted.

13. The judge in the first  instance  concluded  that  the  child  met  the
    requirements of 276ADE and that  the  child  was  to  that  extent  not
    subject to removal.  The judge  thereafter  went  on  to  consider  the
    position of the mother.  It is  in  that  context  that  the  issue  of
    reasonableness arises.

14. Being satisfied that the Appellant otherwise met  the  suitability  and
    eligibility  requirements  of  Appendix   FM   the   judge   considered
    specifically paragraph EX.1(a)(ii).  The judge was satisfied  that  the
    Appellant was in a genuine and subsisting relationship with  the  child
    and that the child had lived continuously in  the  United  Kingdom  for
    seven years.  The judge thereafter went on to  find  that  it  was  not
    reasonable to expect the Appellant and Joshua to seek to  resume  their
    family life in Malawi because they had no family, social  and  economic
    ties in Malawi.  The judge then considered that they had formed  strong
    family and social ties in the United Kingdom.  The judge  took  account
    of Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  and
    determined that it was in the best interests of Joshua who had been  in
    the United Kingdom for eight plus years to remain in the United Kingdom
    with his mother.  That would enable him to continue with his  schooling
    and to enjoy the private life that he had established.   There  was  no
    prospects with regard to family, social or  other  ties  in  Malawi  or
    prospects for education that were  comparable  with  that.   The  judge
    therefore having assessed all the factors considered that  it  was  not
    reasonable for the child  to  be  removed  and  therefore  it  was  not
    reasonable in that context for the mother to  be  removed.   The  judge
    therefore found that the Appellant met the requirements of the Rules in
    Appendix FM.

15. Those were findings of fact that the judge was entitled to make on  the
    basis of the evidence presented.  The judge has properly  assessed  all
    the factors that she was obliged to take into  account  in  considering
    Appendix FM.  The judge has therefore fully justified her  decision  to
    allow this appeal under Appendix FM in respect of the Appellant.

16. In the light of that there is no  material  error  of  law  within  the
    determination.  I uphold the decision to allow  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  I uphold the decision to make a fee  award  as  set
    out.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure



