



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38984/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                      |                  Decision & Reasons|
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On 20th May 2015                       |                On 5th June 2015    |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                                  Mrs N A C
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Janjua, of Janjua & Associates

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Secretary of State  with
    permission against the decision of a First-tier Tribunal  Panel  (Judge
    Saffer/Judge Monaghan) promulgated on 2nd  January  2015  in  which  it
    allowed the  Respondent's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to refuse her leave to remain in the UK on the  basis  of  her
    Article 8 private/family life.

 2. For the sake of continuity and clarity I will  in  this  determination,
    refer to Mrs N A C as "the Appellant" and the  Secretary  of  State  as
    "the Respondent" which reflects their respective positions  before  the
    FtT.

 3. The FtT made an anonymity direction in this appeal and I see no  reason
    to disturb that direction. It therefore continues for  the  purpose  of
    these proceedings under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008.

Background

 4. The Appellant born 1st May 1954 is a citizen of Pakistan.  She  entered
    the United Kingdom as a visitor on 25th September 2013 in order to  see
    her son M now living in the UK. M is the father of A  born  24th  March
    2012. A is a British citizen. Her mother is  currently  in  prison  and
    although A's mother and father are neither married nor living together,
    a  Residence  Order  has  been  made  in  favour  of  A's  father.  A's
    grandmother is currently the principle carer for A.

 5. When the Appellant entered the United Kingdom on  25th  September  2013
    part of the purpose of  her  visit  was  to  enable  a  package  to  be
    presented to Social Services whereby she and her son  could  present  a
    shared cared arrangement which would mean that A could remain with  her
    birth family. The Appellant underwent a Social Services assessment  and
    on 2nd October 2013 a Residence Order was made in favour of A's  father
    with a Supervision Order in favour of Leeds City Council for  a  period
    of one year.

 6. The Appellant remained in the United Kingdom caring  for  A  until  she
    left on 26th December 2013 prior to the expiry of her visa.

 7. She re-entered on 8th February 2014 with a visa valid to 28th July 2014
    and again this was with the purpose of caring for A.

 8. On 24th July 2014 shortly before the expiry of  her  extant  leave  the
    Appellant applied for leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules. On
    30th September 2014 the Respondent  refused  the  application  and  the
    Appellant's subsequent appeal came before the  First-tier  Tribunal  on
    15th December 2014.

 9. The FtT having heard evidence made findings that the best interest of A
    would be served by her being looked after by  the  Appellant,  at  this
    point in time. A had formed a close bond with her grandmother.  Further
    A's father was enabled to work as a taxi driver on night shift and thus
    provide financially for A.

10. If the Appellant were removed, A's father would not  be  able  to  work
    unsocial hours and this would result in a  likelihood  of  recourse  to
    public funds. The FtT accordingly found that whilst there is a need for
    immigration control it did not outweigh the best interests of the child
    in this particular case and it would therefore be  disproportionate  to
    require the Appellant to leave the UK.



The Grounds of Appeal

11. There are three strands to the grounds seeking permission. They can  be
    summarised as follows:

      i) It is said that the FtT misdirected itself in law on this basis. It
         was accepted by the Secretary of State that Social  Services  found
         the Appellant to be suitable as a carer for A, but  there  were  no
         reasons advanced in the Tribunal's determination  showing  why  the
         child's care could not reasonably be  provided  by  other  channels
         e.g. child minder, nanny or state support.

     ii) Added to this  it  is  argued  that  the  FtT's  approach  was  not
         structured in accordance with the guidance given by  the  Court  of
         Appeal in AE (Algeria) v SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  653  because  the
         Appellant was present in the United Kingdom as a visitor and  could
         hold no legitimate expectation of remaining outside  the  terms  of
         her  visa.  Thus  the  FtT  failed  to  lawfully  engage  with  the
         possibility of the A's father accessing other channels of support.

         This theme also  appears under the heading Article  8  and  adds  a
         rider that Article 8 is not a general dispensing power and does not
         confer a choice upon the Appellant or her son as to who care for A.

    iii) Section 117 - It is claimed that although the FtT state that regard
         has been had to Section 117B of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
         Asylum Act 2002, it refers only  to  a  singular  sub-section.  The
         submission on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State  is  that  it  is
         incumbent upon the Tribunal to have regard to all (the Secretary of
         State's emphasis) of  the  public  interest  factors  contained  in
         Section 117, rather than artificially separating them.

The Hearing before the Upper Tribunal

12. Mr Diwnycz who appeared on behalf of the Respondent essentially  relied
    on the grounds seeking permission. Mr  Janjua  was  equally  brief  and
    relied upon advancing those matters which had been put before  the  FtT
    and which are set out in the grounds.

Error of Law

13. The grounds essentially take issue with and revolve around  one  point.
    It is this; the FtT erred by placing too much  weight  on  its  finding
    that the best interests of A would be served by having her  grandmother
    remain in the United Kingdom  as  her  carer.  It  is  said  there  was
    insufficient reasoning (and therefore weight) advanced on why care  for
    A could not reasonably be provided by other channels.

14. I reject that argument.  The  FtT  in  a  carefully  set  out  decision
    considered  all  the  relevant  documentation  before   it,   including
    crucially, a detailed Social Services assessment.  The  Panel  reminded
    itself that the Appellant  could  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules but formed the view that in  its  judgment  the  best
    interests of A would be served by being cared for by  her  grandmother,
    the Appellant. Other avenues were discounted. They acknowledged that if
    the Appellant were removed, A's father would have to give up work which
    would mean public benefits being expended.

15. Having properly directed itself that the Appellant could not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules, the Panel noted that this was  a
    case where they would need to consider Article 8 ECHR outside the Rules
    in accordance with the principles set out in Gulshan.

16. The Panel reminded itself of the following; Removal would  normally  be
    lawful and would be for the legitimate aim of retaining  the  integrity
    of immigration control by only allowing those to  be  here  who  comply
    with the Immigration Rules. The real issue in this case is  whether  it
    would be proportionate to require the Appellant  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom.

17. So far as the Panel's reasoning is concerned I can discern no error  of
    law. The Panel has explained why it has strayed outside the Immigration
    Rules and considered Article 8 with specific reference to Gulshan.  The
    grounds amount to a disagreement with the facts  found  by  the  Panel;
    findings which were open to them on the available evidence. There is no
    reason to suppose that these findings are perverse.

Section 117B

18. The SSHD submits it is incumbent upon the FtT to  have  regard  to  all
    (the SSHD's emphasis) of  the  public  interest  factors  contained  in
    Section 117, rather than artificially separating them. That is  as  far
    as this submission goes. No particulars were given before me why it  is
    said that this "failure" amounts to legal error. The Panel applied  the
    relevant part of Section 117 to the facts they found  on  the  evidence
    before them. Nothing has been put before me to  show  that  somehow  or
    other, the setting out of Section 117 fully would alter the outcome  of
    this appeal.

19. For the foregoing reasons the decision of the FtT discloses no error of
    law. The decision therefore stands.

Decision

20. The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

Direction regarding anonymity - Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008 Rule 14

The appellant is granted anonymity throughout these proceedings, unless  and
until the Tribunal directs otherwise. No report of these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify her or any  member  of  their  family.  This
direction applies both to the Appellant and to the  Respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of Court proceedings.

Signature                                             Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

