
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38800/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 24 September 2015                          | On 2 November 2015               |
|                                              |                                  |


                                   Before


                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between


                   Rajapaksha Pathirannahelage Rajapaksha
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Biggs, Counsel instructed by SEB Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I see no need for, and do not make, an order restricting publication  of
    the details of this appeal.

 2. This is an appeal brought by a citizen  of  Sri  Lanka,  born  in  1986,
    against a decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  his  appeal
    against a decision of the respondent on 15 September  2014  refusing  to
    vary his leave to remain and to remove him by way  of  directions  under
    Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act  2006.  Notice
    of Appeal was served on 30 September 2014 and so the appellant  was  not
    restricted to the more limited  grounds  of  appeal  introduced  by  the
    amendments to section 84 of the Nationality Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002.

 3. The application was refused because the appellant relied on a  form  CAS
    which enquiries revealed had  been  withdrawn  by  the  City  of  London
    Academy and because, according to the respondent, the appellant had  not
    complied with a request  to  attend  an  interview  in  accordance  with
    paragraph 322(10) of the Immigration Rules.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal did not decide if the appellant  had  ever  been
    invited to attend an interview.  It would have been better if it had.

 5. The judge did decide that the respondent  was  under  no  obligation  to
    extend the appellant's leave as a result of his failing to  satisfy  the
    Rules because the form CAS had been withdrawn.

 6. It is not an unusual state of affairs for a form CAS to be withdrawn but
    there is an additional feature in this case.  The appellant says that he
    has twice suffered the frustration of his form CAS  being  revoked.   He
    was given an extension of 60 days when it happened the  first  time  but
    not the second.  He says that he should have been given an extension  on
    the second occasion.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered himself bound by  the  decision
    in Kaur v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 13.
     That case decided that  where  a  Tier  4  Sponsor  failed  to  provide
    evidence in a form CAS there was no obligation on the Secretary of State
    to investigate the matter further or to inform the student.   There  was
    no obligation to give a student caught out by such a deficiency  further
    leave in which to consider his position.

 8. Mr Biggs contended that the First-tier Tribunal was wrong.  The case  of
    Kaur concerned the contention that there was an obligation on  the  part
    of the Secretary of State to  notify  an  applicant  that  the  academic
    course relied upon was deficient  if,  for  example,  he  did  not  show
    academic progress.  The Tribunal held that there was no such  obligation
    and the Court of Appeal  agreed.   That  is  quite  different  from  the
    circumstances here.  Here the appellant  provided  an  apparently  valid
    form CAS but  by  the  time  it  came  to  be  considered  it  had  been
    invalidated by an action of the college.  This is conceptually different
    from the case of an applicant who either  provides  the  wrong  form  or
    relies on his sponsor to provide a form and the sponsor does not  do  as
    required or does not do it properly.  The obligation is on the applicant
    to make his application properly and not on the Secretary  of  State  to
    say where an application has gone wrong and offer an opportunity for  it
    to be remedied.

 9.  The  present  circumstances  are  rather  different.    The   appellant
    reasonably thought that he had satisfied the requirements of the  Rules.
    He  had  produced,  or  caused  to  be  produced,  documents  that  were
    satisfactory.  However, unbeknown to him and for reasons that  were  not
    his fault, the college had withdrawn the CAS by the time the  respondent
    decided the application.

10. In the case of Patel (revocation of sponsor licence  -  fairness)  India
    [2011] UKUT 00211 (IAC) (a decision of the President of the  Immigration
    and Asylum Chamber of the Upper Tribunal, Mr  Justice  Blake  and  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Batiste) the Tribunal decided that  it  would  be  unfair
    where a sponsor's licence had been revoked by the Secretary of State and
    the applicant was unaware of the revocation and was  not  to  blame  for
    licence being revoked for the Respondent not to give  the  applicant  an
    opportunity to vary his application.  This was recognised in part  by  a
    policy operated by the Secretary of State and it was particularly  wrong
    when a policy existed that it was not  extended  to  people  in  broadly
    similar circumstances.

11. This was reinforced in the decision of the Tribunal (President  Blake  J
    and Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  McWilliam)  in  Kaur  (Patel  fairness:
    respondent's policy) India [2013] UKUT 00344 (IAC)).

12. It was Mr Biggs' primary point that there should be a way  of  providing
    a remedy when an innocent person has been caught out as appears to  have
    happened here.

13. The second point is that there is a remedy.   There  is  a  policy.   He
    provided me with a copy of which he claimed was the policy in  force  at
    the relevant time.  Ms Holmes did not suggest  that  this  was  not  the
    correct policy.  It is described as  "Patel  guidance  -  step  by  step
    guide".  I assume it  applies.   There  is  nothing  in  that  guide  or
    anything else that has been drawn to my attention  which  suggests  that
    the entitlement to a 60 day period to vary an  application  necessitated
    by the cancellation of a form CAS  for  reasons  that  are  not  to  the
    applicant's discredit can only be invoked once.  Even if the policy were
    far more generous than anything required  by  common  law  fairness,  or
    indeed arguably even if it were plainly bizarre, the applicant would  be
    entitled to rely upon it and that is what the appellant  is  doing.   Of
    course it is not bizarre. It is merely giving effect to the principle of
    fairness identified above.

14. It follows that I am satisfied that the First-tier  Tribunal  was  wrong
    to dismiss the appeal for the reasons given and I am satisfied that  the
    First-tier Tribunal should have found that the decision  not  to  extend
    leave by 60 days was not in accordance with the law.

15. However, I cannot substitute a decision to that effect because there  is
    an unresolved issue.  The papers before me do not permit an easy  answer
    to the question of whether notice was  sent.   Certainly  the  appellant
    asserts in very clear terms that it was never received but there is some
    evidence from the respondent to suggest that it was sent and should have
    been received.

16. I do not consider it desirable for the Upper  Tribunal  to  decide  this
    point because it is a pure question of fact which has not  been  decided
    at all. The appellant is not entitled to preserve his appeal rights  but
    it is a relevant consideration that his appeal rights are limited if  he
    wants to appeal a finding of fact made in the Upper Tribunal.

17. I therefore allow the appeal of the appellant  because  the  appeal  has
    not been decided properly.  It is for the First-tier Tribunal to  decide
    the case again and I set aside the existing decision.  Once  the  First-
    tier Tribunal has resolved the question of  whether  the  appellant  was
    invited to a further interview it  must  then  decide  if  the  decision
    complained of  was  in  accordance  with  the  law.   I  have  indicated
    circumstances where in my judgment it would not be  in  accordance  with
    the law and that should  be  followed  unless  there  are  extraordinary
    circumstances.

18.  I have  in  mind  the  possibility,  which  occurs  occasionally,  that
    applications either cannot succeed or cannot be refused on  an  exercise
    of discretion but that is a very rare event and I do not  think  it  has
    happened here.

Notice of Decision

19. To the extent indicated above I allow the appeal and  I  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal. The appeal must be determined again
    in the First-tier Tribunal.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 28 October 2015                |








