
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration   and   Asylum    Chamber)                   Appeal    Number:
IA/38797/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Promulgated |
|On April 23, 2015                      |On April 27, 2015         |
|                                       |                          |


                                   Before

                          HIS HONOUR LORD BANNATYNE
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                                 MR N A A L
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Smith, Counsel, instructed by IR Immigration Law
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

         1. The Appellant is a citizen of Cameroon. On September 23, 2012 he
            entered the United Kingdom with a valid entry  clearance  as  an
            accompanied child. This enabled him  to  remain  in  the  United
            Kingdom until February 22, 2013. On February 21, 2013 he applied
            for indefinite leave to remain as  a  child  under  the  age  of
            eighteen whose relative was settled here. The respondent refused
            this application on September 4, 2013 and at the same time  took
            a decision to remove  him  by  way  of  directions  pursuant  to
            Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

         2. On September 23, 2013 the Appellant appealed to  the  First-tier
            Tribunal under Section 82(1) Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
            Act  2002  (hereinafter  called  the  2002  Act),  as   amended.
            Contained within those grounds of appeal was a reference to 1951
            Refugee Convention.

         3. The matter was originally listed before Judge of the  First-tier
            Tribunal Pacey on April 25, 2014 and  following  representations
            he agreed to adjourn the hearing but issued directions to enable
            the respondent to process  the  appellant's  asylum  claim.  The
            matter came  before  the  Tribunal  on  July  9,  2014  and  was
            adjourned because the appellant has a pending  asylum  interview
            on July 16, 2014.

         4. The matter finally came before Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
            PJM Hollingsworth (hereinafter called "the FtTJ") on October 15,
            2014 and he refused the appeal in a determination promulgated on
            November 14, 2014.

         5. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal  on  November  28,  2014.
            Permission to appeal was granted  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
            Tribunal Scott Baker on January 13, 2015.

         6. The matter came before  us  on  the  date  set  out  above.  The
            appellant was in attendance and represented by his counsel.

PRELIMINARY ISSUE

         7. We indicated to Mr Nath that there were a number of matters that
            concerned us. At paragraph [51] of his  determination  the  FtTJ
            made a finding that it  was  implausible  that  the  appellant's
            father would have responded by stating  that  homosexuality  did
            not exist in Cameroon. We indicated that the FtTJ appeared to be
            applying  western  views  as  against  views  commonly  held  in
            Cameroon and other African nations.  This  finding  contradicted
            the father's letter which was set out at paragraph [98]  of  the
            FtTJ's determination. The FtTJ applied  a  western  approach  as
            against an African approach where people reject homosexuality as
            a concept. We suggested to Mr Nath that the  FtTJ's  finding  on
            the concept of homosexuality  in  Cameroon  infected  his  whole
            decision.

         8. We also referred Mr Nath to paragraph [57] of the  determination
            and suggested that the FtTJ had erred by making  a  plausibility
            finding despite being aware of the appellant's father's position
            that homosexuality did not exist in Cameroon. The  FtTJ  further
            erred when he found at paragraph [64] of  his  determination  it
            was "highly implausible" that he would have felt unable to  tell
            his sister-a person he  treated  as  a  mother  especially  even
            though he accepted she  was  shocked  when  she  discovered  his
            secret (see paragraph [80]).

         9. We suggested to Mr Nath that these issues went to  the  core  of
            the appellant's asylum claim and we did not  believe  they  were
            sustainable as they  clearly  would  have  affected  the  FtTJ's
            assessment on credibility. Whilst some of his findings were open
            to him we were of the opinion that the  numerous  "plausibility"
            findings undermined other valid findings on credibility.

        10. We also indicated we had difficulty  following  aspects  of  the
            determination and referred by way of example to paragraph  [108]
            of the determination. We were unclear  who  or  what  was  being
            criticised. The Judge who gave permission to appeal  also  found
            difficulties with the determination and we further  noted  there
            had been no  consideration  of  the  country/objective  evidence
            which would be relevant to any issue of internal relocation.

        11. Mr Nath indicated that he had spoken to Ms Smith  prior  to  the
            hearing and acknowledged Ground Four of the  grounds  of  appeal
            highlighted matters that could lead us  to  conclude  there  had
            been an error in law. He indicated that he had no submissions to
            make on this ground of appeal and  would  leave  the  matter  to
            ourselves but in the event we were satisfied there was an  error
            in law then he suggested the matter  be  remitted  back  to  the
            First-tier Tribunal.

        12. Ms Smith submitted that Ground four was her strongest ground but
            the other grounds when taken with Ground Four also evidenced  an
            error in law. She invited us to find there had been an error  in
            law and to remit the matter  back  to  the  first-tier  Tribunal
            albeit she requested the matter be heard at Taylor House as this
            was more convenient for the appellant.

        13. In light of the concerns expressed above we were satisfied there
            had been an error in law. The Court of Appeal have made it clear
            on a number of occasions that findings on plausibility are to be
            avoided. The FtTJ in  this  appeal  made  numerous  findings  on
            plausibility but in doing so he considered the appellant's claim
            from a Western prospective as against  an  African  prospective.
            Some of his findings made no sense  and  although  some  of  the
            findings were open to him we were  satisfied  that  the  matters
            highlighted above meant there was an error in law.

        14. Having considered Part 3, Section 7.1 to  7.3  of  the  Practice
            Statement we agreed to remit the appeal back to  the  First-tier
            Tribunal for a fresh hearing with no findings preserved.

        15. The matters that will need to be considered are the  appellant's
            asylum, humanitarian protection and articles 2, 3 and 8  claims.
            There is no need for any future  Tribunal  to  hear  any  appeal
            under the  Immigration  Rules  because  the  appellant's  former
            representative conceded  before  the  FtTJ  that  the  appellant
            cannot meet the Immigration Rules.

        16.  The  parties  should  ensure  compliance  with  any  subsequent
            directions issued in light of the fact  the  Tribunal  Procedure
            (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
            2014 will apply to this appeal from hereon.

DECISION

        17. The making of  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did
            involve the making of an error on a point of law.  We  have  set
            aside the decision.

        18. The appeal is remitted back to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
            fresh appeal hearing under Section 12 of the  Tribunals,  Courts
            and Enforcement Act 2007.

        19. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
            2008  (as  amended)  the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity
            throughout these proceedings, unless and  until  a  tribunal  or
            court directs otherwise. An order was  made  in  the  First-tier
            Tribunal and we saw no reason to amend that order.






DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS
IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
