
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38920/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |                Decision & Reasons   |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 28 September 2015                  |                On 29 September 2015 |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     MOHAMMED AKIL CHERIYAN ABDULLA HAJI
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    None


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. The respondent to this appeal is a citizen of India, born on 20  November
   1986. The appellant is the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department,
   who has appealed with the permission of the First-tier Tribunal against a
   decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Wellesley-Cole, allowing the
   respondent's appeal against a decision of the Secretary of  State,  dated
   19 September 2014, refusing to issue him a residence  card  acknowledging
   his right of residence as the extended family member of an EEA  national.
   He had applied on the basis he was in  a  durable  relationship  with  Ms
   Paulina Grochowska, a Polish National but the Secretary of State was  not
   satisfied that sufficient evidence had been submitted to  establish  that
   they were in a durable relationship so as to satisfy Regulation  8(5)  of
   the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  ("the  EEA
   Regulations").


2. It is more convenient to refer to the parties as  they  were  before  the
   First-tier Tribunal. I shall therefore refer to Mr Haji from  now  on  as
   "the appellant" and the Secretary of State as "the respondent".


3. I was not asked and see no need to make an anonymity direction.

4. The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant and  Ms  Grochowska  and
   considered the documents filed in support of the appeal. Having  done  so
   she found as fact that the appellant and Ms Grochowska were in a  durable
   relationship and therefore satisfied Regulation 8(5). The final sentences
   of her decision read as follows:

    "15 ... I am of the opinion that this decision was  not  in  accordance
    with the law and for the  above  cited  reasons  therefore  the  Appeal
    accordingly succeeds.
    ...
    16.  The Appeal is accordingly allowed."

5. The judge made a whole fee award because the appeal had been allowed.

6. The respondent sought permission to appeal from the  First-tier  Tribunal
   on the basis the judge's decision was erroneous in failing  to  recognise
   that she could not allow the  appal  outright.  The  respondent  had  not
   applied her discretion under Regulation 17(4)  of  the  EEA  Regulations,
   which states that the Secretary of State may issue a residence card to an
   extended family member. The judge should only have allowed the appeal  to
   the limited extent that the decision would go back to  the  Secretary  of
   State to consider the exercise of discretion.

7. I heard argument on the question of  whether  the  judge's  decision  was
   vitiated by material error of law from Mr Melvin. In summary he relied on
   the grounds seeking permission to appeal. The appellant was unrepresented
   and did not attend.

Error of law

8. Although there is some ambiguity in  the  judge's  final  paragraph,  she
   makes no reference at all to the need for the respondent to consider  the
   exercise of discretion and I therefore incline towards the view that  she
   made a material error of law by allowing the appeal outright  as  opposed
   to the limited extent that the case remained  before  the  respondent  to
   consider the exercise of discretion. I therefore set aside her decision.

Substituted decision

9. There is no challenge to the judge's finding  that  there  is  a  durable
   relationship and this finding is not affected by her error  with  regards
   to the disposal of the appeal. It therefore stands. All that is  required
   is that I substitute a decision allowing the appeal to the limited extent
   that Regulation 8(5) has been met but it is a matter for  the  respondent
   to consider the exercise of discretion under Regulation 17(4).


NOTICE OF DECISION

     The First-tier Tribunal made a material error on a point  of  law  and
    its decision allowing the appeal is set aside. The  following  decision
    is substituted:


    The appeal of the appellant is allowed to the limited extent  that  the
    requirements of Regulation 8(5) of the EEA  Regulations  are  met.  The
    respondent must now consider the exercise of discretion as  to  whether
    to issue a residence card.


    No anonymity direction has been made.


                               Signed                 Date 28 September
                                   2015






                               Judge Froom, sitting as a Deputy Judge of
                               the Upper Tribunal
