
IAC-AH-KEW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/38436/2013
                                                               IA/38416/2013
                                                               IA/38396/2013
                                                               IA/38378/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9th March 2015                    |On 20th March 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  ALI RAZA
                                  GOHAR ALI
                             MUHAMMAD ARHAM ALI
                                 RAHEEM ALI
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms L Mair, Counsel, instructed by Silverdale
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against the decision  of  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Hawden-Beal promulgated following a hearing on 14th
    March 2014.

 2. The Respondents before the Upper Tribunal were  the  Appellants  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.  I will refer to them as the Claimants.

 3. The Claimants are citizens of Pakistan.  The First and Second Claimants
    are married and are the parents of the Third and Fourth Claimants  born
    9th September 2005 and 13th September 2007 respectively.

 4. The Claimants on 7th December 2012 applied for leave to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom on the basis of their family and private lives.

 5. The applications were refused on 30th August  2013,  the  Secretary  of
    State not accepting that the Claimants satisfied  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM in relation to family life,  or  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules in relation to private life.  It was  not  considered
    that there were any exceptional  circumstances  that  would  warrant  a
    grant of leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules.

 6. The appeals were heard together by Judge Hawden-Beal (the  judge).   It
    was conceded on behalf of the Claimants that  they  could  not  satisfy
    Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE but it was submitted that  the  appeals
    should be allowed with reference to Article  8  of  the  1950  European
    Convention on Human Rights (the 1950  Convention)  outside  the  rules.
    The judge accepted that Article 8  should  be  considered  outside  the
    rules, and allowed the appeals on human rights grounds.  The  Secretary
    of State was granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal and the
    appeal came before me on 3rd December 2014.  I did not accept that  the
    judge had erred in finding that Article 8 should be considered  outside
    the rules, nor had she erred in finding that the best interests of  the
    children would be to remain in the United Kingdom.  I did find that the
    proportionality assessment was flawed and for that reason set aside the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  Full details of  the  application
    for permission, the grant of permission, and my reasons for finding  an
    error of law are contained in my decision dated 9th December 2014.

 7. The hearing was adjourned so that further evidence could be  given  and
    submissions made in relation to Article 8.

Re-making the Decision

Preliminary Issues

 8. I confirmed that I had before me all the documentation  that  had  been
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  I had  received  a  skeleton  argument
    from Ms Mair dated 8th March 2015 which  referred  to  a  supplementary
    bundle which I had not received.  I was provided with a  copy  of  that
    bundle.  Mr Mills confirmed that he had received a copy  prior  to  the
    hearing.

 9. Both representatives indicated that they were ready to proceed.   There
    was no application for an adjournment.

Evidence

10. Both the First and Second Claimants  gave  oral  evidence.   The  First
    Claimant adopted his witness statement contained at pages  3-5  of  the
    Claimants' bundle and his additional witness statement at pages 5-7  of
    the Claimants' supplementary bundle.  Both were signed  and  dated  9th
    March 2015.

11. The Second Claimant adopted her witness statement dated 9th March 2015.

12. The First Claimant was questioned by both representatives  and  I  have
    recorded all questions and answers in my Record of Proceedings  and  it
    is not necessary to reiterate them here.  There were no questions asked
    of the Second Claimant.

13. In brief summary, the Claimants explained that the First Claimant  came
    to the United Kingdom on 9th March 2006 with a  work  permit.   He  was
    joined by the Second and Third Claimants on 25th April 2006.  They were
    granted visas as his dependants.  The Fourth Claimant was born  in  the
    United Kingdom on 13th September 2007.

14. The First Claimant was subsequently granted further leave as a  Tier  2
    sports worker valid until 14th September 2013.  His family were granted
    leave as his dependants.

15. On 8th June 2012 the Claimants' leave was curtailed so that it  expired
    on 8th December 2012.

16. On 7th December 2012 the Claimants applied for leave to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom based upon Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

17. The First Claimant was a professional hockey  player  in  Pakistan  and
    played for Pakistan in the Olympic Games in 2000 and 2004.   The  First
    Claimant is a highly qualified coach and has worked  for  hockey  clubs
    and schools in the United Kingdom.

18. He had no family in Pakistan other than a married sister.  He  had  not
    been back to Pakistan since he came to the United Kingdom although  his
    wife and children had been back for short holidays.

19. The First Claimant could not  take  up  coaching  in  Pakistan  because
    coaches in Pakistan are employed by large companies who run the  hockey
    teams and if you do not work for one of those organisations you are not
    allowed to coach.

20. Both Claimants stated that the children in effect had only  ever  known
    life in the United Kingdom and are completely integrated  into  British
    society.

The Submissions of the Secretary of State

21. Mr Mills submitted that the issue was whether it was  proportionate  to
    remove the family to Pakistan.  It was accepted that a finding made  by
    the First-tier Tribunal that it was in the childrens' best interests to
    remain in this country was preserved.

22. Mr Mills submitted that the question that had to be answered related to
    section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    (the 2002 Act), and whether it was reasonable to expect the children to
    leave the United Kingdom.

23. I  was  reminded  of  the  public  interest  in  maintaining  effective
    immigration control.  Mr Mills submitted that there was no  reason  why
    the family could not re-establish themselves in Pakistan.  It  was  not
    accepted that the First Claimant would not be  able  to  find  work  in
    Pakistan as he is a highly qualified hockey coach.

The Claimants' Submissions

24. Ms Mair relied upon her skeleton argument.  As it was accepted that the
    best interests of the  children  would  be  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom, Ms Mair submitted that it would not be  reasonable  to  expect
    them to leave.  I was asked to find that there were  no  countervailing
    reasons to outweigh the  best  interests  of  the  children.   Ms  Mair
    pointed out that the family had been in the United Kingdom legally, and
    had never breached either immigration law or the criminal  law.   There
    was no illegal working to be considered, and I was asked to  take  into
    account the length of time that the children had  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

25. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

26. I find that it  is  appropriate  to  consider  Article  8  outside  the
    Immigration Rules for the reasons given in my  error  of  law  decision
    dated 9th December 2014.

27. I accept the immigration history set out in the Claimants' evidence.

28. There was no challenge to the finding made by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    that the best interests of the children would be served by remaining in
    the United Kingdom, and that finding is therefore preserved.

29. I consider Article 8 by following the guidance given in  Razgar  [2004]
    UKHL  27  which  indicates  that  the  following  questions  should  be
    considered;

         (i)  Will the proposed removal  be  an  interference  by  a  public
             authority with  the  exercise  of  the  applicant's  right  to
             respect for his private or (as the case may be) family life?

         (ii) If so, would  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such
             gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

         (iii)    If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

         (iv) If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic  society
             in the interests of national security, public  safety  or  the
             economic well being of the  country,  for  the  prevention  of
             disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals,  or
             for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others?

         (v)  If so, is such interference proportionate  to  the  legitimate
             public end sought to be achieved?

30. It is not disputed that the  Claimants  have  established  family  life
    together in the United Kingdom.  However there would be no interference
    with that family life if the Claimants were removed to  Pakistan  as  a
    family.

31. However all of the Claimants have established private  lives  while  in
    the United Kingdom, and I find that Article 8 is engaged on that basis.
     I find that the interference with the Claimants' private  lives  would
    be in  accordance  with  the  law  in  that  they  cannot  satisfy  the
    Immigration Rules.

32. The issue that has to be decided is whether the  proposed  interference
    is necessary and proportionate.

33. If these appeals involved only the First  and  Second  Claimants,  they
    would not succeed.  I accept  that  the  First  Claimant  is  a  highly
    qualified hockey coach, and that he has produced numerous references on
    behalf of clubs, schools and colleagues.  I do not accept that he would
    be unable to find employment in Pakistan.   In  my  view  his  evidence
    indicated that he had made no  credible  effort  to  ascertain  whether
    employment was available, as he wished to remain in the United Kingdom.



34. However these appeals involve two children now  aged  nine  and  seven.
    The elder child arrived in the United Kingdom when he was  six  months,
    the younger child was born in the United Kingdom.

35. ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4 makes it clear that the best  interests  of
    children are a primary consideration, and that the best interests of  a
    child broadly means the well being of  a  child.   A  consideration  of
    where those best interests  lie  will  involve  asking  whether  it  is
    reasonable to expect the child to live in another  country.   The  best
    interests of a child can be outweighed  by  the  cumulative  effect  of
    other considerations.  The Upper Tribunal in Azimi-Moayed  [2013]  UKUT
    00197 (IAC) set out the following in the head note to that decision:

         (i)  As a starting point it is in the best interests of children to
             be with both their parents  and  if  both  parents  are  being
             removed from the  United  Kingdom  then  the  starting  points
             suggests that so should dependent children who  form  part  of
             their household unless there are reasons to the contrary.

         (ii) It is generally in the interests  of  children  to  have  both
             stability and continuity of social and  educational  provision
             and the benefit of growing up in the  cultural  norms  of  the
             society to which they belong.

         (iii)    Lengthy residence in a country other  than  the  state  of
             origin  can  lead  to  development  of  social,  cultural  and
             educational ties that it would be inappropriate to disrupt, in
             the absence  of  compelling  reason  to  the  contrary.   What
             amounts to lengthy residence is not  clear-cut  but  past  and
             present policies have identified seven  years  as  a  relevant
             period.

         (iv) Apart from the terms of  published  policies  and  rules,  the
             Tribunal notes that seven years from age four is likely to  be
             more significant to a child than  the  first  seven  years  of
             life.  Very young  children  are  focussed  on  their  parents
             rather than their peers and are adaptable."

36. I also take into account and find relevant the  guidance  given  in  EB
    (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874 and set out below paragraphs  35  and
    36;

         "35. A decision as to what is in the  best  interests  of  children
             will depend on a number of factors such as

             (a)  their age;

             (b)  the length of time that they have been here;

             (c)  how long they have been in education;

             (c)  what stage their education has reached;

             (d)  to what  extent  they  have  become  distanced  from  the
                  country to which it is proposed that they return;

             (e)  how renewable their connections with it may be;

             (f)  to what extent they  will  have  linguistic,  medical  or
                  other difficulties in adapting to life  in  that  country;
                  and

             (g)  the extent to which the course  proposed  will  interfere
                  with their family life or their rights (if they have  any)
                  as British citizens.

         36.  In a sense the Tribunal is  concerned  with  how  emphatic  an
             answer falls to be given to the question: is it  in  the  best
             interests of the child to remain?  The longer  the  child  has
             been here, the more advanced (or critical) the  stage  of  his
             education, the looser his ties with the country  in  question,
             and the more deleterious the consequences of his  return,  the
             greater the weight that falls into one side of the scales.  If
             it is overwhelmingly in the child's  best  interests  that  he
             should not return, the need to  maintain  immigration  control
             may well not tip the balance.  By contrast if  it  is  in  the
             child's best interests to remain, but only  on  balance  (with
             some factors pointing the other way), the result  may  be  the
             opposite."

37. In this case, I find that the children have no experience  of  life  in
    Pakistan.  The Fourth Claimant has lived all her  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom, and that is in excess of seven years.  The Third Claimant  has
    lived in this country since the age of six months.  They have only ever
    visited Pakistan for short holidays.

38. Both children are doing well at  school.   I  have  seen  their  school
    reports and certificates, and it is clear that not only are they  doing
    well at school, but they engage in extra-curricular activities.   Their
    education is at a relatively early stage.  I do not find that they have
    any realistic links to Pakistan in that  they  have  no  experience  of
    living in that country, although they are Pakistani citizens.  There is
    no evidence that they would face any linguistic or medical difficulties
    in adapting to life in that  country,  but  I  do  find  that  life  in
    Pakistan would be completely alien to  them.   Although  they  are  not
    British citizens, it is my view that the children regard themselves  as
    British, being completely integrated into the British way of life.

39. I conclude that there is considerable  weight  to  be  placed,  in  the
    balancing exercise, in the scales that favour the children remaining in
    the United Kingdom.

40. In considering Article 8(2) I take into account  section  117B  of  the
    2002 Act which states that the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
    controls is in the public interest.

41. It is also in the public interest that persons seeking  to  remain  can
    speak English and are financially independent.  The Claimants all speak
    English and are financially independent.  The Claimants have  not  been
    in the United Kingdom unlawfully.  They have always had  leave.   I  do
    not accept that their immigration status has been precarious,  although
    it is the case that they have only ever had limited leave to remain.

42. Section 117B(6) is set out below;

         "In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where -

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a qualifying child, and

         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom."

43. It is clear that the First and Second Claimants  do  have  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationships with their children.  I find that the
    children are qualifying children as defined in  section  117D,  because
    they are under eighteen years of age, and  have  lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom for a continuous period of seven years or more.

44. I do not find that there are any countervailing features which outweigh
    the finding that the best interests of the children would be to  remain
    in the United Kingdom.

45. As previously stated, the Claimants have never  been  here  unlawfully.
    The First and Second Claimants  have  worked  but  have  done  so  with
    permission, and paid tax.  There has been no illegality  of  any  sort.
    There are numerous references that speak well of  the  Claimants.   The
    First  Claimant  would  have  no  difficulty  in  continuing  with  his
    employment as a hockey coach.

46. As pointed out by Ms Mair in her skeleton argument Lord Kerr stated  at
    paragraph 46 of ZH (Tanzania);

         "Where the best interests of the children clearly favour a  certain
         course,  that  course  should  be  followed  unless  countervailing
         reasons of considerable force displace them.  It is  not  necessary
         to express this in terms of a presumption but the primacy  of  this
         consideration needs to be made clear in emphatic  terms.   What  is
         determined to be in a child's  best  interests  should  customarily
         dictate the outcome of cases such as the present, therefore, and it
         will require considerations  of  substantial  moment  to  permit  a
         different result."

47. As the best interests of the children  are  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom, and I do not find countervailing factors, I conclude  that  it
    would not be reasonable to expect the Third and  Fourth  Claimants,  as
    children, to leave the United Kingdom, and  therefore  section  117B(6)
    stipulates that the public interest does not require the removal of the
    First and Second Claimants.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and  was
set aside.  I substitute a fresh decision.

The appeal of the Secretary of State  is  dismissed.   The  appeals  of  the
Claimants are allowed on human rights grounds in relation to  Article  8  of
the 1950 Convention.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made in the First-tier Tribunal.   There  was  no
application for anonymity made to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  and  no  anonymity
order is made.



Signed        Date 12th March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Because the appeals are allowed I have considered  whether  to  make  a  fee
award.  I have decided that  it  would  be  inappropriate  to  do  so.   The
appeals have been allowed because of  evidence  presented  to  the  Tribunal
which was not presented to the initial decision maker.   There  are  no  fee
awards.



Signed        Date 12th March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

