
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/38778/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 December 2016                           |On 25th January 2017          |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                                jaspal singh
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Coleman instructed by Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is the appeal of Mr Singh against the decision of Judge  Fletcher-
    Hill promulgated on 4 April 2016 in  which  she  dismissed  his  appeal
    against the Secretary of State's decision refusing his claim for  leave
    to remain outside the Immigration Rules  based on length  of  residence
    and his human rights claim.  Without going into matters in detail it is
    clear that evidence was given by five witnesses who were all  found  to
    be truthful in their evidence concerning the amount of  time  they  had
    known him and in what circumstances since his claimed arrival in  1998.
    As I say the judger found all the witnesses to  be  truthful  in  their
    evidence.

2.   The appeal was dismissed with regard to long residence  and  the  judge
    did not accept that the appellant had shown at  least  fourteen  years'
    continuous residence in the United Kingdom.  We know now that that  was
    the wrong test to apply since it is clear from the case law that  in  a
    case such as this, although the application was made before  the  Rules
    changed,  the  decision  was  not  made  during  the  relatively  brief
    transitional period after 12 July 2012 which required decisions  to  be
    made under the old Rules.  The decision in  this  case  was  made  well
    after that  period  had  elapsed  so  he  had  to  show  twenty  years'
    residence.  So nothing hangs on that in the sense that at least  as  of
    now Mr Singh cannot show twenty years' residence and of course was  not
    able to show that before the judge but the issue before me  essentially
    is that of Article 8 and in particular paragraph 276ADE and I think  it
    is common ground that the judge, although clearly  aware  of  the  fact
    that that was given consideration in the refusal letter, she refers  to
    that at paragraph 34 did not in fact go on to apply that  provision  to
    the evidence in this case.  Mr Whitwell says there is some reference to
    evidence at paragraph 42, and findings there, but there are  issues  in
    relation to that, not least that they do not address  the  evidence  in
    the context of a consideration of paragraph 276ADE.

3.   So it seems to me and I think this is not really controversial  between
    the representatives that the matter will have to be remitted for a  re-
    hearing but preserving the credibility findings, the acceptance of  the
    truthfulness of the evidence of the five witnesses and it will go  back
    to be heard by a First-tier Judge at Taylor House who I  understand  is
    Mr Coleman's request in this case.

Notice of Decision

4.   The appeal is allowed to that extent.



Signed                                  Date 25/01/2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
