
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38892/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 30 April 2015                             |On 5 May 2015                 |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE E B GRANT

                                   Between

                   Damiana Oldezire Tiny De Graca Fonseca
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms D. Ofei-Kwatia of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant applied for an EEA residence card  and  her  application
      was refused by letter dated 4 September 2013. Her appeal  against  the
      refusal was heard by FtTJ Raymond and in a decision promulgated on  31
      October 2014 he dismissed the appeal. The appellant sought  permission
      to appeal and this was granted by  FtTJ P.J.G. White  on  19  December
      2014 who said: " The central issue  in  this  appeal  is  whether  the
      appellant is a "family member" of the sponsor who is an EEA national"


   2. He went on to note that the judge erred by failing to consider or make
      findings on whether  the  appellant  was  a  "family  member"  on  the
      alternative basis of  being  a  member  of  the  sponsor's  household"
      following Dauhoo (EEA Regulations - Reg 8(2) [2012] UKUT 79 (IAC).

   3. In  remarkably  brief  findings  which  comprise  three  sentences  in
      paragraph 12 the FtTJ found "I find that the appellant, upon whom lies
      the burden of proof, has not established  on  the  available  evidence
      that she has been dependent upon her claimed sister, with that claimed
      relationship  having  also  been  established.  The  claimed   sibling
      relationship has been left in substantial obscurity on  the  available
      evidence (see paragraphs 3 to 4 above). The  fact  of  dependency  has
      been asserted, and there is nothing to suggest that the appellant  has
      not been living an autonomous economic existence in the UK since entry
      in 2005"

   4. There have been some difficulties with this appeal not least that  the
      refusal letter cites the wrong regulation that  is  7  (1)  (c)  which
      provides that a dependent direct relatives in the ascending line shall
      be treated as the family member of another person.  The  appellant  is
      not her sister's mother and is not a relative in the ascending line of
      her sister. Before the FtTJ Miss Bell  for  the  respondent  submitted
      that the appellant did not meet Regulation 7 (1) (c) for  this  reason
      and that she could only succeed under Regulation 8 (2).

   5. There is no mention at all of Regulation 8 (2)  in  the  determination
      and even though Dauhoo was placed before the FtTJ by  the  respondent,
      yet the FtTJ has failed to make any findings on whether the  appellant
      meets the requirement of dependency in one of the four ways  indicated
      in Dauhoo. Furthermore he failed to make any clear finding on  whether
      the appellant is a sibling of her sponsor as claimed.

   6. Regrettably the findings of the FtTJ are so brief as to be  inadequate
      and consequently the FtTJ erred in law. His  finding  that  dependency
      had not been established does not  specify whether the appellant could
      show prior dependency on her sponsor before her arrival in the  United
      Kingdom, and present membership of the sponsor's household as set  out
      in (iii) of the headnote to Dauhoo, even if present  dependency  could
      not be established. His finding on the  sibling  relationship  in  the
      first sentence of paragraph 12 is confused and it is not clear whether
      he is saying the sibling relationship had been established or  whether
      it had not. He was plainly addressed at length on the evidence  before
      him and sets out some of the submissions made and the  evidence  heard
      before failing to follow the approach  set  out  in  Dauhoo  and  make
      findings on whether the appellant could meet the applicable Regulation
      8 (2) having been informed by Miss Bell that was the  correct  one  to
      apply.

   7. The appellant's case is not without difficulties. There seems to  have
      been little evidence of prior dependency or  membership  of  the  same
      household placed before  the  Tribunal  and  certainly  there  was  no
      evidence before the Tribunal that when the appellant came as a student
      her sponsor paid her fees and expenses. In other  words  although  the
      FtTJ has materially erred in law in his decision the appellant  should
      not assume that by setting aside the FtTJ's decision that  her  appeal
      will succeed.

   8. The FtTJ has erred in law by failing to make findings on the  evidence
      placed before him. I have concluded that accordingly the appellant did
      not have a fair hearing of her appeal and the decision should  be  set
      aside entirely and it is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
      heard de novo.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtTJ is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  at  Hatton  Cross  on  8
October 2015 to be heard de novo.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  30 April 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge E B Grant







