

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)            Appeal number: IA/38624/2013

                                  IA/38623/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated   |
|On January 16, 2015                  |On January 19, 2015         |
|                                     |                            |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                         MISS OLOLADE OLUFUNKE AJAYI
                  mr oluwatayo moronfoluwa jackson-ajimuda
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Ambagh (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants, born October 14, 1978 and March 17, 1977, are  citizens
    of Nigeria. The first-named appellant was granted leave  to  enter  the
    United Kingdom as a student on December 19, 2007. She was  subsequently
    granted leave to remain as a Tier 4 student until  December  31,  2011.
    The second-named appellant entered the United Kingdom as the spouse  of
    the first-named appellant on June 8, 2010. His leave  was  extended  in
    line with that of his wife's. They both applied to vary their leave  to
    remain as tier 1 (Post-study work) Student  migrant  and  dependant  on
    December 28, 2011.
 2. On October 19, 2012 the respondent refused both applications  and  took
    decisions to remove them by way of directions pursuant to Section 47 of
    the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 3. The appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal under Section  82(1)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  on  February  18,
    2013. However on August 9, 2013 the respondent withdrew  the  decisions
    of October 19, 2012 and fresh decisions dated September  5,  2013  were
    served on both appellants including a similar removal decision.

 4. The appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal under Section  82(1)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  on  September  20,
    2013 and on September 24, 2014 Judge of the First Tier Tribunal  Walker
    (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ")  heard  their  appeals  and  in
    determination  promulgated  on  October  1,  2014  he   refused   their
    appellant's  claims  under  both  the  Immigration   Rules   and   ECHR
    legislation.

 5. The appellants lodged grounds of appeal  on  October  9,  2014  and  on
    December 1, 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Levin gave permission
    to appeal finding there were arguable reasons the FtTJ had erred in his
    approach to section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act
    2009 and possibly the date of application.

 6. The matter came before me on the above date and  both  appellants  were
    present and represented as set out above.

    PRELIMINARY ISSUE

 7. Mr Ambagh accepted that there was no  merit  to  his  first  ground  of
    appeal because although the original decision was  withdrawn  the  date
    for compliance with the Rules was the date of application and  at  that
    date the appellants could not satisfy the Rules.

    SUBMISSIONS

 8. Mr Amgbah submitted the FtTJ failed to  consider  the  children's  best
    interests and consequently failed to have full consideration of article
    8 ECHR. He failed to fully explore their situation.


 9. Mr Walker opposed the application and  adopted  the  Rule  24  response
    dated December 12, 2014. He also invited me to follow the  decision  of
    EV (Phillipines) & Ors v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874  and  find  that  the
    FtTJ did consider all that was required on the evidence  placed  before
    him. He submitted the FtTJ made findings open to him.

10. Mr Amgbah raised with me whether female  genital  mutilation  had  been
    raised at the  original  hearing  and  after  checking  the  record  of
    proceedings I indicated to him that it was not. In the circumstances he
    had no further submissions to make.

ERROR OF LAW ASSESSMENT

11. I remind myself that this is an application outside of the  Immigration
    Rules under article 8 ECHR. Mr Walker did not  dispute  that  the  FtTJ
    could consider the  case  outside  of  the  Rules.  The  FtTJ  properly
    dismissed the appeal under the immigration Rules and noted  they  could
    not meet the requirements of Appendix FM or  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules. Between paragraphs [27] and [29] he considered their
    claims.

12. The best interests of the child is paramount and recently the Court  of
    Appeal in EV (Phillipines) & Ors v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874 stated:

        "35. A decision as to what is in the  best  interests  of  children
        will depend on a number of factors such as (a) their age;  (b)  the
        length of time that they have been here; (c)  how  long  they  have
        been in education; (c) what stage their education has reached;  (d)
        to what extent they have become distanced from the country to which
        it is proposed that they return; (e) how renewable their connection
        with it may be; (f) to  what  extent  they  will  have  linguistic,
        medical or other difficulties in adapting to life in that  country;
        and (g) the extent to which the course proposed will interfere with
        their family life or their rights (if they  have  any)  as  British
        citizens."

13.  There  were  two  children  and  the  FtTJ  recorded   this   in   his
    determination. He noted that the eldest  child  (aged  three)  attended
    nursery but there was no evidence adduced about his attendance  at  the
    nursery. The FtTJ had in his mind the fact  that  the  children  should
    live with their parents and he made this clear in paragraph [29] of his
    determination.


14. The FtTJ was fully aware of their ages and the fact they had been  born
    here. He also took into account they were Nigerian nationals and had no
    entitlement to British citizenship. The youngest child was at home  and
    the eldest had recently started nursery. The appellants both had family
    in Nigeria and there was nothing preventing them  returning  especially
    as they have spent the majority of their lives there.  They  both  came
    here on limited leave and had no expectation to be allowed to remain.

15. Although he did  not  mention  "best  interests  of  the  child"  I  am
    satisfied he had regard to the relevant factors as set out  in  EV  and
    made findings that were clearly open to him. He was  satisfied  it  was
    proportionate to require the whole family to return  to  Nigeria  where
    they could continue their family and private lives together.

16. Although the first-named appellant had studied here and had applied  to
    remain as a Tier one migrant the Tribunal made clear in  in  Nasim  and
    others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 00025 (IAC) at paragraph [20] that  this
    was insufficient-

         "We therefore agree with Mr Jarvis that [57] of Patel and Others is
         a significant  exhortation  from  the  Supreme  Court  to  re-focus
         attention  on  the  nature  and  purpose  of  Article  8  and,   in
         particular, to recognise its limited utility to an individual where
         one has moved along the continuum, from that Article's core area of
         operation towards what might be described as  its  fuzzy  penumbra.
         The limitation arises, both from what will at that  point  normally
         be  the  tangential  effect  on  the  individual  of  the  proposed
         interference and from the fact that, unless  there  are  particular
         reasons to reduce the  public  interest  of  enforcing  immigration
         controls, that interest will consequently prevail in  striking  the
         proportionality balance (even assuming that stage is reached)."

17. The FtTJ had regard to all of the above matters and taking into account
    the children's best interests I am satisfied it would be  proportionate
    to remove the appellants from the United  Kingdom  and  consequently  I
    refuse their applications.

DECISION

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an  error  in
    law and the original decisions shall stand.


19. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    such order was made in the First-tier and I see no reason to make  such
    an order now.

Signed:                Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



TO THE RESPONDENT

I revoke the earlier fee award as I have dismissed the appeal.

Signed:                           Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
