
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/38695/2014
                                                               IA/38698/2014
                                                               IA/38701/2014
                                                               IA/38702/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 March and 2 August 2016                 |On 4 August 2016              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                      RAJVINDER [S] (FIRST respondent)
                        ANJU [S] (SECOND respondent)
                          [H S] (THIRD respondent)
                          [B S] (FOURTH respondent)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                       Respondents/Claimants
Representation:

For the Appellant:              Mr T Wilding (23.04.16) and Mr D. Mills
                               (02.08.16), Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondents/Claimants:  Mr I Singh, Solicitor, Rakkani Solicitors
                               (23.04.16) and Mr N. Ahmed, Counsel
                               (02.08.16)

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal allowing their appeal against  the  decision
    to remove them as persons in respect of whom removal  directions  might
    be given in accordance with Section 10 of the  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 1999 as (in the case of the  first  claimant)  a  person  who  used
    deception in seeking (whether successfully or not) leave to remain; and
    (in respect of the other claimants) as a member of the family of such a
    person.  The First-tier Tribunal did not make an  anonymity  direction,
    and I do not consider that the claimants require  anonymity  for  these
    proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

Reasons for the Grant of Permission

 2. On 7 August  2015  Designated  Judge  Campbell  gave  his  reasons  for
    granting the Secretary of State permission to appeal:

         1.   The appellants' appeals against decisions to remove them  from
             the United Kingdom,  wrongly  described  in  the  decision  as
             appeals against decisions to refuse them leave,  were  allowed
             by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  S  J  Pacey,  in  a  decision
             promulgated on 12th May 2015.  The Secretary  of  State  found
             that Mr [S], on whom the other appellants depend, had obtained
             a TOEIC certificate through deception.   That  conclusion  was
             reached following  an  administrative  review  by  ETS,  which
             suggested that a proxy had taken the test in his place.

         2.   The Secretary of State also made  adverse  findings  regarding
             the requirements of the Immigration Rules ('the rules'), under
             Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE,  having  also  assessed  the
             best interests of the children of the family.

         3.   The judge found that the ground  of  refusal  under  paragraph
             322(1A) of the rules was not made out, witness statements from
             civil servants being unpersuasive.  The judge did  not  accept
             an argument made by the Presenting Officer that, in any event,
             the  particular  test  had  been  declared  invalid,  as   the
             certificate in issue had been  relied  on  by  Mr  [S]  in  an
             earlier, successful application for leave, but not in relation
             to the present application.  The overall conclusion reached by
             the judge was that no lawful decision had been made and so the
             appeal was allowed.

         4.   In the grounds, it  is  contended  that  the  judge  erred  in
             failing to give adequate reasons for allowing the appeal.  The
             witness statements relied  upon  by  the  Secretary  of  State
             provided details of the investigation undertaken by ETS and Mr
             [S] was identified by name in a spreadsheet which  was  before
             the Tribunal.

         5.   The grounds are arguable.  In  particular,  the  reasoning  at
             paragraph 10  of  the  decision  shows  that  the  judge  gave
             determinative weight to the  many  possible  reasons  why  the
             particular  test  results  were  declared  'invalid'  in   the
             spreadsheet, concluding that the 'source data' do  not  reveal
             the basis upon  which  the  test  was  found  to  be  invalid.
             However, it is arguable that the witness  statements  provided
             just such an explanation.  In Gazi [2015] UKUT 327, a judicial
             review application, the same  or  very  similar  evidence  was
             described as  having  the  hallmarks  of  care,  thoroughness,
             underlying expertise and sufficient reliability.

         6.   Whether an error of law is present will  no  doubt  depend  on
             whether the ground of refusal under paragraph S-LTR.2.2.(a) is
             made out.  In this context, the judge correctly noted that the
             'false information' must have been submitted 'in  relation  to
             the application', but the respondent has permission  to  argue
             that there was deception in the application giving rise to the
             decision under appeal, not merely in the earlier one in  which
             the test certificate was expressly relied upon.

Relevant Background

 3. The claimants are all nationals of India.  On 27 June 2014 Mr [S]  (the
    claimant) submitted a further application for leave to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom as a Tier 4 Student.  The application was refused on  11
    September 2014.  On 7 October 2014 Mr [S]  was  served  with  an  IS15A
    notice informing him of his liability to removal under Section 10.  The
    specific statement of reasons said he  was  specifically  considered  a
    person who had  sought  leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  by
    deception.  For the purposes of his previous student application  dated
    24 September 2012, he had submitted a TOIEC certificate from ETS to his
    sponsor in order for them to provide him with a CAS.  ETS had a  record
    of his speaking test.  Using voice verification software, ETS was  able
    to detect when a single person was  undertaking  multiple  tests.   ETS
    undertook a check of his test and  confirmed  to  the  SSHD  there  was
    significant evidence to conclude that his certificate was  fraudulently
    obtained by the use of a proxy test taker.  His scores  from  the  test
    taken on 27 June 2012 at Colwell College had now been cancelled by ETS.
     On the basis of the information provided to her by ETS, the  SSHD  was
    satisfied that there was substantial  evidence  to  conclude  that  his
    certificate was fraudulently obtained.

 4. In the accompanying decision letter dated  7  October  2014,  the  Home
    Office said that consideration had been given to his circumstances, and
    whether his removal would breach his rights under Article 8 of the ECHR
    on the basis of established family and/or private life  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 5. He was excluded on suitability grounds as his conduct came  within  the
    scope of S-LTR.2.2.

 6. He also did not meet the eligibility requirements for limited leave  to
    remain in the United  Kingdom  as  a  partner  or  as  a  parent.   His
    dependent spouse was presently in the United Kingdom as a dependant  on
    his case and was therefore also subject to  immigration  control.   The
    same applied to the two children, who were not settled in  the  UK  and
    had not lived in the UK continuously  for  at  least  the  seven  years
    immediately preceding the date of application.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 7. Both parties were legally represented before Judge Pacey, and the judge
    received oral evidence  from  the  claimant  who  adopted  his  witness
    statement as his evidence-in-chief.

 8. In her subsequent decision, she said that the documents before her were
    generic witness statements from two Home Office  civil  servants.   She
    did not find these to be of persuasive value  since  they  were  simply
    generic and did not expressly or by reasonable implication specifically
    engage with the particular test taken by the  claimant.   There  was  a
    printout of a document headed "ETS SELT source date" and this  referred
    to test dates of 27 June 2012 as being invalid.   There  was  no  other
    evidence which expressly  or  by  reasonable  implication  specifically
    referred to the test taken by  the  claimant  in  June  2012.   In  her
    judgment the simple word "invalid" did not mean that there had been use
    of a proxy test taker or that there was any  element  of  deception  or
    that a false document or representation was used or made:  "for  all  I
    know there may be many reasons why ETS subsequently declare a  test  to
    be invalid".

 9. The judge went on to observe that the test certificate in question  was
    not provided with the current application.  So even if  the  2012  test
    certificate had been cancelled or found to be  invalid,  that  did  not
    address the question of whether a proper certificate had been  provided
    in support of the current application.

10. The upshot of this was that no proper decision had  been  made  on  the
    instant application, and so she was allowing the appeal to  the  extent
    that the matter was remitted to the Secretary of  State  for  a  proper
    decision to be made on the instant application  in  the  light  of  the
    documents submitted with  it  (and  not  submitted  with  any  previous
    application).

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

11. The hearing before me took  place  against  a  backdrop  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal at Field House giving judgment  in  two  test  cases,  SM  and
    Qadir, featuring  ETS  claimants  pursuing  statutory  appeals  against
    removal on the grounds of  deception.   The  information  gleaned  from
    social media was that the test cases had been resolved in favour of the
    claimants, and Mr Wilding recognised that the outcome of the test cases
    had potentially profound ramifications for disposal of this appeal,  in
    the event that an error of law was made out.  The  successful  outcomes
    did not detract from the cogency, he submitted, of  the  error  of  law
    challenge to Judge Pacey's decision.  On behalf of  the  claimants,  Mr
    Singh submitted that the judge  had  rightly  found  that  the  generic
    evidence relied upon by the Secretary of State did  not  discharge  the
    burden of proof.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

12. As the error of law challenge is one of adequacy of reasons, I consider
    it is appropriate for me to decide whether the error of  law  challenge
    is made out, even if it subsequently turns out that the error or errors
    were not material.

13. I find that Judge Pacey has not given adequate reasons for finding that
    the evidence of the respondent was incapable of discharging the  burden
    of proof, which was on  the  balance  of  probabilities.   The  witness
    statement evidence from the Home Office  civil  servants  informed  the
    judge that the designation of the appellant's test  result  as  invalid
    meant that ETS were satisfied that the appellant had used a proxy  test
    tester for the speaking test.  As was stated  by  Judge  Campbell  when
    granting permission, in Gazi [2015] UKUT 327 the same or  very  similar
    evidence as that relied on before Judge  Pacey  was  described  by  the
    President as having the hallmarks  of  care,  thoroughness,  underlying
    expertise and sufficient reliability.  The judge was wrong to treat the
    evidence as not establishing a prima facie case.  It is clear from  her
    chain of reasoning that the judge simply  dismissed  the  Secretary  of
    State's evidence as being incapable of discharging the burden of proof,
    and she did not consider the evidence in the round.

14. The judge correctly found that paragraph S-LTR.2.2.(a) was not made out
    in respect of the application made on  27  June  2014.   But  this  was
    academic.  It was clear from the specific statement of reasons  in  the
    removal notice, and  also  from  what  was  said  in  the  accompanying
    decision letter, that the factual issue which the  Tribunal  needed  to
    resolve was whether  the  claimant  had  used  deception  in  the  2012
    application.  If he had, this effectively disposed of the appeal  under
    Appendix FM as the claimant and  his  dependants  were  ineligible  for
    Article 8 relief under Appendix FM either by reference  to  the  parent
    route or by reference to the partner route.

Conclusion

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of law, such
    that it must be set aside and re-made.

Future Disposal

16. I reviewed the decision in SM and Qadir (promulgated on 5  April  2016)
    for  two  purposes.  The  first  was  to  check  whether  its  findings
    undermined my error of law analysis and the  second  was  to  look  for
    guidance on future disposal.

17. Of particular significance are the following passages in the decision:


         "68. As our analysis and conclusions in the  immediately  preceding
         section make clear, we  have  substantial  reservations  about  the
         strength and quality of the Secretary  of  State's  evidence.   Its
         shortcomings are manifest. On the other hand, while bearing in mind
         that the context is one of alleged deception, we must be mindful of
         the comparatively  modest  threshold  which  an  evidential  burden
         entails. This calls for an evaluative assessment on the part of the
         tribunal. By an admittedly narrow margin we are satisfied that  the
         Secretary of State has discharged this burden.  The effect of  this
         is that there  is  a  burden,  again  an  evidential  one,  on  the
         Appellants of raising an innocent explanation.


         ...


         78.  The events of 2012 are of  obvious  significance.   The  TOEIC
         Certificate was, on its face, obtained by this Appellant [SM] after
         undergoing the necessary testing on two separate dates, 20  and  26
         March 2012.  We acknowledge that, in the abstract, his score in the
         modules of listening and reading is very high indeed, being 930 out
         of a possible 990 (circa 90%).  In  the  modules  of  speaking  and
         writing the scores recorded are also high, being  160/200  in  each
         instance (circa 80%).  Duly armed with his TOEIC Certificate,  this
         Appellant applied for leave to remain in the United  Kingdom.   His
         application was refused, giving rise to a hearing before the First-
         tier Tribunal ("FtT") on 05 September 2012.



         79.  We consider  this  aspect  of  the  evidence  to  be  of  some
         significance.  From the Tribunal's determination  one  learns  that
         this Appellant [SM] attended the hearing, gave evidence, was  cross
         examined and was re-examined. No interpreter was required and there
         is no indication of the slightest difficulty  in  communication  or
         comprehension.   We  note  further  that  during  the   period   of
         (approximately) September 2010  to  February  2012  this  Appellant
         claims that he was pursuing courses at two colleges simultaneously,
         which we accept.   We  infer  from  this  fact,  coupled  with  the
         successful outcomes, that his mastery of English was of a high  and
         progressively improving level.

         80.  We consider that in appeals of this nature  evidence  of  this
         kind is likely to be of substantially  greater  force  and  cogency
         than the  tribunal's  own  assessment  of  an  appellant's  English
         language proficiency based on performance at  the  appeal  hearing.
         This is especially pertinent in the present case, given  that  some
         three years have  elapsed  since  this  Appellant  claims  to  have
         secured his TOEIC certificate. In some of the FtT decisions in this
         field one finds observations concerning  the  appellant's  apparent
         fluency in, and command of, the English language.  We consider that
         Judges should be cautious in adopting this approach  for  at  least
         three reasons.  The first is the passage of time.   The  second  is
         that Judges are not language testing or linguistics  experts.   The
         third is that,  to  date,  there  has  been  no  expert  linguistic
         evidence in any of these cases.


         ...




         101. We have already held  that  the  evidential  burden  of  proof
         resting on the Secretary of State  has  been  narrowly  discharged.
         For the reasons which we have given, we  are  satisfied  that  both
         Appellants have discharged their  burden  of  raising  an  innocent
         explanation of the prima facie indications of  deception  on  their
         part  in  the  Secretary  of  State's  evidence.  For  the  reasons
         elaborated, we conclude, without hesitation, that the Secretary  of
         State has failed to establish, on  the  balance  of  probabilities,
         that the Appellants' prima facie innocent explanations  are  to  be
         rejected. The legal burden of proof falling  on  the  Secretary  of
         State has not been discharged. The Appellants are clear winners."

18. The findings did not undermine my error of law analysis as, despite its
    shortcomings, the generic evidence coupled with the  specific  evidence
    of the appellants' tests being declared invalid narrowly discharged the
    burden of proof. So, as in the test cases, the burden  in  this  appeal
    shifts to the principal claimant to provide  an  innocent  explanation.
    The test cases illuminate  the  fact  that  external  evidence  of  the
    claimant's proficiency in the English language  commensurate  with  the
    test scores achieved in the TOEIC certificate is likely  to  assist  in
    fulfilling this requirement.

Directions for the Resumed Hearing

19. I directed that there should be a further hearing before me to  re-make
    the decision, and gave both parties  permission  to  adduce  additional
    evidence pertaining to the allegation of deception  (and  the  rebuttal
    thereof) that was not before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  provided  that
    such evidence was served on the Upper Tribunal and on  each  other  not
    less than seven days before the resumed  hearing  in  a  paginated  and
    indexed bundle.

The Resumed Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

20. At the resumed hearing Mr Mills submitted a bundle of  documents  which
    included a report of a criminal investigation known as  Project  Fa�ade
    into abuse of the TOEIC at, among others, Colwell College in  Leicester
    where the claimant purportedly sat his speaking and writing test on  27
    June 2012. The same bundle included an ETS  TOEIC  Test  Centre  Lookup
    Tool data printout showing the number of tests taken at the college  on
    27 June 2012, and the number that had been found to be invalid.  65  of
    the 83 tests taken on that day (75%) were found by ETS to be invalid.

21. However, Mr Mills submitted that I should not proceed with a  rehearing
    of the appeal on its merits, taking  into  account  this  new  evidence
    which he relied on as fortifying the case  on  deception,  but  that  I
    should postpone remaking the decision until the probative value of  the
    generic evidence had been clarified by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  the
    appeal which had been brought by the Secretary  of  State  against  the
    decision of the Presidential Panel in SM and Qadir v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department (ETS - Evidence - Burden of  Proof)[2016]  UKUT
    327. Permission to appeal had been granted, and the appeal was  due  to
    be heard at the end of October 2016.

22. Mr Ahmed had prepared a skeleton argument in  which  the  primary  case
    advanced by him was that, upon a  proper  consideration  of  the  above
    decision, I had misdirected myself in law and I had been wrong to  find
    that Judge Pacey's  decision  was  erroneous.  However,  this  line  of
    argument is refuted by the very recent  Court  of  Appeal  decision  in
    Secretary of State for the Home Department v (1) Muhammad  Shehzad  and
    (2) MD Chowdhury [2016] EWCA Civ 615  which  is  also  included  in  Mr
    Mills' bundle.

23. Mr Ahmed's alternative case was that instead of me proceeding to remake
    the decision, I should remit the matter to the First-tier  Tribunal  as
    the Secretary of State had acted unfairly in failing to put the gist of
    her case to the claimant and giving him the opportunity to  respond  to
    the allegations of deception.

24. The new evidence sought to be relied on by  Mr  Mills  was  not  served
    seven days in advance of the hearing in accordance with my  directions,
    but only on the day of the hearing. So on this ground alone  procedural
    fairness  requires  that  the  rehearing  of  this  appeal  should   be
    postponed.

25. As I explored with Mr Mills in oral argument,  I  am  sceptical  as  to
    whether the Court of Appeal's decision on the forthcoming  appeal  will
    significantly change the legal landscape. Having considered  the  grant
    of permission to appeal in detail with Mr Mills' assistance, I consider
    that the crucial factor which swung the decisions under appeal  in  the
    claimants' favour was the panel's refusal to entertain expert  evidence
    from  Professor  French  (on  the  grounds  of  lateness),   with   the
    consequence that the Secretary of State was unable to call an expert to
    counter the criticisms of the  generic  evidence  voiced  by  Professor
    Harrison. So, as I informed the parties at the hearing, in my  view  it
    is only after both experts have been cross-examined in  the  same  test
    case that a final and definitive finding on the cogency  and  probative
    value of the generic evidence is likely to emerge. This is likely to be
    a long way off.

26. However, some helpful guidance may emerge from the  Court  of  Appeal's
    decision and both representatives were in agreement  that  this  appeal
    should be remitted to the First-Tier Tribunal. So I  agreed  to  remit,
    and I directed that the appeal should not be listed in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal before January 2017, thus giving both parties plenty  of  time
    to prepare.

Notice of Decision

27. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of law, such
    that it must be set aside and re-made.

28. This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal in Birmingham for  a
    de novo hearing before any judge apart from Judge Pacey.


I make no anonymity direction.





Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson















