
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/38832/2014
                                                               IA/38836/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 September 2015                 |On 18 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                tanvir ahmed
                              husnine chowdhury
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr. M. B. Hussain, instructed by Zahra & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. C. Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellants against a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge McClure promulgated on 20  February  2015  in  which  he
    dismissed their appeal against the Respondent's refusal to grant  leave
    to remain as Tier  1  (Entrepreneurs)  under  paragraph  245DD  of  the
    immigration rules.

 2. The Appellants appeal on two grounds.  First, that the judge  erred  in
    his consideration  of  the  contracts  provided  and  misconstrued  the
    immigration rules in finding that the contracts did not show  duration.
    Secondly, that the judge erred in law  by  failing  to  find  that  the
    decision was not in accordance with the law given the  failure  of  the
    Respondent to contact the  Appellants  under  paragraph  245AA  of  the
    immigration rules.

 3. At the hearing before me it was confirmed that the appeal  in  relation
    to paragraph 245AA related to the contracts and did not relate  to  the
    Barclays Bank letter provided at the First-tier Tribunal hearing.

The First Ground

 4. It is the Appellants' position that the supplier's quotations  provided
    with the application formed part of the contracts.  The quotations  set
    out the date on which the event for which the Appellants had contracted
    was due to take place.  It is the Appellants' case that the duration of
    the contracts is  limited  to  services  provided  on  that  date,  and
    therefore that  the  contracts  indicate  duration  as  the  supplier's
    quotations are part of the contracts (paragraph [10] of the grounds  of
    appeal).  It was therefore submitted on behalf of the  Appellants  that
    the contracts meet the requirements of the immigration rules.

 5. The requirement of the immigration rules under  paragraph  41-SD(e)(iv)
    is that an applicant must provide:

         '(iv)    one or more of the following  documents  showing  trading,
         which must cover (either together  or  individually)  a  continuous
         period  commencing  before  11  July  2014  or  6  April  2015  (as
         applicable), up to no earlier than three months before the date  of
         his application:

             (1)  one or more contracts for service. If a contract  is  not
             an original the applicant must sign each page.  Each  contract
             must show:

                  (a)  the applicant's name and the name of the business;

                  (b)  the service provided by the applicant's business;

                  (c)  the name of the other party or  parties  involved  in
                  the contract and their contact  details,  including  their
                  full address, postal code and, where  available,  landline
                  phone number and any email address; and

                  (d)  the duration of the contract;'

 6. In the Reasons for  Refusal  Letter  the  Respondent  stated  that  the
    evidence submitted in relation to  trading  was  not  acceptable.   The
    documents specified did  not  meet  the  requirements  in  relation  to
    duration  as  they  did  not  specify  the  termination  dates  of  the
    contracts.  Further, the Reasons for Refusal Letter goes  on  to  state
    that the quotations do not satisfy the duration requirement as they are
    supplementary to the contracts provided and only  serve  to  show  that
    "you are providing the services as outlined in your contracts".  It was
    submitted on behalf of the Respondent that the contracts had  not  been
    accepted as they did not specify a termination date and the  Respondent
    did not know if any existed.  The quotations covered only two days  and
    served  to  show  that  services  were  provided  as  outlined  in  the
    contracts.

 7. The judge did not make a finding as to whether or  not  the  quotations
    provided formed part of the contracts.  He found  that  the  quotations
    were "merely evidence that at specific times specific items  have  been
    provided" [16].  "The fact that they did provide services and then  put
    quotations in for specific events does not show how long  the  contract
    was to run for.  In that event the contract does not show its duration"
    [20].

 8. The judge referred  to  the  case  of  Shebl  (Entrepreneur:  proof  of
    contracts) [2014] UKUT  216  (IAC)  (paragraph  [7])  which  held  that
    contracts need not necessarily exist in a single document.  Clause 3 of
    the contract quoted by the judge in paragraph [11] states "the quantity
    and description of the services shall be as set out in  the  supplier's
    quotation."  There is no reference to  the  duration  of  the  contract
    being set out in the quotation.  However, even if the duration  of  the
    contract can be inferred from the quotations, this does not assist  the
    Appellants.

 9. It was accepted by the Appellants' representative at the  hearing  that
    he had no choice but to agree that  the  documents  provided  with  the
    application must show trading covering a three month period, as set out
    in paragraph 41-SD(e)(iv).  The Appellants' representative confirmed at
    the hearing  that  only  two  contracts  had  been  provided  with  the
    application.  The Tribunal is only able to consider  evidence  provided
    with the application (section 85A of the 2002 Act).

10. The two quotations provided refer to events taking  place  on  19  July
    2014 and 30 July 2014.  They cover two days some eleven days apart  and
    fall far short of covering a period of three months.   Therefore,  even
    if the judge had considered that the  quotations  formed  part  of  the
    contracts,  he  did  not  have  evidence  showing  trading  covering  a
    continuous period of three months.

11. It was submitted by the Appellants' representative that applicants were
    not required to provide "loads and loads" of contracts covering a three
    month period.  He submitted that the immigration  rules  only  required
    "one or more contracts".  I do not find that  there  is  any  merit  in
    this.  The contracts must show trading  over  a  continuous  period  of
    three months as set out in  paragraph  41-SD(e)(iv)(1).   An  applicant
    might only have to provide one contract to show this, but he might have
    to provide many more, and the rules state that  he  may  provide  "more
    contracts".  If, owing to the nature  of  his  business,  an  applicant
    needed to provide separate contracts covering every  day  for  a  three
    month period, the immigration rules provide that he  can  do  so.   The
    rules also provide for an alternative, which is the provision  of  bank
    statements to show trading (paragraph 41-SD(e)(iv)(2)).

12. I therefore find that the first ground has not been  made  out.   While
    the judge did not make a finding as to the nature of  the  relationship
    between the quotations and the contracts, the Appellants had failed  to
    provide evidence to show trading over  a  continuous  period  of  three
    months.  I therefore find that there is no material error of law in the
    judge's decision capable of affecting the outcome of the appeals.

The Second Ground

13. The judge set out the requirements of paragraph 245AA (paragraph  [21])
    before finding at paragraph [23]:

         "However if one examines the refusal letter on page 4 it  is  clear
         that consideration was given to whether or  not  a  request  should
         made (sic) for specified documents.  A decision was  taken  not  to
         request additional documents,  and  it  was  not  anticipated  that
         addressing  the  omission  would  lead  to   a   grant.    In   the
         circumstances the discretion was considered by the respondent.   In
         the circumstances I do not find that the respondent has  failed  to
         comply with the requirements of paragraph 245AA."

14. Paragraph 245AA is a discretionary power.  The Respondent is not  under
    any obligation to contact the Appellants.   It  was  submitted  by  the
    Respondent's representative there was no indication  in  the  documents
    provided that the Appellants had contracts to  cover  the  three  month
    period and therefore it would have been speculative for the  Respondent
    to have requested these documents  under  paragraph  245AA.   Only  two
    contracts and two quotations  covering  two  days  had  been  provided,
    whereas evidence covering trading for  a  period  of  three  months  is
    required.

15. I find that there is no error of law in the judge's  finding  that  the
    Respondent had not failed to comply  with  paragraph  245AA  given  the
    evidence  before  him,  consisting  of  only  two  contracts  and   two
    quotations provided with the application.

Notice of Decision

    There is no error of law in  the  decision  capable  of  affecting  the
    outcome of  the  appeals.   The  decision  dismissing  the  Appellants'
    appeals stands.

    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 17 September 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

