
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38962/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28th April 2015                   |On 29th May 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                            muhammad umar farooq
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Cleghorn, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision  of  Judge  Caswell
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 8th December 2014.

Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of  Pakistan  born  on  9th  May  1991.   He
    entered the UK with leave on 6th  April  2010  which  was  subsequently
    extended until July 2014.  Shortly before expiry he applied for further
    leave on private and family life grounds in the UK and was  refused  on
    25th September 2014.

 3. As a part of his application for further student  leave  the  Appellant
    took  a  TOEIC  English  speaking  and  writing  test  through  ETS  in
    Manchester on 26th September 2012 and on 11th October 2012 a  listening
    and reading test.  His test for 26th September 2012 was cancelled.   In
    the reasons for refusal letter the Respondent states:

         "During an administrative review process ETS  have  confirmed  that
         this test was obtained through deception.  Because the validity  of
         these test results could not be authenticated the scores  from  the
         test taken on 26th September 2012 have been cancelled.  Your client
         is specifically considered a person who has sought leave to  remain
         in the UK by deception following information provided to us by  ETS
         that an anomaly with the speaking test indicated the presence of  a
         proxy test taker."

 4. He was therefore refused on the  grounds  that  he  did  not  meet  the
    suitability requirement S-LTR.2.2A for consideration of  limited  leave
    to remain in the UK as a partner under E-LTRP and/or  parent  under  E-
    LTRPT and/or on the grounds of private life under paragraph 276ADE.

 5. It was the Appellant's case that he never used a proxy test  taker  and
    has not used deception.

 6. The Judge relied on  the  statements  supplied  by  the  Respondent  in
    relation to the methodology used to identify where deception had  taken
    place which she set out in the determination.  She was  satisfied  that
    the evidence was cogent and, although the Appellant  gave  evidence  in
    English, this was in December 2014 when he had been in  the  UK  for  a
    further two years after taking the test.  His present English  language
    level had no bearing on what it was at the time the tests  were  taken.
    The Appellant could not succeed on family or private life grounds under
    the Rules since he did not meet the suitability requirements.

 7. The Judge also considered the claim under Article 8.  She recorded that
    the adults had resolved that the Appellant's wife  and  children  would
    not join him in Pakistan because when they last went there with her ex-
    husband they were kidnapped and held at  her  in-laws'  house  with  no
    proper food and no electricity.  The ex-husband refused to  allow  them
    to return to the UK and threatened and beat them.  They only managed to
    return to the UK in 2012 with the help of the  Pakistani  police.   She
    said that there was no evidence of any ongoing interest  from  the  ex-
    husband and although there was a recent referral for the older child to
    the Children's Emotional Wellbeing Service she was satisfied  that  any
    support needed could be provided by both parents in Pakistan where they
    could integrate into society there;  both  had  strong  links  to  that
    country.

 8. She took into account the evidence from the older child  that  she  did
    not want to lose her father and that she wanted to live with them  both
    in the UK.  The Judge reminded herself that the Appellant had only been
    living with his wife and the  children  since  January  2014  and  only
    caring for them whilst his wife worked since March 2014.  There was  no
    supporting evidence of  whether  the  Appellant's  wife  could  earn  a
    sufficient sum to meet the financial requirements for  her  husband  to
    join her and no medical evidence to suggest that there were any serious
    mental health problems.

 9. She concluded as follows:

         "It is of course not the children's  fault  if  others  have  acted
         badly but at the same time the Appellant has  sought  to  undermine
         the immigration system and has shown disregard for the laws of  the
         UK by using deception.   He  and  his  wife  have  furthered  their
         relationship and his with the children in the full  knowledge  that
         he has no status in the UK and might have to  return  to  Pakistan.
         Considering the short length of time that the  Appellant  has  been
         involved with this family I find the best interests of the children
         are to remain in the UK with  their  mother  where  they  have  the
         benefit of British citizenship.  I accept that the Appellant has  a
         close and positive relationship  with  them  as  well  particularly
         significant in Z's case but the positive impact on the children and
         on the Appellant's wife having him remain in the UK  with  them  is
         outweighed in this case by the interests of maintaining immigration
         control.  I make that finding having regard  also  to  the  matters
         contained in Section 117A and B of the Nationality, Immigration and
         Asylum Act 2002."

10. She dismissed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

11. The Appellant sought permission to  appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
    Judge's findings were demonstrably contrary to the weight  of  evidence
    before her and even if deception had been used, which  was  denied,  S-
    LTR2.2A is a discretionary ground for  refusal.  The  Judge  failed  to
    reason  why  discretion  ought  not  to  have  been  exercised  in  the
    Appellant's favour, particularly in the light of her findings that  the
    parties were in a genuine and subsisting marriage and  it  was  in  the
    best interests of the British children to remain in the UK.

12. She placed undue weight on two statements submitted by  the  Respondent
    which have not been verified,  and  misdirected  herself  in  attaching
    weight to the statements in the absence of further evidence linking his
    particular oral test to the language college in 2012 to the  fact  that
    his result went through  the  purported  search  engine  and  shown  as
    invalid.   The  Appellant  has  been  deprived  of  an  opportunity  to
    challenge and explore the evidence.

13. The  evidence  relied  on  is  general  and  does  not  deal  with  the
    Appellant's  particular  test.   The  refusal  letter  refers  to   the
    cancellation of the test, and at paragraph 29 of one of the statements,
    ETS confirmed that even questionable results, which  were  inconclusive
    in terms of whether a proxy test taker was used, were  still  cancelled
    on the basis of administrative irregularity.  In the current case there
    was nothing to adduce directly from  ETS  or  TOEIC  to  expressly  and
    unequivocally state that a proxy test taker was identified.  No reasons
    were given for the invalidation.  Moreover the score sheet  invalidates
    two scores which are presumed to be the speaking and writing tests  and
    expressed as 180 and 180 whereas  the  official  score  report  in  the
    Respondent's bundle confirmed that he  scored  180  and  160  which  is
    inconsistent and undermines the quality of  the  evidence  provided  by
    ETS.

14. The Judge failed to take into account that at  paragraph  22  of  Peter
    Milligan's statement it confirms that ETS has a policy to  cancel  test
    scores on mere suspect behaviour  and  it  cannot  be  verified  as  to
    whether the result  was  cancelled  for  that  reason.   There  was  no
    evidence to confirm whether or not human verification had  taken  place
    in the Appellant's case and according to the  witness  statement  there
    were 6,600 cases of false positives since only 80%  were  confirmed  by
    human verification.  The witness statement itself states that the voice
    recognition software  was  imperfect  and  could  potentially  flag  up
    results on the basis of background noise.  There was no  evidence  from
    ETS as to who the analysts who carried out the human verification were.



15. If the allegation of deception is unfounded the Appellant meets all  of
    the requirements of Appendix FM for  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  in
    reliance on EX.1 and the finding that he has a genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with a British child and it is in  the  interests  of  the
    British children to remain in the UK.

16. Permission to appeal was granted by  Judge  Cruthers  for  the  reasons
    stated in the grounds on 9th February 2015.

Submissions

17. Ms Cleghorn relied on her grounds.  She also stated that, according  to
    the Home Office website, the ETS licence expired on 6th April 2014  and
    anyone relying on an ETS test in an application  made  after  1st  July
    2014 would not be considered to have made a valid application.

18. She relied on her challenge in the grounds to the procedures adopted by
    ETS and submitted that the  Judge  had  plainly  erred  in  failing  to
    consider the discretionary nature of SL-TR2.2.  Discretion ought to  be
    exercised in the Appellant's favour because it was accepted that it was
    in the children's best interests to be  with  both  of  their  parents.
    This was a  genuine  family.   It  was  clear  that  the  children  had
    undergone a traumatic experience on their last visit  to  Pakistan  and
    did not want to return.  Both were British citizens at school in the UK
    and they did not speak Urdu.  Moving to  Pakistan  was  simply  not  an
    option.  The Appellant met the other requirements set out in 117B.

19. Mr Diwnycz informed me that he had consulted a senior colleague who had
    told him that ETS do  not  give  information  to  the  Home  Office  of
    certificates which had become invalid because of the passage  of  time.
    In this particular case ETS notified the Home Office of their view that
    the  Appellant  had  practised  deception  on  14th  April  2014  when,
    according to the official score report, the test was still  valid.   At
    C1 of the bundle it states that the test was valid from 26th  September
    2012 to 25th September 2014.



Consideration of whether there is an error of law

20. I rely on Mr Diwnycz's report of the senior colleague when he  told  me
    that ETS do not include in their  reports  of  invalidity  tests  which
    become invalid simply because of the  passage  of  time.   If  it  were
    otherwise, there would clearly be grave concerns about the  reliability
    of the data because there would be no  way  of  distinguishing  between
    invalidity because the ETS licence has expired and  invalidity  because
    of deception.

21. So far as the evidence itself is concerned i.e. the witness  statements
    and the printout, the Judge was entitled to rely on them.  As  she  set
    out in the determination, the tests were analysed  not  only  by  voice
    recognition software but by two analysts, working independently, one of
    whom was experienced.

22. According to Peter Milligan an individual test result  which  has  been
    invalidated on the basis of  test  administration  irregularity  rather
    than an individual's results being analysed would usually result in  an
    invitation  to  a  free  re-test  and  in   any   event   are   clearly
    distinguishable by ETS in the spreadsheets provided to the Home Office.
     In this case there is no evidence that the Appellant was offered a re-
    test and nothing in the spreadsheet.

23. I accept that the official score report refers to a speaking  score  of
    180 and writing score of 160 whereas the printout refers to both  being
    180 but I understand that the printout is completed by the Home  Office
    from information provided by ETS and that in itself does not render the
    printout unreliable.

24. So far as the false positives are concerned from the voice recognition,
    only 80% are confirmed by human verification.  However  that  does  not
    mean that those 80% are marked as invalid.  According  to  the  witness
    statement human verification is required in every single  case.  It  is
    simply not true to suggest that the system is only 80% accurate.

25. The burden of proof is on the Respondent to  establish  deception.  The
    standard of proof is the civil standard, the balance  of  probabilities
    and applying that standard, on the basis of the  evidence  before  her,
    the Judge was entitled to conclude that it had been discharged.

26. Article 8 was not pleaded in the grounds although Ms Cleghorn sought to
    submit that no proper Article 8 analysis  had  taken  place.   That  is
    plainly wrong.  From paragraphs 24 to 31 the judge conducted a detailed
    analysis of all of the relevant factors and reached a  conclusion  open
    to her.

27.  However  there  is  an  error  in  respect  of  S-LTR2.1  which  is  a
    discretionary ground  for  refusal  and  not  mandatory  as  the  Judge
    appeared to believe.

28. Under S-LTR2.1 the applicant will normally be  refused  on  grounds  of
    suitability if any of paragraphs S-LTR.2.2-2.4 apply.

29. S-LTR2.2 states that (a) whether or not to  the  applicant's  knowledge
    false information, representations or documents have been submitted  in
    relation to the application (including false information  submitted  to
    any person to obtain a document in support of the application)  or  (b)
    there has been a failure to disclose material facts in relation to  the
    application.

30. The issue here is whether the normal course should be followed.

31. It is the Appellant's case that he  meets  the  requirements  of  EX.1,
    aside from the suitability requirements because he has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with a child who is a British  citizen
    and it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.  He
    also has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a partner who is in
    the UK and a British citizen and there are insurmountable obstacles  to
    family life with that partner continuing outside the UK.

32. On an application  for  entry  clearance  he  would  be  refused  under
    paragraph 320(7B) having used deception in his application for leave to
    remain, although if he left the UK voluntarily, not at the indirect  or
    direct expense of the Secretary of State more than twelve  months  ago,
    320(7B) would not apply.  He would of course face a ten year ban if  he
    was removed or deported from the UK.  There would inevitably  therefore
    be a delay in his being able to return.

33. Whilst he has a genuine and subsisting relationship with his spouse  it
    cannot  be  said  on  the  findings  of  the  judge  that   there   are
    insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing with her outside the
    UK because she has close links  to  Pakistan,  albeit  that  she  is  a
    British citizen, and  there  is  no  recent  evidence  of  any  adverse
    interest in her there.

34. So far as the children are concerned, on the findings of the Judge, the
    Appellant has a good relationship with them. There was some evidence of
    some past traumatic events occurring in Pakistan, although not  of  any
    continuing interest by the children's father, but no  evidence  of  any
    serious health problems. Their best interests lie in remaining  in  the
    UK where they have the benefit of British citizenship.

35. There is no evidence one way or the other in relation to  the  couple's
    finances.

36. Like the first Immigration Judge I place weight upon the fact that  the
    Appellant's relationship with  his  partner  and  her  children  is  of
    relatively short duration. I accept that it would  be  unreasonable  to
    expect the children to leave the UK, and there would undoubtedly  be  a
    period of separation, but against that, in  twelve  months'  time,  the
    Appellant would be able  to  apply  for  entry  clearance  if  he  left
    voluntarily to re-join his wife and her  children  here.  He  has  been
    guilty of practising deception, and there would have to be  substantive
    reasons why the normal course of events should not be followed.





Notice of Decision

37. The original judge erred in law and her decision is set aside.   It  is
    re-made as follows.  The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.

38. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

