
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38421/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 March 2015                              |On 17 April 2015              |
|Prepared on 26 March 2015                     |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                              mr forhad ahamed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T. Shah, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr P. Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh,  born  on  4  May  1972.   He
    appeals against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Whalan
    sitting  at  Taylor  House  on  6  November  2014  who  dismissed   the
    Appellant's appeal  against  a  decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  2
    September 2013.  That decision was  to  remove  the  Appellant  and  to
    refuse to grant leave to remain outside  the  Immigration  Rules  under
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

2.   The Appellant entered the United Kingdom on or about 13 August 2002  on
    a visit visa valid until 21 January  2003.   On  17  December  2002  he
    lodged an application for further leave to remain  on  medical  grounds
    which was granted on 6 March 2003 until 6 June  2003.   Thereafter  the
    Appellant overstayed his leave.  Some six years later  on  24  November
    2009 he applied for leave to remain under Article 8 which  was  refused
    on 7 January 2010 with no right of appeal.  On 24 June 2011  he  lodged
    an application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the grounds
    of his marriage to Ms Fatema Begum, a British citizen ("the  Sponsor").
    His application was refused on 22 August 2011 again with  no  right  of
    appeal.  On 25 January 2013 he was encountered during a street stop and
    arrested by immigration officials and on 27 June  2013  he  was  served
    with  papers  as  an  overstayer.   The  following  day  he  lodged  an
    application for leave under Article 8.  This was refused on 2 September
    2013 and has given rise to the present proceedings.

Documentation considered

3.   On the file  was  the  Respondent's  bundle  which  comprised:  removal
    decision and reasons for refusal letter dated 2 September 2013 together
    with notice of appeal against them;  immigration  information  on  form
    PF1; application details; application for leave on form FLR(O) dated 17
    November  2009;  a  letter  of  representations  by   the   Appellant's
    solicitors 24 June 2011 and enclosing a form FLR(M) together  with  the
    Respondent's letter refusing that application  dated  22  August  2011;
    letter of representation from the Appellant's solicitors 28  June  2013
    together with refusal letter dated 2 September 2013.

4.   The Appellant submitted a bundle for the First-tier  proceedings  which
    was also relied upon  before  me  which  comprised  statements  of  the
    Appellant, Sponsor, Appellant's sister and brother-in-law;  DNA  report
    confirming the Appellant  is  the  father  of  three  children  by  the
    Sponsor; children's health record  books;  Sponsor's  decree  absolute;
    documents regarding one of  the  Sponsor's  children  by  her  previous
    marriage; school and other documentation  regarding  the  children  and
    evidence of the Appellant and Sponsor's relationship.

Explanation for refusal

5.   On 2  September  2013  the  Respondent  wrote  a  letter  refusing  the
    Appellant's application for leave  to  remain  under  Article  8.   The
    letter noted that the Appellant  was  said  to  be  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with the Sponsor and  had  been  since  January
    2004.  They underwent an Islamic marriage ceremony on 2 March 2004  and
    had been  living  together  as  a  married  couple  ever  since.   They
    underwent a civil marriage on 13 June 2011.  The Appellant  was  living
    with five children, three were his by the Sponsor and two were  by  her
    previous marriage.  All the children were born in  the  United  Kingdom
    and were British citizens.  The Appellant had experience as a chef  but
    was unable to work due to his immigration status.   The  Appellant  met
    the criteria set out in Section S-LTR: Suitability for leave to  remain
    under the Immigration Rules.

6.   Although the  Appellant  had  submitted  his  marriage  certificate  as
    evidence he was married to the Sponsor there was no evidence to suggest
    that he had a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  her  and  her
    children.  There was no evidence to suggest  that  he  resided  at  her
    address or saw her regularly.  There was no  evidence  to  support  the
    relationship claimed to be in existence since January 2004.  There  was
    no Islamic marriage certificate for the Islamic  marriage  on  2  March
    2004.  His application could not succeed therefore under  E-LTRP.1.7  -
    eligibility for limited leave to  remain  as  a  partner  because  "the
    relationship between the applicant and their partner  must  be  genuine
    and subsisting".

7.   The Appellant could  return  to  Bangladesh  to  obtain  correct  entry
    clearance to enter the UK as the spouse of a British national  and  his
    wife could support that application.  He  was  not  currently  working,
    provided no financial support to his wife or children and there were no
    insurmountable obstacles to him leaving the United Kingdom to make  the
    application.  The Appellant had remained in the country  in  breach  of
    immigration laws as an overstayer since  6  June  2003  when  his  visa
    expired.  He had failed to mention his relationship  with  the  Sponsor
    when he had applied for leave to remain in November 2009 even though he
    had solicitors acting for him at that  time.   If  he  had  been  in  a
    relationship with the Sponsor since 2 March 2004 it was  reasonable  to
    have expected him to rely on that relationship.  Section EX.1.1 did not
    apply as the Respondent did not consider the Appellant had  established
    a family life with his alleged partner.  It was not accepted  that  the
    Appellant was taking an active role in the children's upbringing.   The
    name Hafiz Ali appeared  on  the  birth  certificates  of  two  of  the
    children which was not the  Appellant's  name.   The  information  that
    Hafiz Ali was the Appellant's nickname was not accepted as  a  credible
    reason for this discrepancy.

8.    The  Appellant  could  not  succeed  under  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules as he  had  not  lived  continuously  in  the  United
    Kingdom for at least twenty years and he  still  had  social,  cultural
    and/or family ties with Bangladesh.  He spent 32 years of his  life  in
    Bangladesh and he would have no language or communication  problems  on
    return.  He had significant  experience  and  exposure  to  Bangladeshi
    culture and would encounter no problems re-adapting to  society  there.
    He would be expected to have family in Bangladesh including his parents
    to whom he had made previous reference.  He had skills  and  experience
    as a chef and it was reasonable to suggest he could use his  skills  to
    secure a job in this field in Bangladesh.  There  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances to justify granting leave outside the  Rules.   Not  only
    had the Appellant remained in the United Kingdom  illegally  after  the
    expiration of his visit visa but he had also  been  working  illegally.
    No explanation had been made for the delay in seeking to regularise his
    stay.

The Proceedings at First Instance

9.   At first instance the Appellant told the Judge that when he had  lodged
    his Article 8 application in 2009 he had made no mention of his wife or
    children but rather  referred  to  his  relationship  with  his  sister
    because he was badly advised by a friend.   There  was  no  documentary
    evidence confirming his marriage to the Sponsor because it was  illegal
    and he had lived at  various  locations,  sometimes  with  his  sister,
    sometimes with his cousin.  His family relationships back in Bangladesh
    had broken down a long time ago.  He had told the Sponsor early on that
    he had no status in the United Kingdom.

10.  The Sponsor described how  she  had  come  to  the  United  Kingdom  in
    November 2002 as she had married a Mr Azmal  Ali,  a  British  citizen.
    The couple had two children born January  2001  and  April  2002.   The
    marriage broke down and they separated in 2003.  The Sponsor's marriage
    to the Appellant was arranged by family and friends.   In  contrast  to
    the evidence of the Appellant the Sponsor said she  did  not  know  the
    Appellant had no immigration status until  five  or  six  months  after
    their Islamic marriage in 2004.  She was educated in  Bangladesh  until
    the age of 19.  Her parents were now  dead.   She  had  a  brother  and
    sister living there.  She had visited Bangladesh since  coming  to  the
    United Kingdom but not since 2004.  She  maintained  contact  with  her
    remaining family members in Bangladesh by telephone.

11.  The Judge noted the written statements of the  Appellant's  sister  and
    brother-in-law and the DNA evidence  which  confirmed  paternity.   The
    Judge found the Appellant and Sponsor to be straightforward and  candid
    witnesses of fact and that they had a genuine marriage to  each  other.
    The  Appellant  and  Sponsor  were  completely  dependent  upon   state
    benefits.  Both spoke some English but both needed the assistance of  a
    Bengali  Sylheti  interpreter  during  the  hearing.   Aside  from  the
    diabetes of the Sponsor's  oldest  daughter  no  real  information  was
    provided about the children.  The Appellant and Sponsor could not  meet
    the financial requirements under Section E-LTRP3.3 as they  were  on  a
    very limited income.  The Judge considered whether the Appellant  could
    succeed under Section EX-1 which provides an exception where there  are
    insurmountable obstacles to  family  life  with  a  qualifying  partner
    continuing outside the United Kingdom.   However  as  the  Sponsor  was
    born, raised and educated to college level in Bangladesh and had  lived
    more than half her life there and had family there the  Judge  did  not
    consider that there were such insurmountable obstacles.

12.  At paragraph 38  the  Judge  dealt  with  the  position  regarding  the
    children and wrote:

         "The Appellant's three children  with  Ms  Begum  are  all  British
         citizens but none had lived in the United Kingdom continuously  for
         at least seven years immediately preceding the date of  application
         (in  June  2013).   Nor  did  the  Appellant  have  sole   parental
         responsibility  for  any  of  the   five   children;   indeed   his
         responsibility for [the Sponsor's] two  children  with  Mr  Ali  is
         comparatively  limited.   He  cannot   satisfy   the   relationship
         requirements of E-LTRPT2."

    The Judge rejected the claim for private life  under  paragraph  276ADE
    accepting that the Appellant's only real integration to British society
    was to marry the Sponsor just over two years after she herself  entered
    the United Kingdom from Bangladesh and live on her and  her  children's
    state benefits.

13.  The Judge proceeded to consider the appeal under Article 8 outside  the
    Immigration Rules stating at paragraph 40: "my conclusion is  that  the
    Immigration  Rules  do  provide  a  complete  code  applicable  to  the
    Appellant's family and private life claims.  If conversely I  am  wrong
    in  this  conclusion  I  will  consider  Article  8  for  the  sake  of
    completeness under the principles outlined in Huang and  Razgar".   The
    Judge found that there was a relevant family and/or  private  life  and
    that interference with it would engage Article 8.  The family unit  had
    been  established  in  its  entirety  against  the  background  of  the
    Appellant's overstaying.   Any  application  for  entry  clearance  was
    likely to be unsuccessful because  of  the  inability  to  satisfy  the
    financial  requirements.   The  Judge  considered  Section  55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and noted that there  was
    no requirement or  proposal  to  remove  the  Sponsor  or  the  British
    children.  The children would retain their ability  to  re-start  their
    lives in Bangladesh with their two parents should the Sponsor choose to
    relocate back to Bangladesh with  the  Appellant.   Finally  the  Judge
    considered Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002 stating at paragraph 45 that although the Appellant had a  genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship with his children "they  were  not
    qualifying children at the date of application and in any  event  there
    is no requirement or expectation for them to leave the United Kingdom".
     He dismissed the appeal.

The Onward Appeal

14.  The Appellant  applied  for  permission  to  appeal  arguing  that  the
    applicable  Rule  was  EX.1.   The  Sponsor  could  not  accompany  the
    Appellant back to Bangladesh as she had five children to take with her.
     The seven year Rule quoted by the Judge did not apply as the  children
    were British.  The Judge had failed to follow the case of Ahmed  [2013]
    UKUT 84, that any benefits received by the settled spouse and  children
    should not affect the appeal.  The children could  not  re-start  their
    life in Bangladesh as they had no working  knowledge  of  Bengali,  the
    language in state-run schools.  The Appellant would not be able to earn
    a living there after an absence of twelve years, one of  the  Sponsor's
    daughters had certain medical conditions and  the  Appellant  would  be
    unable to obtain entry clearance upon return as the Sponsor  would  not
    be able to earn the �18,600 required given the ages of the children she
    had to look after.  The Judge had failed to consider the Upper Tribunal
    decision in Omotunde  where  British  children  were  affected  by  the
    decision their interest and welfare was the primary consideration.  The
    Judge had not considered the factors set out in E v Philippines [2014].
     The assessment made under Section 55 was not  in  accordance  with  JO
    (Nigeria) [2014].

15.  The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    Judge De Haney on 26 January 2015.  In granting permission to appeal he
    found the grounds to be arguable, noting that "the Judge has  misstated
    the law [at paragraph 38] in respect of paragraph  EX;  whilst  finding
    the children are British citizens  he  finds  the  Appellant  does  not
    satisfy the relationship requirement because they have not lived in the
    UK for seven years".

16.  The Respondent replied to the grant of permission on  3  February  2015
    stating that the Judge in a comprehensive determination had  considered
    all the facts, applied the relevant case law and it was open to him  to
    dismiss the appeal by giving adequate reasons.   The  purported  errors
    [such as the finding at paragraph 38 that the Appellant did not satisfy
    the relationship requirements because the Sponsor and children had  not
    lived in the UK for seven years] could have no material impact  on  the
    final outcome of the appeal.

The Error of Law stage

17.  The matter came before me to decide whether there was a material  error
    of law in the determination such that it fell to be set aside.  At  the
    outset  the  Presenting  Officer  indicated  he  was  troubled  by  the
    determination as the Judge appeared to have misunderstood the  relevant
    law.  All the children were British citizens and  therefore  they  were
    all qualifying children.  Although the error of law  was  conceded  the
    appeal was not as the Respondent's position remained that  it  was  not
    unreasonable to expect the children to relocate with the Appellant  and
    Sponsor.  It was an error for the Judge to find in this case that  they
    were not qualifying children.  The break in the family life  caused  by
    relocation would be proportionate given the Appellant's bad immigration
    history and other factors in this case.

18.  I considered whether there was an error of law  and  indicated  to  the
    parties that I found that there was.  This was an  application  outside
    the Immigration Rules under Article 8 but the Judge nevertheless had to
    apply the statutory provisions contained in the 2002 Act.   Given  that
    the Sponsor and all five children, the three of the Appellant's and the
    two  of  the  Sponsor's,  were  all  British  citizens  they  were  all
    qualifying children and whether they had or had not lived in the United
    Kingdom for seven years immediately preceding the date  of  application
    during 2013 made no difference to their status as  qualifying  persons.
    The Judge needed to assess the appeal in the light of the status of the
    Sponsor and the children.  The Judge repeated the  error  at  paragraph
    45.   As  this  error  appeared  to  have  significantly  affected  his
    conclusions under Article 8 I considered that  those  conclusions  were
    rendered unsafe and therefore the determination fell to  be  set  aside
    and the decision re-made.

19.  The Judge had also dismissed the Appellant's claim that  removal  would
    breach the Appellant's private life.  I cannot see that the  Judge  was
    in  error  in  concluding  that  there  would  be  no  disproportionate
    interference with the Appellant's private life since it was established
    at a time when his status here was unlawful.  Little  weight  would  be
    given to  his  private  life  in  the  balancing  act  determining  the
    proportionality of interference.  At the hearing  before  me  the  case
    concentrated on whether the Judge was wrong in his findings in  respect
    of family life and it was the appeal in relation to the claim to family
    life that needed to be re-heard.

The Substantive Re-hearing

20.  I indicated to the parties that I would proceed to re-hear the  matter.
     I enquired whether there was any further oral evidence that needed  to
    be given but I was informed that there was not.  I indicated  that  the
    positive findings of fact made by the Judge at first instance would  be
    preserved even though the determination itself was set aside.  I  heard
    further submissions from the parties before reserving  my  decision  on
    the re-making of the appeal.

21.  It was acknowledged the Appellant had a poor  immigration  history  but
    the Respondent had not accepted the relationship between the  Appellant
    and Sponsor and the Appellant had had to obtain DNA evidence  to  prove
    that he was the  father  of  his  three  children.   Where  there  were
    children involved the assessment of the proportionality of interference
    should be made  by  reference  to  the  qualifying  partner  having  to
    accompany the Appellant where  four  of  the  children  were  still  in
    school.  The test was whether there were insurmountable  obstacles  but
    there were no guidelines as to what that phrase meant.

22.  The Judge had placed too much emphasis on the fact that  the  wife  and
    children were dependent on public funds.  The  issue  was  whether  the
    Appellant  would  cause  additional  recourse  to  public  funds.   The
    Appellant had given evidence that he had not worked because he  had  no
    permission to do so but if granted permission he would  find  work  and
    assist the family and then they would be able  to  come  off  benefits.
    There would be adequate  payments at or  above  income  support  level.
    The Appellant and Sponsor had been in a longstanding relationship since
    2004 and if one applied the Razgar test  the  Appellant  satisfied  the
    requirements.  The Sponsor had come to the United Kingdom as  the  wife
    of a UK citizen but had found herself the victim of domestic  violence.
    It would disproportionately affect the education  of  the  children  to
    return them to Bangladesh.  They had no working knowledge  of  Bengali,
    they might be able to speak Bengali in the home but  if  they  attended
    school they would have no written skills in that language and they  had
    never been to Bangladesh.

Findings

23.  The Appellant and Sponsor have a genuine and  subsisting  relationship.
    Together they have five children, three are the biological children  of
    the Appellant himself and the other two are the children of the Sponsor
    by her previous marriage although the Appellant has a parental role for
    them.  The children's ages are Zaria born 23 April 2002 now  13  years,
    Zaima born 22 May 2007 now 7 years, Mohamed Hamza born 23 January  2001
    now 14 years, Mohamed Hamim born 23 September 2008 now 6 years old  and
    Mohamed Hammad born 12  November  2011  now  3  years  old.   The  best
    interests of these five children are a  primary  consideration  of  the
    Tribunal in assessing the claim under Article 8 and this  accords  with
    the duty under Section 55.  This means that their best  interests  must
    be considered first  but  although  a  primary  concern  they  are  not
    necessarily paramount.

24.  The best interests of the children are undoubtedly to be  looked  after
    by both parents together in one  family  unit.   Given  that  they  are
    already in the educational system and indeed are British citizens their
    best interests would be for them to remain in the United Kingdom to  be
    able to continue their education.

25.  The Respondent has made a removal decision against  the  Appellant  and
    if enforced this would interfere with the family life of the Appellant,
    Sponsor  and  the  children.   Given  that  the  Appellant  has  a  bad
    immigration  history  of  overstaying  and   working   unlawfully   the
    interference  would  be  in  accordance  with  the  legitimate  aim  of
    immigration  control.   The  decision  comes  down  to  the  issue   of
    proportionality.  What the Tribunal must do is to balance the competing
    arguments  to  assess  whether  the  removal  of   the   Appellant   is
    proportionate to the legitimate aim  pursued.   On  the  one  hand  the
    Appellant has a bad immigration record and he would have no difficulty,
    I find, in readjusting to life in Bangladesh.  He has only been out  of
    the country for some twelve years, he  still  speaks  the  language  of
    Bangladesh, has family there, I have no doubt would  be  able  to  find
    work and re-establish himself.

26.  Although he has formed a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
    qualifying partner that relationship was established at a time when the
    Appellant's status in this country was unlawful and by Section  117B(4)
    little  weight  should  be  given   to   that   relationship   in   the
    proportionality exercise.

27.  Importantly Section 117B(6) provides that where  as  in  this  case  an
    Appellant is not liable to deportation the  public  interest  does  not
    require that person's removal where they have a genuine and  subsisting
    parental relationship with a qualifying  child  and  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom.

28.  As indicated all five children in this  case  are  qualifying  children
    and it was found as a fact by the Judge  at  first  instance  that  the
    Appellant had a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with them.
     The question is whether it is reasonable to  expect  the  children  to
    leave the United Kingdom.  If it is not then the public  interest  does
    not require the Appellant's removal.  It would be hard to say that  the
    Sponsor's children  by  her  previous  marriage  should  reasonably  be
    expected to leave the United Kingdom and  travel  to  Bangladesh  given
    their ages and the length of time they have been in education  in  this
    country.  Similarly it would be hard to say that the family  should  be
    separated, for example some of the children should be expected to leave
    the United Kingdom but  not  others.   If  one  is  talking  about  the
    reasonableness of expecting children to leave the United Kingdom in  my
    view it is all or nothing, either all of the children would be expected
    to leave with the Appellant and Sponsor or none would.

29.  I do not consider that it would be unduly harsh to expect  the  Sponsor
    to return to Bangladesh with the Appellant (leaving aside the issue  of
    the children) since she like the Appellant has spent  the  majority  of
    her life in Bangladesh, speaks the language, has family  members  there
    and could re-adapt to  life  in  that  country.   Indeed  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect her to relocate with her husband  given  that  she
    has known for a considerable time that he had no status and no right to
    be in this country and there is no right under Article 8 for a  married
    couple to choose where to exercise their rights under Article 8.

30.  It would be in the best  interests  of  the  children  to  continue  to
    remain in this  country  and  I  do  not  consider  that  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect them to leave the United  Kingdom.   The  children
    have a range of ages. It might be possible to say in  relation  to  the
    youngest child that their formative experiences and life is  likely  to
    be focused on their parents and the child could  return  to  Bangladesh
    with them, notwithstanding the British citizenship  but  that  argument
    loses its force as the children's ages are greater. The result is  that
    the public interest does not require the Appellant's removal  as  I  do
    not consider it would be reasonable to expect the children to leave the
    United Kingdom with him.

31.  The next question is whether the Appellant  should  nevertheless  leave
    the United Kingdom in order to return to Bangladesh to apply for  entry
    clearance from there.  It may seem at  present  that  there  is  little
    likelihood that such an  application  would  be  successful  given  the
    Sponsor's reliance on public funds but that is beside  the  point.   In
    effect what is happening here is that the Appellant is seeking  to  use
    Article 8 to re-write the Immigration Rules and that this is in reality
    an exercise in queue jumping.  The question is whether the  effects  on
    this family of the Appellant being forced to return  to  Bangladesh  to
    make such application for entry  clearance  as  he  could  would  be  a
    proportionate or disproportionate interference with the family life  of
    the Appellant, his wife and  children  the  latter  remaining  in  this
    country.

32.  The case cited by the Appellant's solicitor of Ahmed has little if  any
    relevance to the facts of this case.  Firstly, that was a case  on  the
    calculation  of  state  benefits  in  order  to  assess   adequacy   of
    maintenance.  It was based on an application which had  been  made  for
    entry clearance before the July  2012  amendments  to  the  Immigration
    Rules (which set a higher threshold to be crossed).  That  is  a  quite
    different situation to the one which I have before me  in  the  instant
    case.

33.  In the case of Azimi-Moayed [2013] UKUT 00197 the Upper  Tribunal  gave
    guidance on the principles to be applied in determining  appeals  where
    children were affected by the appealed decisions.  As a starting  point
    it was in the best interests of children to be with both their parents.
     If both parents  were  being  removed  from  the  United  Kingdom  the
    starting point suggested that so should dependent children  who  formed
    part of their household.  It was generally in the interests of children
    to have  both  stability  and  continuity  of  social  and  educational
    provision and the benefit of growing up in the cultural  norms  of  the
    society to which they belong.  Lengthy residence  in  a  country  could
    lead to development of social, cultural and educational  ties  that  it
    would be inappropriate to disrupt.  Very young children are focused  on
    their parents rather than their peers and are adaptable.

34.  Undoubtedly there would be interference in this case with  family  life
    by  the  Appellant  returning  to  Bangladesh.   It   might   be   some
    considerable time before he was able  to  return  given  the  financial
    position of the Sponsor.  However, to say  that  that  means  that  the
    appeal  must  be  allowed  is  in  effect  to  re-write  the  financial
    requirements of Appendix  FM,  an  argument  that  was  comprehensively
    rejected by the Court of Appeal in the decision of MM.   The  Appellant
    has a poor immigration record, the Sponsor and children would  continue
    to be supported by public funds as they are supported  at  the  present
    time.  There would be an effect on the children but they would continue
    with their education and continue to enjoy the rights and privileges of
    being a British citizen in the  United  Kingdom.   Whilst  therefore  I
    would not consider it reasonable to expect the Appellant's Sponsor  and
    all five children to relocate back to Bangladesh, I would consider that
    it was proportionate to the  legitimate  aim  being  pursued  that  the
    Appellant should have to return to Bangladesh and at  some  appropriate
    time in the future make such application as he  can  if  he  wishes  to
    return to the United Kingdom to re-join  his  wife  and  children.   He
    could continue to maintain contact with his family through modern means
    of communication.

35.  There would be some interference with the children's best interests  to
    the extent that they would not  be  brought  up  by  their  father/step
    father for the period that he was away seeking lawful  entry  but  that
    consideration  is  outweighed  by  the  other  factors  in  this  case,
    including the Appellant's poor  immigration  record,  the  reliance  on
    state funds (including as was pointed  out  that  the  absence  of  the
    Appellant means that the low income of the Sponsor is not  further  sub
    divided). I find therefore that the  Respondent's  decision  to  refuse
    leave to remain under Article 8 and to remove the Appellant  would  not
    breach this country's obligations under Article 8 of the  Human  Rights
    Convention.  I therefore dismiss the Appellant's appeal.

Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I have set it aside. I have re-made  the  decision  in  this
    case by dismissing the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    decision to remove and to refuse to grant leave.

    Appellant's appeal dismissed.

    I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy  reason  for  so
    doing.



Signed this 13th day of April 2015

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appeal there can be no fee award.



Signed this 13th day of April 2015

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft
