
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38039/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 September 2015                 |On 30 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mr DANIEL GEISLER
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Sharma, Counsel instructed by Kent Immigration
                    & Visa Advice


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a decision by First-tier Tribunal Judge Blake
    promulgated on 13th January 2015, in which he allowed the appeal of Mr.
    Daniel Geisler against the decision of the Secretary of State  of  28th
    August 2014, to refuse to issue a  Residence  Card  to  Mr  Geisler  as
    confirmation of a right of residence as the family member of a  British
    citizen who was previously working  or  self-employed  in  another  EEA
    State.

 2. This is one of two appeals that was filed by Mr Geisler  and  heard  by
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Blake  on  the  same  date.   The   second
    (IA/38763/2014) was an appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of
    State of 16th September 2014 to refuse an application by Mr Geisler for
    leave to remain in the UK on family and private life grounds. As before
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Blake,  the  two  appeals  come  before  me
    separately and I have decided each appeal separately.

 3. The appellant before  me  is  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department and the Respondent, is Mr. Daniel Geisler. However for  ease
    of reference, in the course of this determination  I  shall  adopt  the
    parties' status as it was before the First-tier Tribunal.  I  shall  in
    this determination, refer to Mr. Daniel Geisler as  the  appellant  and
    the Secretary of State as the respondent.

 4.  Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
    Hollingworth on 12th May 2015.  Insofar as this appeal  (IA/38039/2014)
    is concerned, he noted:

         "In respect of IA/38039/2014, at paragraph 70 onwards  an  arguable
         error of law has arisen in relation to that  which  the  Respondent
         was able to  grant  under  the  EEA  Regulations.   The  Judge  has
         referred to ILR under the EEA Regulations.

         An  arguable  error  of  law  has  arisen  in   relation   to   the
         consideration of the correct Regulations."

 5. The matter comes before me to consider whether or not the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Blake involved the making of a material error
    of law.

Background

 6. The appellant is an Australian national.  The  factual  background  was
    not in issue before the First-tier Tribunal.  It is useful to summarise
    the material chronology before I turn to the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal and the grounds of appeal before me.

 7. The appellant was born in Australia on 24th May 1989 and left Australia
    in October 2000 (aged 11) with his mother and siblings.  The family had
    obtained Residence cards in France as dependant's  of  the  appellant's
    stepfather, a British Citizen living in France  and  exercising  treaty
    rights in France.  The appellant started his  schooling  in  France  in
    January  2001  and  graduated   in   France   with   an   International
    Baccalaureate in May 2007.

 8. On 27th September 2007, the appellant arrived  in  the  UK  with  entry
    clearance as a student, valid  from  21st  September  2007  until  31st
    October 2011.  In October 2008, the appellant's mother and brother came
    to the UK and they have remained in the UK since.

The decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Blake  in  appeal  IA/38039/2014
("The EEA appeal")

 9. In his decision promulgated on 13th January  2015  in  respect  of  the
    respondent's decision to refuse to issue the appellant with a residence
    card under the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006
    ("the 2006 EEA Regulations"), First-tier Tribunal Judge Blake sets  out
    at paragraphs [44] to [62], the  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant.  Counsel for  the  appellant  referred  to  the  appellant's
    mother and brother having come  to  the  UK  and  having  been  granted
    indefinite leave to  remain  on  entry,  because  the  requirements  of
    Regulation 9 of the 2006 EEA Regulations were met.  At paragraphs  [57]
    and [58] of the decision, the Judge records:

         "57. She submitted it was  clearly  evident  that  the  Appellant's
         mother and brother had succeeded under the Regulations in 2008  and
         that because of their status they had been granted Residence Cards.
         She submitted therefore that the Appellant qualified.

         58.  She submitted  that  also  in  2008  the  Appellant  had  been
         exercising treaty rights. She submitted that his family members had
         returned to the  UK  in  2008  and  that  this  event  should  have
         triggered the Appellant's status and that he should then have  been
         granted ILR along with his mother and brother."

10. The Judge noted that the respondent did not challenge  the  appellant's
    evidence.  In setting out  his  findings  and  conclusions,  the  Judge
    correctly referred to the material chronology  at  paragraphs  [66]  to
    [69].  It is what then follows, that is in issue in the  appeal  before
    me:

         "70. I noted that  in  October  2008  the  Appellant's  family  had
         travelled to the UK. I noted that on entry the  Appellant's  mother
         and brother had been given indefinite leave to remain because  they
         had resided together with  the  Appellant's  stepfather  in  France
         whilst he had been exercising treaty rights.

         71.  I noted that when the family had arrived in the  UK  they  had
         all been granted ILR because of their status as family members of a
         British citizen who had lived lawfully in France.

         72.  I noted as a fact that the Secretary of State  had  failed  to
         consider the position of the Appellant  at  this  time  as  he  was
         already in the UK as a student.

         73.  I accepted the Appellant's submissions that the  Secretary  of
         State should have granted him ILR under the EEA Regulations at that
         time but had failed to do so. I accepted that he  had  enjoyed  the
         status to be granted ILR at the time his family had entered the  UK
         in October 2008.

         74.   I  accepted  the  submissions  that  on  a  consideration  of
         Regulation 9(2) of the Immigration (EEA)  Regulations.  2006,  that
         the Appellant's stepfather did comply with Regulation  9(2)(a)  and
         (c).

         75.  I found that the Appellant's stepfather was a British  citizen
         who had been residing in an EEA State as a worker and had  been  so
         residing before returning to the United Kingdom.    I  also  found,
         on the basis of the evidence, that the centre  of  the  Appellant's
         stepfather's life had transferred to the EEA  State  where  he  had
         resided as a worker.

         76.  I noted that it was on this basis that the Appellant's  mother
         and brother had succeeded under the Regulations  in  2008  and  had
         been issued with Residence Cards. I considered that on  such  facts
         the Appellant did qualify under the Regulations.

         77.  I found that the family members  return  to  the  UK  in  2008
         should have triggered the Appellants status and that he should also
         have been granted a Residence Card along with that  of  his  mother
         and brother.

         78.  I further found on the facts before me that the Appellant  had
         been in the UK in excess of five years with the status of  being  a
         British citizen's EEA family member. In this respect  I  took  into
         account Regulation 15. I found that under this, he qualified for  a
         right of residence on the  basis  of  his  five  year's  continuous
         residence in the UK.

         79.  In the light of my findings, I considered that  the  Appellant
         was  entitled  to  the  grant  of  a  Residence   Card.    In   the
         circumstances  I  direct  that  the  Appellant  should  be  granted
         indefinite leave to remain in the UK  in  line  with  that  of  his
         family's grant of ILR given in 2008.

The Grounds of Appeal in appeal IA/38039/2014 ("The EEA appeal")

11. The respondent appeals the  decision  on  the  ground  that  the  Judge
    misunderstood or was misdirected as  to  the  facts.   The  appellant's
    family (his mother and brother) could not have been granted  ILR  under
    the 2006 EEA Regulations.   In fact, they were granted leave  to  enter
    the UK under the immigration rules then in  force  as  the  spouse  and
    dependent child of a British citizen. They  were  subsequently  granted
    ILR under the immigration rules in force  at  the  material  time.  The
    suggestion therefore at paragraph [73] that the appellant "enjoyed  the
    status to be granted ILR at the time his family had entered the  UK  in
    October 2008" is wholly  misconceived.    The  appellant  had  made  no
    application under the immigration rules for leave to enter or remain in
    the UK as a dependant, in line with the applications made by his mother
    and brother, and in the absence of such an application it is not  clear
    why the respondent ought to have granted ILR to the appellant.

12. The respondent submits that the error is repeated at paragraph [76]  of
    the decision.  The Judge notes that the Appellant's mother and  brother
    had succeeded under the Regulations in 2008 and had  been  issued  with
    Residence Cards and finds that on such facts, the  appellant  qualified
    under the Regulations.  The Respondent submits that the  Judge  appears
    to conflate the entry clearance that was issued to the family under the
    immigration rules, with residence  cards  issued  under  the  2006  EEA
    Regulations.

13. Furthermore, the decision discloses a material  error  of  law  in  the
    approach adopted by the Judge.  Notwithstanding the  finding  that  the
    appellant's stepfather met the requirements of Regulation  9(2)(a)  and
    (c) of the 2006 EEA Regulations, the judge was bound  to  consider  the
    question of whether or not the appellant was in fact  a  family  member
    within the meaning of  regulation  7,  at  the  date  of  the  hearing.
    Whatever the position might previously have been, as at the date of the
    hearing, the appellant's mother and stepfather  had  divorced  and  the
    appellant could no longer establish that he is a  family  member  of  a
    person exercising treaty rights.

14. To the extent that the judge allowed the appeal on the basis  that  the
    appellant may once have had a right under the 2006 EEA Regulations, and
    that although he did not make any application for such a  right  to  be
    recognised  while  it  was  held,  he  now   retains   such   a   right
    notwithstanding the divorce of  his  step-stepfather  and  mother,  the
    judge has failed to give any reasons as to how such a  right  has  been
    retained.

15. Finally, the respondent submits that the direction given by  the  judge
    at paragraph [79] that the appellant should be granted indefinite leave
    to remain in the UK in line with that of  his  family's  grant  of  ILR
    given in 2008, is one that cannot be complied with.  The  direction  is
    made on the basis that the Judge  considered  that  the  appellant  was
    entitled to the grant of a Residence  Card.   The  appellant's   family
    were not granted ILR in 2008 and entitlement to a residence  card  does
    not confer an entitlement to a grant of ILR.

16. The respondent submits that the degree to  which  the  Judge  has  been
    misdirected primarily by the confusion over  "ILR"  and  the  2006  EEA
    Regulations, is such that the determination is fundamentally flawed.

The hearing before me on 25th September 2015

17. At the hearing before me, Mr Walker on behalf of the respondent adopted
    the respondents grounds of appeal and submitted that a  proper  reading
    of paragraphs [71] and [73] of the  decision  demonstrate  the  Judge's
    misunderstanding of the  true  position  as  to  the  events  in  2008.
    Neither the appellant nor his family could have been granted ILR  under
    the 2006 EEA Regulations.  The appellant's mother and brother were both
    admitted to the UK following applications made  under  the  immigration
    rules then in force.  They did not enter the UK exercising rights under
    the 2006 EEA Regulations.

18. On behalf  of  the  appellant,  Mr  Sharma  accepted  that  in  several
    paragraphs of his decision, the Judge refers to a grant of  ILR  having
    been made under the 2006 EEA Regulations.  He submits  that  the  Judge
    simply adopted the incorrect terminology,  and  that  if  one  were  to
    substitute the references in the decision to "ILR" for "leave to remain
    under HC395", the decision makes perfect sense and does not contain any
    material error of law.  He submits that the references  to  ILR  having
    been granted under the Regulations are immaterial because the Judge was
    satisfied that the requirements of Regulation 9(2)(a) and  (c)  of  the
    2006 EEA Regulations, were met by the appellant.   He submits that  the
    question is whether the judge was entitled to conclude, as  he  did  at
    paragraph [79], that the appellant was  entitled  to  the  grant  of  a
    Residence Card.  He submits that I should simply correct any slip  made
    by the Judge.  Mr Sharma submits that the decision contains a  semantic
    error but it is not a material error capable of affecting  the  outcome
    of the appeal.

Error of Law decision in appeal IA/38039/2014 ("The EEA appeal")

19. I reject the submission made by Mr Sharma that the decision contains  a
    semantic error but it is not a material error capable of affecting  the
    outcome of the appeal.  It is plain  from  a  careful  reading  of  the
    Judge's findings and conclusions that are set out at paragraphs [70] to
    [79] of the decision, that the Judge repeatedly conflates  a  right  of
    residence under the 2006 EEA Regulations and indefinite leave to remain
    in the UK that is granted in accordance with the  requirements  of  the
    immigration rules HC395.  Similarly a careful reading  of  the  Judge's
    findings and conclusions makes it plain that the mistaken understanding
    that the appellant's mother and brother  had  been  granted  indefinite
    leave to remain in the UK in  2008  under  the  2006  EEA  Regulations,
    weighed heavily in the decision of the Judge.

20. At paragraph [73], the Judge appears  to  accept  that  the  respondent
    should have granted the appellant ILR under the 2006  EEA  Regulations,
    but failed to do so.  The Judge states "I accepted that he had  enjoyed
    the status to be granted ILR at the time his family had entered the  UK
    in October 2008".  There was no application made by the  appellant  for
    either an EEA residence card or for leave to remain  in  the  UK  as  a
    dependant under the Immigration Rules.  It is  difficult  to  establish
    the basis upon  which  the  Judge  could  properly  conclude  that  the
    appellant enjoyed the status to be granted ILR at the time  his  family
    entered the UK in October 2008 given that no such application had  been
    made.

21. Notwithstanding the fact that  there  was  no  application  before  the
    respondent, the respondent could not have  granted  the  appellant  ILR
    under the 2006 EEA Regulations as appears to be suggested by the Judge.
      If the appellant could establish a right of residence under the  2006
    EEA Regulations, the most he could have expected was a residence  card.
    He would certainly not have been entitled to ILR nor for that matter, a
    grant of leave to remain for a limited period.

22. If, as Mr Sharma submits, I were to substitute the words "ILR under the
    EEA Regulations" with  the  words  "LTR  under  the  Immigration  Rules
    HC395", into various paragraphs  of  the  decision,   that  would  also
    require the decision to  be  read  on  the  basis  that  there  was  an
    application made by the appellant for LTR under the  immigration  rules
    HC395.  For example, paragraphs [73] of the decision as  amended  would
    read:

         "I accepted the Appellant's submissions that the Secretary of State
         should have granted him LTR under the Immigration  Rules  HC395  at
         the time but had failed to do so.  I accepted that he  had  enjoyed
         the status to be granted LTR at the time his family had entered the
         UK in October 2008."

    Amending the decision in  this  way  pre-supposes  that  there  was  an
    application before the respondent made by the  appellant  in  2008  for
    leave to remain under the immigration rules and some  relevant  failure
    on the part of the respondent to properly decide that application.  The
    same could be said of paragraphs [76] and [77].   The  fact  is,  there
    was no such application and  amending  the  decision  in  this  way  is
    therefore entirely artificial.

23. In my judgement, the entire thrust of the decision is premised upon the
    misunderstanding that the  appellant's  mother  and  brother  had  been
    granted ILR when they arrived in the UK  in  2008  because  they  could
    successfully meet the requirements of the 2006  EEA  Regulations.   The
    requirements of the 2006 EEA Regulations are  quite  different  to  the
    requirements for leave to enter or remain set out  in  the  Immigration
    Rules.

24. Contrary  to  what  is  said  by  the  Judge  at  paragraph  [76],  the
    appellant's mother and brother had not been  granted  Residence  Cards.
    They had been granted leave to enter under the immigration rules.

25. The Judge's focus  appears  to  have  been  upon  whether  or  not  the
    appellant qualified under the 2006 EEA Regulations,  and  at  paragraph
    [77] the Judge states "I found that the family members return to the UK
    in 2008 should have triggered the Appellants status and that he  should
    also have been granted a Residence Card along with that of  his  mother
    and brother.".  The appellant's mother and brother were not  granted  a
    residence card, and so the appellant could not be granted  a  residence
    card alongside his mother and brother.

26. The conclusion at paragraph [79] that the appellant was entitled to the
    grant of a residence card, follows from the findings made by the Judge.
     In my judgement, those findings are based upon a misunderstanding  and
    or a misdirection as to the facts.

27. An error of law can be established where there has been a mistake as to
    an existing fact.  It is uncontroversial that the grant of ILR  to  the
    appellant's brother and mother followed a grant of leave to  enter  the
    UK under the Immigration Rules and not because the criteria set out  in
    the 2006 EEA Regulations were met.  The Judge cannot be criticised  for
    his erroneous understanding of the facts.  The misunderstanding  as  to
    the facts appears to have arisen because there appeared to be no  issue
    as to the facts and in the submissions recorded at paragraphs  [48]  to
    [62], it was repeatedly submitted on behalf of the appellant  that  the
    appellant's mother and brother had been granted ILR in accordance  with
    the 2006 EEA Regulations.  In my judgment,  for  the  reasons  set  out
    above, the mistake of fact played a material (not necessarily decisive)
    part in the Judge's reasoning.

28. It follows that, in my judgement, the decision of the Judge discloses a
    material error of law.  The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed  to
    the extent that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside
    and the appeal  is  remitted,  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  with  no
    findings of fact preserved.

Notice of Decision

29. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and the appeal  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

30. No anonymity direction is applied for and none is made.


Signed   Date


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia



FEE AWARD

1.   The First-tier Tribunal made a  fee  award.   As  I  have  allowed  the
    respondent's appeal, the fee award is set aside.


Signed   Date


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

