
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38643/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 20 January 2016                   |On 11 February 2016                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Mrs irene safoa osei
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent/Claimant:    Miss I Hussain, Counsel instructed by Rock
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Camp  sitting  in  Birmingham  on  22
    December 2014) allowing on Article  8  grounds  the  claimant's  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State to remove  the  claimant
    and her  dependent  family  members  pursuant  to  Section  10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  The First-tier Tribunal did not  make
    an anonymity direction, and I do not consider that the claimant or  her
    dependent family members require anonymity for these proceedings in the
    Upper Tribunal.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 13 February 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer granted permission
    to appeal for the following reasons:

         "I am satisfied it  is  arguable  that  the  judge  misapplied  the
         balancing exercise by excluding from the balance  the  [claimant's]
         adverse immigration history and the deception practice in obtaining
         entry clearance referred to in paragraph 17, by  placing  too  much
         emphasis  on  the  length  of  time  [R]  had  been  here  and  her
         schooling."

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 3. For the present purposes, it was only necessary to refer to the judge's
    reasons for finding that the eldest child, [R], met the requirements of
    Rule 276ADE(1)(iv), as this  finding  determined  the  outcome  of  the
    claimant's  appeal  and  the  appeals  of  the  other  family  members,
    including [R]'s two younger siblings who had not accrued  seven  years'
    residence in the United Kingdom.

 4.  The  judge's  reasoning  on  Rule  276ADE(1)(iv)  are   contained   in
    paragraphs 17 to 21 of his decision, which I reproduce verbatim below:

         "17. The immigration histories for the appellant  and  her  husband
             show a deliberate disregard for the immigration rules  of  the
             United Kingdom.  Her husband arrived  in  March  2004  with  a
             visit visa.  The appellant joined him in November  2004,  also
             with a  visit  visa.   They  deliberately  overstayed.   I  am
             satisfied that they had no intention  of  returning  to  Ghana
             when  they  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  evidence
             strongly suggests that the appellant's motivation was to  seek
             medical help for her diabetes, to  which  she  attributes  her
             previous miscarriages.  She became  pregnant  soon  after  her
             arrival in the United Kingdom.  The child born as a result was
             followed by two more children, born when their parents had  no
             right to be in the United Kingdom and were well aware of this.

         18.  The eldest child [R] is in a different situation from her  two
             sisters.  She is now nine years old.   She  was  born  in  the
             United Kingdom and has never left the country.  The respondent
             appears to accept that she fulfils all the  criteria  required
             by paragraph 276ADE of the immigration rules, except  that  it
             would be reasonable to expect her to leave the United  Kingdom
             (276ADE(1)(iv)).  As Miss Hussain submitted,  she  would  have
             fulfilled the relevant criteria before  the  changes  made  in
             December 2012.  The evidence is that, like  her  sisters,  she
             has little knowledge of Ghana and does not speak Twi.

         19.  I bear in mind Azimi-Moayed v Secretary of State for the  Home
             Department [2013] UKUT  197  (IAC)  and,  in  particular,  the
             opinion expressed in it that the seven years from age four are
             likely to be more significant that the first  seven  years  of
             life.  Five of [R]'s years in the  United  Kingdom  have  been
             passed since the age of four.  I also  bear  in  mind  EM  and
             Others (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT 98  (IAC)  for  the
             proposition summarised in the headnote that '[i]n the  absence
             of countervailing factors, residence  of  over  7  years  with
             children well-integrated into the educational  system  in  the
             United Kingdom, is an indicator that the welfare of the  child
             favours regularisation of the status of mother and children'.

         20.  The evidence, which  I  accept,  is  that  [R]  and  her  next
             youngest sister are integrated into the educational system  in
             the United Kingdom.  The youngest is only four.

         21.  I do not, for these reasons, consider that it is reasonable to
             expect the eldest child, [R], to leave the United Kingdom.  It
             follows that I find that she has satisfied me on a balance  of
             probabilities that she meets  the  requirements  of  paragraph
             276ADE."

The Application for Permission to Appeal

 5. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal on  the  ground
    that the judge erred in law by  failing  to  consider  the  immigration
    status of the parents when assessing whether it is reasonable  for  the
    eldest child to leave the UK for the purposes  of  Rule  276ADE(1)(iv).
    The finding was thus erroneous,  and  the  error  also  undermined  the
    Article 8 findings in favour of the remaining claimants.  In support of
    this proposition, the Secretary of State cited paragraphs [36] and [37]
    of the judgment of Clark LJ in EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874 and
    paragraphs [58] to [60] of the judgment of Lewison LJ in the same case.

 6. Applying the reasoning of the Court of Appeal in EV (Philippines),  the
    Secretary of State contended that the parents had no right to remain in
    the  UK  independently  of  their  child,  and   the   most   important
    consideration in the assessment of the children's  best  interests  was
    that of allowing the children to be brought up by their parents.  Given
    that this could take place in either the UK  or  in  Ghana,  the  court
    ought to have considered the parents' immigration status  as  a  factor
    rendering it reasonable to expect the children, including [R], to leave
    the UK.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

 7. I refer to the passages from EV (Philippines) cited in the  application
    for permission to appeal.

 8. EV (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874 provides  the  most  recent
    guidance from the senior courts on the  interrelationship  between  the
    best interests of children and the question whether it is reasonable to
    expect a child to return to the country of his or her parent's  country
    of origin.  Clarke LJ said:

         "34  In determining whether or not, in a case such as the  present,
             the need for immigration control outweighs the best  interests
             of the children, it is necessary  to  determine  the  relative
             strength of the factors which make it in their best  interests
             to remain here; and also to take account of any  factors  that
             point the other way.

         35. A decision as to what is in the  best  interests  of  children
             will depend on a number of factors such as (a) their age;  (b)
             the length of time that they have been here; (c) how long they
             have been in education; (c) what  stage  their  education  has
             reached; (d) to what extent they have  become  distanced  from
             the country to which it is proposed that they return; (e)  how
             renewable their connection with it may be; (f) to what  extent
             they will have linguistic, medical or  other  difficulties  in
             adapting to life in that country; and (g) the extent to  which
             the course proposed will interfere with their family  life  or
             their rights (if they have any) as British citizens.

         36. In a sense the tribunal is  concerned  with  how  emphatic  an
             answer falls to be given to the question: is it  in  the  best
             interests of the child to remain? The  longer  the  child  has
             been here, the more advanced (or critical) the  stage  of  his
             education, the looser his ties with the country  in  question,
             and the more deleterious the consequences of his  return,  the
             greater the weight that falls into one side of the scales.  If
             it is overwhelmingly in the child's  best  interests  that  he
             should not return, the need to  maintain  immigration  control
             may well not tip the balance. By contrast  if  it  is  in  the
             child's best interests to remain, but only  on  balance  (with
             some factors pointing the other way), the result  may  be  the
             opposite.

         37. In the balance on the other side there falls to be taken  into
             account the strong weight to be given to the need to  maintain
             immigration control in pursuit of the economic  well-being  of
             the country and the fact that, ex  hypothesi,  the  applicants
             have no entitlement to remain. The immigration history of  the
             parents may also be relevant e.g. if they are overstayers,  or
             have acted deceitfully."

 9. Lewison LJ said:

         "49. Second, as Christopher Clarke LJ points out, the evaluation of
             the  best  interests  of  children  in  immigration  cases  is
             problematic.  In the  real  world,  the  appellant  is  almost
             always the parent who has no right to remain in the  UK.   The
             parent thus relies  on  the  best  interests  of  his  or  her
             children in order  to  piggyback  on  their  rights.   In  the
             present case, as  there  is  no  doubt  in  many  others,  the
             Immigration Judge made two findings about the children's  best
             interests:

             (a)  the best interests  of  the  children  are  obviously  to
                  remain with their parents; [29] and

             (b)  it is in the best interests of the  children  that  their
                  education in the UK [is] not to be disrupted [53].

         50.  What, if any, assumptions are to be made about the immigration
             status of the parent?  If one takes the facts as they  are  in
             reality, then the first of the  Immigration  Judge's  findings
             about  the  best  interests  of  the  children  point  towards
             removal.  If, on the other hand, one assumes that  the  parent
             has the right to remain, then one is assuming  the  answer  to
             the very question the Tribunal has to decide.  Or is there  is
             a middle ground, in which one has to assess the best interests
             of the children without regard to the  immigration  status  of
             the parent?"

10. The judge went on to analyse ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department [2011] UKSC 4 in order to  elicit  an  answer  to  this
    question.  He reached the following conclusion:

         "58.  In  my  judgment,  therefore,  the  assessment  of  the  best
             interests of the children must be made on the basis the  facts
             are as they are in the real world.  One parent has no right to
             remain, but the other parent  does,  that  is  the  background
             against which the assessment is conducted.  If neither  parent
             has the right to remain, then that is the  background  against
             which the assessment is conducted.  Thus the ultimate question
             will be is it reasonable to expect the  child  to  follow  the
             parent with no right to remain to the country of origin?"

    On the facts of ZH it was not reasonable  to  expect  the  children  to
    follow their mother to Tanzania, not least because the family would  be
    separated and the children would be deprived of the right to grow up in
    the country of which they were citizens.  That was a long way from  the
    facts of the case before them.  No one in  the  family  was  a  British
    citizen.  None had the right to remain in the country.  If  the  mother
    was removed, the father had no independent right to remain.   With  the
    parents removed, then it was entirely reasonable to expect the children
    to go with them:

         "Although it is, of course a question of fact for the  Tribunal,  I
         cannot see that  the  desirability  of  being  educated  at  public
         expense in the UK can outweigh  the  benefit  to  the  children  of
         remaining with their parents.  Just as we  cannot  provide  medical
         treatment for the world, so we cannot educate the world."

    Jackson LJ agreed with both judgments.

11. For the reasons given in the grounds of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,
    and the additional reasons ventilated in the grant  of  permission,  an
    error of law is clearly made out.  The judge had a  choice.   He  could
    either have followed the real world approach championed by Lewison  LJ,
    or he  could  have  followed  the  conventional  hypothetical  approach
    comprehensively set out by Clarke LJ (assessment of best interests  for
    and against removal without immigration control overtones, followed  by
    assessment of wider proportionality considerations).  He  did  neither.
    Instead, he performed an inadequate best interest  assessment,  whereby
    he only took  into  account  the  best  interest  considerations  which
    militated in favour of the eldest child remaining  here,  and  did  not
    take into account the best interest considerations which  militated  in
    favour of her returning to Ghana with the other members of her  family.
    The  judge  also  did  not  bring   to   bear   wider   proportionality
    considerations (see in particular Clarke LJ  at  paragraph  [37]  cited
    above) before reaching the conclusion that requiring the  eldest  child
    to return to Ghana was unreasonable.

12. Accordingly, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal must be set  aside
    and remade.

Future Disposal

13. In the normal course of events, the Upper Tribunal will retain  a  case
    such as this, and indeed seek to remake the decision  on  the  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal and  without  the  need  for  a  further
    hearing.  However, the First-tier Tribunal did not make any finding  on
    the claimant's evidence as  to  the  asserted  difficulties  which  the
    family would face on return to Ghana, and equally  it  did  not  engage
    with the case advanced by the Secretary of State  that  there  were  no
    significant obstacles to the claimant and  her  family  re-establishing
    themselves in Ghana.

14. With the agreement of the parties, I find that  this  is  therefore  an
    appropriate case for remittal to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  fresh
    hearing.  None of the findings made by the First-tier Tribunal shall be
    preserved, save for the wholly uncontentious findings made in paragraph
    [17].



Notice of Decision

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of law,  and
    accordingly the decision is set aside.

Directions

16. The appeals shall be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal in  Birmingham
    for a de novo hearing before any judge apart from Judge Camp.

17. None of the findings of fact made by the First-tier Tribunal  shall  be
    formally preserved, save the findings made in paragraph [17]  of  Judge
    Camp's decision.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
