
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38735/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22nd September, 2014                       |On 3rd October, 2014         |
|Given extempore                               |                             |
|Signed, 1st October, 2014                     |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                    Claimant
                                     and

                          Leonardo DavidLopez Wayte

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Claimant: Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr McIndoe, a Solicitor with Latitude Law


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home Department  and  I
    shall refer to her as, "the claimant".  The respondent is a citizen  of
    the Argentine Republic, born on 15th November, 1973.   He  entered  the
    United Kingdom as a visitor on 9th February, 2013.

2.   On 2nd August, 2013, he applied for variation of his leave to enter  or
    remain  and  the  application  was  refused  by  the  claimant  on  8th
    September, 2013.  The respondent appealed that decision and his  appeal
    was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge JDL Edwards in Manchester on 7th
    January, 2014.

3.   In his determination, the judge allowed the respondent's appeal on  the
    basis  of  his  Article  8  rights,  having  refused  the  respondent's
    immigration appeal.  Unfortunately in doing  so  the  judge  failed  to
    properly apply the Immigration Rules and failed  to  properly  identify
    what circumstances about the respondent or his situation permitted  him
    to allow the appeal outside the Immigration Rules  in  accordance  with
    Nagre, R (on the application of) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) and Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules -
    correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC).

4.   The complainant challenged the determination and permission  to  appeal
    was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Alan Williams.  At the hearing
    before  me  today  the  respondent's  representative  agreed  that  the
    determination could not stand and indicated that he was not opposed  to
    the matter being remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh
    by a judge other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  JDL  Edwards.   Mr
    McVeety agreed.  In the circumstances I have concluded that it would be
    appropriate for the matter to be reheard afresh by a judge  other  than
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  JDL  Edwards.   A  Spanish  interpreter  is
    required and one a half hours should be allowed for the hearing of  the
    appeal with just two witnesses.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
