
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
           (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/38423/2013
                                                               IA/38429/2013
                                                               IA/38434/2013
                                                               IA/38444/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12 February 2015                           |On 1 May 2015                |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        MRS JUSTICE THIRLWALL DBE and
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                          SALIM SADRUDDIN SINDHWANI
                           SALMAN SALIM SINDHWANI
                              NASREEN SINDHWANI
                           SAIFALI SALIM SINDHWANI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Pretzell of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Kenny of the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal  by  four  members  of  the  same  family  against  a
    determination of the First Tier Tribunal (FTT) to dismiss their appeals
    against a decision of the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    made on 19 September 2013 to remove them from the United Kingdom.  They
    appeal with leave of a judge of the First-tier Tribunal.

Background

 2. The first appellant, dob 12th October 1968, is  married  to  the  third
    appellant,  dob  14  July  1970.   They  are  the  mother  and   father
    respectively of the second and fourth  appellants,  their  sons.   They
    were born on 9th June 1991 and 23 November 1995.  Thus at the  time  of
    the decision by the Secretary of State the second appellant was 21, the
    fourth appellant was 17.  As at the date of the hearing (February 2014)
    they were 22 and 18 respectively.

 3. The appellants are  all  nationals  of  India.   The  first  and  third
    appellant came to the UK as visitors with leave to remain from 22nd May
    until 22nd November 2003.  The third appellant, Mrs Sindhwani, returned
    to India during the period of leave and thereafter came to this country
    with her sons on visitors' visas.  They entered  the  UK  on  27th  May
    2005.  Thereafter they overstayed, as they had planned to do.

 4. The fourth appellant has comprehensive special needs.   This  has  been
    the case since shortly after he was born.  He is  wholly  dependent  on
    his family.  He suffers from seizures.   He  cannot  walk  unaided  and
    requires support in all aspects of his daily living.  He cannot be left
    alone.   We observe that the question of the  capacity  of  the  fourth
    appellant does not seem to have been  specifically  considered  at  any
    stage.  The evidence that he lacks capacity within the meaning  of  the
    Mental  Capacity  Act  2005  is  overwhelming  but  it  is  plain  that
    throughout these proceedings his parents have sought to act in his best
    interests.  We were not invited to and we do not think it necessary  to
    take any further action in that regard.

 5. On 19th September 2006 the family applied for  leave  to  remain.   The
    basis of the application was the physical and mental  health  needs  of
    the fourth appellant.  To remove  him  would  constitute  a  breach  of
    Article 3, they argued.  To remove him and the rest of the family would
    also be a breach of Article 8.  The application was eventually  refused
    but the decision was  reconsidered  following  the  issue  of  judicial
    review proceedings  which  were  compromised  on  the  basis  that  the
    Secretary of State would reconsider.  By that stage the claim  included
    the assertion that the delay had prejudiced  the  family,  particularly
    the fourth appellant.  The Secretary of State sent  a  further  refusal
    letter on 19th September 2013.  The notice of appeal was lodged on  2nd
    October 2013.  The hearing took place on 5 February 2014.

Ground 1, Private life under the Rules.

6.   It was the appellants' case before the FTT judge that he  should  first
    consider the fourth appellant's application under para. 276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules which, at that time, read:

         "The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain on
         the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the date of
         application, the applicant:

         ...

         (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the
         UK for at least 7 years (discounting any period of imprisonment)."

7.   It was submitted that by operation of para.276ADE  (1)(iv)  the  fourth
    appellant was entitled to leave to remain because he was "under the age
    of 18 years and has lived continuously in the UK  for  at  least  seven
    years".  This argument overlooked the fact that  the  period  of  seven
    years is measured as at the date of the application.  The date  of  the
    application is the date it was posted (see para.34G(i)).  At  the  date
    of the application (September 2006) the fourth appellant  had  been  in
    the UK  for  barely  a  year.   The  FTT  judge  rightly  rejected  the
    submissions in this regard.  Mr Pretzell, who produced at short  notice
    for this tribunal a succinct and properly focussed  skeleton  argument,
    made it clear from the outset that the argument (which was  effectively
    ground 1 of the appeal) was no longer pursued.   It  was  misconceived.
    The Secretary of State had considered the position under the Rules and,
    correctly, the FTT judge considered what the position would  have  been
    under the Rules but, as a matter of law, all four  cases  fell  outside
    the Rules.

8.   No complaint is made about the FTT judge's decision that there  was  no
    breach of Article 3.  The contrary was  unarguable.   No  complaint  is
    made about his findings of fact, all of which  were  justified  on  the
    evidence.   We turn to the grounds which were pursued.

Ground 2, Delay.

9.   Mr Pretzell argues that the FTT judge should have found  the  delay  in
    this case to be "exceptional".  He  referred  us  to  the  decision  of
    Collins J in R (FH) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007]
    EWHC 1571 (Admin).  Collins J observed "applicants  should  not  suffer
    any more  than  is  inevitable  because  of  delays  that  are  not  in
    accordance with good administration even if not unlawful."  Mr Pretzell
    submits that the point there being made is that delays that are not  in
    accordance  with  good  administration  could  still  be   a   relevant
    consideration  albeit  that  they  would  not  be  decisive   save   in
    "exceptional cases".   He referred to  paragraph  26  of  the  judgment
    where Collins J said "the longer a claim has been outstanding the  more
    important it is that it should be dealt with".  We agree.  At paragraph
    27 he said this:

         "This concern applies particularly in H's case.  His  human  rights
         claim has not been determined and has been outstanding for  some  5
         years.  In the circumstances that claim is more akin to an  initial
         claim.  Whether or not the system should cater  expressly  for  the
         length of any delay, he falls into what may properly be regarded as
         an exceptional case."

10.  Mr Pretzell submits that  on  any  view,  the  judgment  of  Collins  J
    justifies the submission that a time span of 6 years and 2  months  (as
    here) is capable of "making the case exceptional".  We agree that delay
    can be a relevant factor but we do not accept that a delay of  6  years
    and 2 months of itself renders a case exceptional.  The  judge  has  to
    consider the whole of the circumstances, including the effect, if  any,
    of the delay.  We have reminded ourselves of the decision of the  House
    of Lords in EB Kosovo (FC) v  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2008] UKHL 41.  The question at the heart  of  that  appeal
    was what (if any) bearing does delay by the decision making authorities
    have on any non-national's rights under Article  8.   At  paragraph  14
    Lord Bingham said that:

         "... delay in  the  decision  making  process  is  not  necessarily
         irrelevant to the decision.  It may be ...relevant in any one of  3
         ways. The first, the applicant may during the period of  any  delay
         develop close personal and social ties and establish  deeper  roots
         in the community than he  could  have  shown  earlier.   ...to  the
         extent that it is true, the applicant's claim under Article 8  will
         necessarily be strengthened."

    The second way that may be relevant is what Lord Bingham  described  as
    less obvious.  Where a person has a precarious immigration  status  and
    yet is not removed the longer the delay in removal the less  the  sense
    of impermanence and "the expectation will grow that had the authorities
    intended to remove the applicant they would have taken steps to do so".
     As Lord Bingham said, that depends on no  legal  doctrine  but  on  an
    understanding of how minds may work in some situations.  It may  affect
    the proportionality of removal.  The third way in which  delay  may  be
    relevant may be in reducing the weight otherwise to be accorded to  the
    requirements of a firm  but  fair  immigration  control.   Thus  it  is
    relevant again to the proportionality of removal.

11. The FTT judge considered the effect of the delay at paragraph  21.   Mr
    Pretzell argues that  the  reference  to  "legitimate  expectation"  is
    misconceived in this context.  The judge said:

         "The appellants knew full well that they had no right to be in  the
         UK.  They had shown scant regard for the immigration rules  of  the
         United Kingdom.  There was nothing to prevent them  from  returning
         to India.  Whilst the appellants have been  in  the  UK  they  have
         taken advantage of the facilities which have been available to them
         [this was a reference to earlier findings in respect  of  education
         and medial  services,  amongst  others]  and  they  have  not  been
         disadvantaged in any way.   They  have  continued  to  build  their
         family life in much the same way that they would have done if  they
         had remained in India.  There has been no disadvantage to  them  of
         the delay in the decision making."

    There is nothing wrong  with  that  conclusion.   The  reference  to  a
    legitimate expectation is no more than a reference to the second way in
    which delay  might  be  relevant  as  set  out  in  EB  (Kosovo).   The
    conclusion is reinforced, rather than undermined, by the letters to the
    Secretary of State, pressing  for  a  decision  to  which  Mr  Pretzell
    referred us.  The  appellants  plainly  did  not  consider  that  their
    position was secure as a result of the delay.  As to the first  way  in
    which delay may be relevant the judge  found,  correctly,  that  family
    life was not affected by the delay and there was  no  evidence  of  the
    development of any  close  personal  ties  within  the  community  (see
    paragraph 25 of the decision).  On analysis therefore, there is nothing
    in this ground.

12. The appellants submitted that the case should be looked  at  under  the
    old Rules.  The FTT judge found that even were the case to be looked at
    under the old Rules the appellants would struggle to  demonstrate  that
    removing them as a family unit would be a disproportionate interference
    with their rights under Article 8.  This was because (see paragraph 25)
    their private lives are inter-dependent with the lives of other  family
    members.

Ground 3 Exceptionality

13. Mr Pretzell submits that the  FTT  judge  was  wrong  to  approach  his
    decision on the basis that the  circumstances  must  be  compelling  or
    exceptional to consider Article 8 outside the Immigration  Rules.    At
    paragraph  23  the  judge  said  "The  appellants  do  not   meet   the
    requirements of the amended Rules and apart from the fourth appellant's
    disability there are no exceptional circumstances in  this  case  which
    warrant taking it outside the rules".   The judge went on to  refer  to
    the determination in Gulshan (Article 8 -new rules - correct  approach)
    [2013] UKUT 00640 which contained a  review  of  the  decisions  in  MF
    (Article  8-new  rules)  Nigeria  [2012]  UKUT  00393  and  R  (on  the
    application of Nagre) v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720, including paragraph 29 of
    Nagre.  The judge then summarised the decision thus "[it] decided  that
    the Tribunal had to consider Article 8 applications under  the  amended
    Rules, and only look beyond where the circumstances were exceptional or
    compelling."  He then went on (paragraph 24) to observe "There  are  no
    exceptional  or  compelling  circumstances  in  this  case  to  warrant
    consideration outside the  rules".   The  reference  to  the  need  for
    "exceptional circumstances" was an error.

14.  Since the decision was promulgated in this case the  Court  of  Appeal
    has further considered the decision in Nagre.  In MM  (Lebanon)  [2014]
    EWCA Civ. 985.  The Court found that "there was not much utility" in  a
    preliminary or threshold stage (of an arguable case) before an  Article
    8 claim could be considered.   We do not think that the judge sought to
    impose such a test in any event.

15. Most recently (23rd April 2015) in SS (Congo) and  others  [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 387 the Court of Appeal  considered  the  question  of  exceptional
    circumstances again.  At paragraph 33 the judgment of the  Court  reads
    "it is accurate to say that the general position outside the  sorts  of
    special contexts referred to above [which do not exist  here]  is  that
    compelling circumstances would need to be identified to support a claim
    for grant of LTR outside the new Rues in Appendix FM.  In our view that
    is a formulation which is not as strict a test as exceptionality  or  a
    requirement  of  "very  compelling  reasons"  (as  referred  to  in  MF
    (Nigeria) in the context of the Rules applicable to foreign  criminals)
    but which gives appropriate weight to  the  focussed  consideration  of
    public interest factors as finds expression in the Secretary of State's
    formulation of the new Rules in Appendix  FM.   It  also  reflects  the
    formulation in Nagre at paragraph 29, which ahs  been  tested  and  has
    survived scrutiny in this court, see eg Haleemedeen [2014] EWCA Civ.558
    at [44], per Beatson LJ".  We assume that is a reference to the  second
    half of paragraph 29 namely the consideration  of  whether  "there  are
    compelling circumstances not  sufficiently  recognised  under  the  new
    rules to require the grant of such leave".

16. In our judgment whilst the judge erred  in  referring  to  "exceptional
    circumstances" the error was immaterial since he went  on  to  consider
    the Article 8 claims outside the rules and by reference to the  earlier
    case law.  The judge acknowledged the position of the fourth appellant.
     He applied the Razgar test to the facts as he found them  to  be.   He
    began with the observation, which is  not  challenged,  that  there  is
    family life between  the  appellants  and  that  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to remove them all from this  country  as  a  family
    unit does not interfere with that family life.  He found that each  had
    a private life but it was a private life which  was  interdependent  on
    the lives of the other family members.  He observed that

         "... apart from the treatment and education  facilities  which  are
         provided for the fourth  appellant,  there  is  no  evidence  of  a
         separate private life or any real roots in the host community."

    It is not suggested that he was wrong about any of that.

Grounds 4 and 5, the fourth appellant

17. The central complaint in these grounds is that  the  FTT  judge  should
    have considered  first  and  separately  the  position  of  the  fourth
    appellant before considering the rest of the family.  Had he  done  so,
    the judge would have concluded that removal would be a  breach  of  his
    Article 8 rights.

18. Mr Pretzel began a submission that the FTT judge  should  have  treated
    the fourth appellant as a child notwithstanding that he was,  by  then,
    18 because his functioning is so limited. Mr Pretzel sought to  develop
    an  argument  based  on  the  determination  in  Azimi-Moayad  and  Ors
    (decisions affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197  (IAC)
    where the Upper Tribunal identified the following relevant propositions
    when deciding how to approach the question of the best interests  of  a
    child  who  is  in  education  but  whose  parents   are   subject   to
    administrative removal:

          a. as a starting point it is in the best interests  for  children
             to be with both parents and if both  their parents  are  being
             removed from the UK then the starting point suggests  that  so
             should dependent children who form  part  of  their  household
             unless there are reasons to the contrary.

          b. it is generally in the interests  of  children  to  have  both
             stability and continuity of social and  educational  provision
             and the benefit of growing up in the  cultural  norms  of  the
             society to which they belong.

          c. lengthy residence in a country other than the state of  origin
             can lead to development of social,  cultural  and  educational
             ties that would be inappropriate to disrupt, in the absence of
             compelling reasons to the contrary.  What amounts  to  lengthy
             residence is not clear cut but past and present policies  have
             identified seven years as a relevant period.

          d. apart from the terms of  published  policies  and  Rules,  the
             Tribunal notes that 7 years from age 4 is likely  to  be  more
             significant to a child than the first 7 years  of  life.  Very
             young children are focused on their parents rather than  their
             peers and are adaptable.

19. We do not think it permissible or desirable simply to  treat  an  adult
    who lacks capacity as a child.  Whilst some of  the  practical  welfare
    considerations may be similar the fourth appellant  is  an  adult  with
    special needs who lacks capacity and  should  be  considered  as  such.
    Even if we are wrong about that we are quite sure that a  consideration
    of  Azimi-Moayad  would  not  have  made  any  difference  here.     In
    particular, given the very young age  at  which  the  fourth  appellant
    functions, dependent as he is on his family  for  all  his  needs,  the
    effect of lengthy residence is likely to be much  less  significant  in
    his case than it  would  be  to   (say)  a  17  year  old  without  his
    difficulties.   The FTT judge found

         "... regardless of whether he is a child or not, his needs are such
         that care is going to be required for the rest of his life  and  he
         is a vulnerable person and will remain so."

20. There can be no sensible complaint about this  conclusion.   The  judge
    correctly found that at home all his care is given by his family.  Much
    of his time is spent at a special school.  Mr  Pretzell  argues  it  is
    clear from the FTT judge's  determination  that  no  consideration  was
    given to factors pointing in favour of the fourth  appellant  remaining
    in the UK.  It is difficult to see that attendance at a special  school
    and the receipt of medical care when necessary  constitutes  a  private
    life for this young man such  that  it  would  be  disproportionate  to
    remove him from the UK.  Whilst the judge did not say that in terms  we
    cannot see how he could have reached any other conclusion.  Such  other
    private life as he might have was dependent on  other  members  of  his
    family, and vice versa.

21. Mr Pretzell argues that the judge should have sought an  assessment  of
    the  fourth  appellant's  needs.    We   disagree.    His   needs   are
    comprehensive as is plain from the decision.  That moving him from  his
    special school to a different country would be disruptive does not need
    to be said.  Complaint is made  about  the  judge's  observation  "that
    there is no evidence ... to suggest that the fourth  appellant's  needs
    were not being met whilst he was in India".  Mr Pretzell  submits  that
    this is pure speculation.  It is not. There is extended  family  there.
    The first and third appellants left both their children  in  India  for
    some time when they first came to this country.  They were looked after
    by members of the extended family.   The  judge,  reasonably,  did  not
    accept that medical treatment had not been  available  or  adequate  in
    India.  The judge was entitled to find that there was  no  evidence  to
    support the assertion that the fourth appellant's needs  had  not  been
    met whilst he was in India.

22. It follows that even if the judge had started with the fourth appellant
    and considered his Article 8 right to private  life  separately  before
    considering the rights of his parents and his  brother  he  would  have
    been bound to come to the same conclusion.  In reality this is  a  case
    about a family whose family life would not be affected by removal.   It
    is unarguable that either separately or collectively removal  would  be
    disproportionate to their right to respect for their private life.

23. In our judgment none of the grounds of appeal is made out and no  other
    decision was reasonably open to the judge on a  proper  application  of
    the law to the facts of this case.  Accordingly, the  determination  of
    the First-tier Tribunal did not contain any material error of  law  and
    shall stand.

    NOTICE OF DECISION

    The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain any
    material error of law and shall stand.

    The effect is that the appeal of each of the appellants is dismissed.






    Signed   Date 12 February 2015

                    Mrs Justice Thirlwall
