
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/38339/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 5 June 2015                       |On 15 June 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                                FARHANA BIBI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Smith Counsel instructed by Maya Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. The Appellant is all national of Pakistan born on 2 June 1972 and there
    were three dependents in that appeal her children born on  26 May 2001,
    16 September 2005  and  5  August  2008  respectively..  The  Appellant
    appealed against the decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  dated  10
    September 2014 to refuse to grant an application for  an  extension  of
    stay as the spouse of a  person  present  and  settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom under paragraph 284 and under Appendix FM and paragraph  276ADE
    and also found no exceptional circumstances to warrant a grant of leave
    outside the Rules under Article 8 and to remove  her  from  the  United
    Kingdom. First-tier Tribunal Judge Holt dismissed the appeal under  the
    Rules and the Appellant now appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

 3. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant entered the  United
    Kingdom on 7 June 2012 accompanied by her three children as the  spouse
    of Mohammad Arshad. The Appellant had limited leave to remain until  11
    August 2014 . In an  application  dated  14  July  2014  the  Appellant
    applied to extend her leave. The refusal  was  on  the  basis  set  out
    above.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge heard oral evidence  from  the  Appellant
    and her husband. The Judge concluded  that  given  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant had not , she accepted  ,  achieved  the  required  level  of
    English she could not meet the requirements of  the  Rules.  The  Judge
    acknowledged therefore that the case fell to be decided under Article 8
    considerations. The  Judge  was  aware  that  there  were  3  dependent
    children (paragraph 14) but other than that reference and a  brief  one
    at paragraph 22 there is no reference to the  children  or  their  best
    interests or indeed to the fact that there had  been  no  reference  to
    this in the refusal letter.

 5. At the hearing before  me  Mr  Harrison  and  Ms  Smith  were  both  in
    agreement and submitted to me that the Refusal Letter and the  decision
    were inadequate in that they did not address the best interests of  the
    children. Ms Smith relied on the decisions of JO and Others (section 55
    duty) Nigeria [2014]  UKUT  00517  (IAC)  MK  (section  55  -  Tribunal
    options) Sierra Leone [2015] UKUT 223  (IAC)  and  suggested  that  the
    appropriate remedy in the circumstances was to remit the  case  to  the
    Respondent for them to remake the decsion.

Error of Law

 6. The grounds of appeal to the Upper tribunal content that the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge erred in failing to give consideration to s  55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 in respect of the 3 minor
    children.

 7. Ms Smith relied on JO.  I particularly note what was said at paragraphs
    11 and 12:

         "11. I consider that, properly  analysed,  there  are  two  guiding
         principles, each rooted in duty. The first  is  that  the  decision
         maker must be properly informed. The second is that, thus equipped,
         the decision maker  must  conduct  a  careful  examination  of  all
         relevant information and factors. These principles  have  a  simple
         logical attraction,  since  it  is  difficult  to  conceive  how  a
         decision maker could properly have regard to the need to  safeguard
         and  promote  the  welfare  of  the  child  or  children  concerned
         otherwise. Furthermore, they reflect long recognised  standards  of
         public law. Being adequately informed and conducting  a  scrupulous
         analysis are elementary prerequisites to the inter-related tasks of
         identifying the child's best interests and then balancing them with
         other material  considerations.  This  balancing  exercise  is  the
         central  feature  of  cases  of  the  present   type.   It   cannot
         realistically or sensibly be undertaken unless and until the scales
         are properly prepared.

         12. The second  of  the  duties  imposed  by  section  55  is,  per
         subsection  (3),  to  have  regard  to   the   statutory   guidance
         promulgated by the Secretary of State. In considering whether  this
         discrete duty has been discharged in any given  case,  it  will  be
         necessary for the appellate or reviewing Court or Tribunal to  take
         cognisance  of  the  relevant  guidance  emanating  from  the  same
         subsection,  juxtaposing  this   with   the   representations   and
         information provided by the person or  persons  concerned  and  the
         ensuing decision.  The  guidance  is  an  instrument  of  statutory
         authority to which the decision maker "must" have regard: there  is
         no element of choice or discretion. The guidance was duly published
         in November 2009. It is entitled "Every Child Matters:  Change  for
         Children". Notably, at  paragraph  2.7  it  contains  a  series  of
         "principles" which are rehearsed in the context of a statement that
         UKBA (the United Kingdom Borders Agency, the Secretary  of  State's
         agents) "must .. act according to ." same." "

 8. The failure of the First-tier Tribunal to address and determine whether
    the Respondent had been properly informed and carried out carried out a
    careful examination of all relevant information and  factors  and  thus
    carried out their statutory duty  and  thereafter  herself  failing  to
    carry out any assessment of the children's best interests constitutes a
    clear error of law. This error I consider to be material since had  the
    Tribunal conducted this exercise the outcome could have been different.
    I therefore set the decision aside.

Remaking the decision

 9. I have considered the guidance given in JO and MK and  the  submissions
    of the parties and I find that the appropriate remedy is to  remit  the
    decision to the Respondent to be remade.

Decision

10. There was an error on a point of law in the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal with regard to  Article  8  and  the  best  interests  of  the
    children such that the decision is set aside

11. I remake the decision.

12. As the Secretary of State's decision was not  in  accordance  with  the
    law, for the reasons given above, I allow the appeal to the extent that
    it is incumbent on the Respondent to remake the decision.



Signed      Date 12.6.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
