
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA384232014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 March 2016                               |On 24 May 2016                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             DONNA JEAN CHAPLIN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Harding, Grange & Castle Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State's appeals with permission against  the  decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Coffey promulgated on 19  August  2015  in
    which she  allowed  the  appeal  of  Miss  Donna  Jean  Chaplin,  ("the
    claimant"), on the basis that the Secretary of State's decision was not
    in accordance with the law. The judge directed the matter  be  returned
    to the Secretary of State for reconsideration of  discretionary  leave.
    The facts of this case are sufficiently set out in  the  determination.
    It is, however, important to note that the claimant  is  a  citizen  of
    Jamaica and has a son, also a citizen of Jamaica, who was born on  [  ]
    1995.

 2. There were in this case previous applications for leave made  prior  to
    that which gave rise to this appeal. The first, on  17  July  2009  was
    rejected owing, it appears, to a failure to pay the correct fee and the
    application was then resubmitted and  was  refused  on  31  March  2010
    without the right of appeal. Following a request for reconsideration of
    the application there was a fresh decision giving rise to  the  current
    right of appeal.

 3. It is important to note in this context that the claimant's son had not
    been over the age of 18 at the relevant times and indeed at the time of
    the first attempted application was  made  he  was  14.   The  son  has
    subsequently been granted limited leave to remain in the United Kingdom
    pursuant to paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  That grant made
    on 24 September 2014.

 4. When the matter came before Judge Coffey the Secretary of State was not
    represented.  The claimant was, as she  is  today,  represented  by  Mr
    Harding.  The judge concluded at paragraph 26  that  "The  decision  is
    conspicuously unfair and unlawful due to the unreasonable delay leading
    to a material  change  in  the  outcome.  I  remit  this  case  to  the
    respondent for reconsideration in accordance with her discretion."

 5. Mr Duffy's case is that the judge had not given  proper  reasoning  for
    the conclusion that the decision not to exercise discretion was unfair.
     Mr Harding accepted that this is a case in which it  might  have  been
    better for the claimant to  make  a  cross-appeal  in  that  the  judge
    appears not to have considered Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.



 6. Having heard submissions from both representatives it was  agreed  that
    the judge had erred in her finding  of  unlawfulness.  The  failure  to
    exercise discretion which she identified  was  in  fact  a  failure  to
    consider granting leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules.   That
    is a matter which ought to be  considered  in  a  proper  merits  based
    analysis of the Article 8 claim taking account the failure to meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration  Rules.   The  judge  appears  to  have
    thought that rather than going on to consider the merits of  Article  8
    she should have deferred to the Secretary of State to make the analysis
    outside the Rules.

 7. Both parties agree that in the circumstances  of  this  case  the  best
    course of action would be for it  to  be  formally  recorded  that  the
    judge's decision did involve the making of an error of law in that  her
    findings in relation to unfairness and unlawfulness should  in  reality
    have led her on to a consideration of  Article  8  outside  the  Rules,
    which she did not do.

 8. In the circumstances of the case I consider that  the  best  course  of
    action, it being agreed there is an error of law in this case, for  the
    matter to be  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  fresh
    findings on all issues subject of course to the findings of  the  judge
    in respect of the first application which  are  properly  reasoned  and
    based on the evidence.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS


 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of  an
    error of law and I set it aside.

 2. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  it  to  make  a
    fresh decision in respect of the claimant's article 8 case.

 3. No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                  Date:  10 March 2015
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

