
[pic]
IAC-PE-AW/SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/38588/2014
                                                               IA/38589/2014
                                                               IA/38590/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 14th January 2016                     |On 16th March 2016                |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD

                                   Between

                           O S O (first appellant)
                          A O O (Second APPellant)
                          A M O O (third appellant)
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms L Mair - Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety - Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. These are appeals by Mr O S O and his wife and older child  to  whom  I
    shall refer throughout this decision as AM.  There is a  younger  child
    dependent on his father's appeal. The dates of birth of the  Appellants
    are  4th  October  1974,  24th  June  1978  and   22nd   October   2007
    respectively.   The younger child was born in the UK  on  22nd  January
    2012).

 2.  The First Appellant arrived in the UK  on  22nd  August  2007  with  a
    student visa valid to  3rd  January  2011.   This  was  extended  twice
    expiring on 12th April 2012 at which  point  the  First  Appellant  was
    granted leave to remain on a Tier 1 (Post-Study) Visa  for  the  period
    25th July 2012 to 25th July 2014.  His wife and  the  elder  child  had
    visas in line with him and did not come to the UK with him.  They  were
    here from 17th October 2009.

 3. Because two children are involved in this appeal I  make  am  anonymity
    direction.

 4. The Appellants appeal against the decision of Respondent made  on  18th
    September 2014 to refuse to vary their leave to remain  and  to  remove
    them from the United Kingdom by way of directions under Section  47  of
    the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act  2006.   Their  appeal  was
    determined and dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Pooler  on  30th
    December 2014.  Permission to appeal against that decision was  granted
    and on 3rd November 2015, having heard submissions, I found that  there
    was a material error of law in the determination of First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Pooler and I set his decision  aside.   Although  I  specifically
    granted permission in respect of the third Ground of Appeal I  made  it
    clear that it may well be the case  that  the  reconsideration  of  the
    appeal would have to be wider than that probably intended by the  Upper
    Tribunal  Judge  who  granted  permission,  given  that   the   medical
    investigations into AM's condition have not been completed and  a  more
    complete diagnosis and prognosis made other   issues  relative  to  the
    effect  of  removal  on  the  Appellants  and  thus  to  the  issue  of
    stigmatisation and societal discrimination.  What had been submitted in
    the third ground was that the judge had failed in relation to Article 8
    to consider the impact on AM of the entrenched societal  discrimination
    against suffers of epilepsy.  The judge had made no findings in respect
    of evidence relating to the child's half-brother or in respect  of  the
    evidence contained in a medical report from Dr Adeshina relating to the
    stigma suffered by epileptics or in respect of the potential impact  on
    AM's morale and physical integrity of any discrimination or  stigma  he
    may face in Nigeria.  Judge Pooler had  noted  that  there  was  "scant
    medical evidence" produced relating to the actual nature  of  the  risk
    facing the child  if he  were  unable  to  access  appropriate  medical
    treatment, a factor also relevant to the  assessment  of  AM's  private
    life under Article 8, i.e. his moral and physical integrity.  There  is
    evidence that AM's uncle, his father's half brother, also suffered from
    epilepsy and indeed had tragically committed suicide in Nigeria when he
    was 16 years old because of the  difficulties  he  had  endured  there.
    There is a genetic element to the epilepsy which AM has.  His  mother's
    brother also suffered from it.

 5. All three Appellants and the First  Appellant's  younger  son  appeared
    before me at the hearing.





Decision of the Secretary of State

 6. The decision of the Secretary of State is contained in a  letter  dated
    14th July 2014.  She considered the application under paragraph EX.1 of
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules  and  under  paragraph  276ADE(1).
    She considered the family and private  life  of  the  First  Appellant.
    With regard to the children she  considered  whether  leave  should  be
    granted under Appendix FM as a child.  She  considered  the  Article  8
    rights of the children and with regard to the  elder  child  said  that
    Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009  had
    been considered.  The Secretary of State took  into  account  that  the
    family would all be returning to Nigeria together so there would be  no
    breach of their family life.  The Secretary of State took into  account
    that the elder child suffers from epilepsy and took  into  account  the
    letter from Dr Adeshina which said that the availability  of  treatment
    for epilepsy in Nigeria is not as good as it is in the UK.  The view of
    the Secretary of State is that  treatment  for  epilepsy  is  available
    according to the Country of Origin Information Report.   The  Secretary
    of State said that whereas it is accepted that  healthcare  systems  in
    the UK and Nigeria are unlikely to be equivalent this does not  entitle
    the Appellant to remain here with his child.

 7. I have a statement prepared by the  First  Appellant  for  the  resumed
    hearing before me.  I would say that at the hearing  on  the  issue  of
    error of law I was given some  information  about  the  child  and  his
    condition.  Having heard that, I asked the First Appellant and his wife
    to prepare statements and I now deal with these.  The  First  Appellant
    set out his immigration history in the UK.  With regard  to  his  elder
    son he said the following.  The child is now 8 years old.   He  entered
    the UK on 17th October  2009.   He  has  been  diagnosed  with  complex
    partial epilepsy.  He had his first seizure on  29th  August  2012  and
    since then he has been having seizures on a regular basis.  He is under
    the care of Dr Siobhan West, a Consultant Paediatric Neurologist at the
    Central Manchester Hospital.  The First Appellant states  that  he  has
    witnessed how epileptics are treated in Nigeria as two members  of  his
    family were epileptics - his half-brother [OO] and  his  mother's  only
    brother [KF].  [OO] suffered from epilepsy from the age of 6  until  he
    committed suicide on 15th September 1992 at the age of 16.  He said  he
    was  aware  of  his  mum  and  dad  taking  his  brother  to  different
    traditional homes in an attempt to  find  a  cure  for  his  condition.
    [OO]'s education suffered greatly as a result of  his  condition.   The
    First Appellant states that although he was only about  a  year  and  a
    half older than him he was five years ahead of him in terms  of  school
    years as a result of his younger half-brother having to  change  school
    from time to time coupled with him having seizures during  exam  times.
    He was made to repeat  classes  many  times.   He  would  often  suffer
    epileptic seizures on  his  way  to  and  from  school  and  the  First
    Appellant would stand beside him powerless as other students gave  them
    insults and abuse.  He  would  stay  with  his  half-brother  until  he
    regained consciousness and both of them would cry  and  go  home.   His
    half-brother had to drop out of school because he could  not  bear  the
    shame and abuse from the other students and teachers.  He said  in  his
    suicide note that he had to go so that his parents and  siblings  could
    be free from the shame that was all due to him.  He  said  he  received
    love and care from his family but hated discrimination,  stigmatisation
    and shame each time he went outside  the  home.   The  First  Appellant
    states that it was the most horrifying  experience  of  his  life.   He
    recalls how one day one of his father's friends came to the  house  and
    told his dad about a man he claimed had the power to cure [OO]  of  his
    epilepsy.  His dad was reluctant to go because  he  had  taken  him  to
    several herbalist homes and churches.  However [OO]'s mum prevailed  on
    his dad urging him to give the man a try.  They were  there  for  seven
    days.  When they came back [OO] had marks all over his body.   The  man
    had used a razor to cut his face, back, hands and legs and applied some
    black powdery substance to him.  They claimed  that  this  would  chase
    away  the  evil  spirit  responsible  for  his  condition.   The  First
    Appellant goes  on  to  say  that  stigmatisation,  discrimination  and
    inhumane treatment of epilepsy  sufferers  are  a  very  big  issue  in
    Nigeria.  His son's teachers now know what to do when he has a  seizure
    because his epilepsy nurse [MD] has given the school a care plan on how
    to manage his epilepsy.  In Nigeria he would  get  no  such  help.   He
    recalls one day he went out with his half-brother  about  a  couple  of
    days before he died.  He had a seizure on a bus and everyone on the bus
    came down.  Some were  insulting  and  abusing  them  and  others  were
    kicking them.  He has been very badly affected by this.

 8. He then speaks of his uncle saying he suffered from epilepsy  until  he
    died in  1996  at  the  age  of  29.   He  too  experienced  a  lot  of
    discrimination and dehumanisation.  He dropped out of school in primary
    4 at the age of 14.  His mother had to juggle raising  five  boys  with
    caring for her epileptic brother.  She would take him from  one  church
    and traditional home to the other in search of help.

 9. The First Appellant states that his son's education is getting stronger
    and stronger in the UK despite his condition and this is only  possible
    because  of  the  difference  in  cultural  beliefs  regarding   people
    suffering from epilepsy and other mental  disorders.   Whilst  epilepsy
    sufferers in Nigeria are moved from one church  or  herbalist  home  to
    another in the hope of finding a cure or confined to the four walls  of
    their home without hope for the future, their British counterparts  are
    supported to lead a normal life and achieve their potential through the
    provision of good medical care, adequate care plans and constant review
    and management of their condition.  He goes on  to  name  many  British
    people who have  achieved  great  things  despite  being  sufferers  of
    epilepsy.  He worries that his son would not  be  able  to  fulfil  his
    potential in  Nigeria.   His  welfare  would  not  be  safeguarded  and
    promoted.   He  would  be   maltreated,   discriminated   against   and
    stigmatised.  He says that as his parents he  and  his  wife  have  the
    burden to prevent impairment of his health and total development.  They
    have a responsibility as parents.  He would be  alienated  in  Nigeria.
    It would be worse for his son because he has now experienced in the  UK
    the levels of care and understanding relating  to  his  condition.   He
    could not understand why he was being so badly treated.  He points  out
    that he and his wife have a good immigration history.

10. In her statement the Appellant's mother says that  her  elder  son  was
    very healthy until he had his first seizure in August 2012.   They  had
    had no problems prior to that.  When it happened they were  in  church.
    The child turned floppy and was turning his head from one side  to  the
    other.  His eyes were  rolling  backwards.   The  pastors,  elders  and
    medical practitioners in church attended to him and after a few minutes
    he became conscious.  About four weeks later the same incident happened
    again in church.  The following day  they  went  to  their  GP  and  he
    referred them to a paediatrician.  The first  time  the  child  had  an
    epileptic episode in school he was rushed to A & E by  ambulance.   The
    doctors asked if there was any history of epilepsy in the family.   She
    said there was not but her  husband  said  there  was  history  in  his
    family.   His younger brother  committed  suicide.   The  child  had  a
    seizure one day when the First Appellant's mother was staying with them
    on holiday.  She got help from the neighbours to call an ambulance  and
    she spoke of how she had had to move her brother from one place to  the
    other in search of a cure.  She also spoke about her stepson and how he
    committed  suicide.   She  was  extremely  upset  about   the   child's
    condition.  The child has now had several epileptic episodes at school.
     He is well looked after by everyone at his school and is very popular.
     He has won lots  of  awards  for  his  good  work  ethic  and  helping
    colleagues.  His  school  has  written  two  letters  supporting  their
    immigration case.  She is worried that his education will suffer if  he
    is returned to  Nigeria  and  that  society  would  not  give  him  the
    opportunity to thrive.   The  child  also  engages  in  extracurricular
    activities like swimming, football and going for guitar  lessons.   The
    medical professionals treating the child have said that  they  have  to
    let him enjoy whatever he wants to do as long as they are  looking  out
    for him.  This is a contrast to what would happen in Nigeria.  She says
    that when she took the child to register him for a swimming  class  she
    was asked about medical conditions and told  the  teacher  that  he  is
    epileptic.  She became upset but the teacher told  her  not  worry  and
    that she would look after him and make  sure  he  had  fun.   She  says
    everyone has been amazing.  She says that when the child had the  first
    seizure they were just one month into their two  year  post-study  work
    visa.  They did not plan for this  to  happen.   They  would  not  have
    wished it on their child just so that they can remain in the UK.

The Medical Evidence

11. I have before me medical evidence as follows:-

      a) A letter from Dr Siobhan  West  at  Central  Manchester  University
         Hospitals dated 4th November 2015.  She says that she first met  AM
         in June 2013.  She had diagnosed focal epilepsy.  He has had an MRI
         scan, a standard EEG and a sleep EEG.  The MRI scan was normal  and
         did not show any focal  changes  that  could  be  a  cause  of  the
         epilepsy.  He has been on anti-epileptic medication since September
         2013.  The first medication that he was  given  did  not  make  any
         difference to his seizures and he was subsequently tried on another
         in September 2014.  He is apparently still having  seizures  albeit
         infrequently which suggests  that  his  current  treatment  is  not
         controlling the condition.  She states that there  are  many  other
         medications that she would  consider  trying  him  on.   The  ideal
         solution would be to find the medication that could control all his
         seizures  and  render  him  seizure-free.   The  chances  of   this
         happening having already tried to types of medication is  low.   If
         he continues to have the seizures she will consider doing a further
         MRI scan which is more detailed.  He has to be older to  have  this
         as he cannot have it with sedation or general anaesthetic.  She had
         been asked to comment on what would happen  if  his  condition  was
         untreated.  Her response is that she would expect him  to  continue
         to have seizures but it is impossible to determine  how  frequently
         these would occur.  The seizures are unpredictable  in  nature  and
         this in itself causes stress to the child and to his family as they
         may occur when he is in a position that could be  dangerous.   When
         AM has seizures his eyes deviate to the right, his head deviates to
         the right and he becomes unsteady on his feet.  He feels odd  prior
         to this starting so knows something is going to happen.  The events
         last a minute or two and then he is sleepy afterwards.  It seems as
         though the seizures are originating from one particular part of the
         brain.  A further more detailed scan may show an area that has some
         cortical dysplasia i.e. an area of the brain that  has  not  formed
         properly that is the trigger for these events.  If that is the case
         then sometimes epilepsy surgery  can  be  an  option  to  cure  the
         epilepsy.  This has not at  this  point  been  discussed  with  the
         family.

      b) A letter from Dr West dated 1st May 2014 stating that the Appellant
         is undergoing investigation for partial epileptic seizures.

      c)  A  letter  from  Dr  Tan,  a  Consultant  Paediatrician  at  North
         Manchester General Hospital dated 10th September 2013 addressed  to
         Dr West.  This is in relation to  investigations  he  was  carrying
         out.  He states:-

             "According to previous letters he had  two  EEGs  in  November
             2012 and December 2012 which were  both  reported  as  normal.
             His sleep study on 6th November 2012 reports  moderate  severe
             obstructive sleep apnoea with 140 desaturation with lower  set
             at 78%.  He was therefore listed for urgent adenotonsillectomy
             in RMCH.  Mother reports that he had a further floppy  episode
             at home in July 2013.  This happened when he  was  playing  on
             his Wii when complaining of feeling dizzy and becoming floppy.
              His mother had to assist  him  going  to  bed.   During  this
             episode he appeared to be responsive when  he  was  talked  to
             then he turned his head to the right and his mother was unable
             to move his head into midline.  This  lasted  for  about  five
             minutes.  There was no stiffness in his arms or legs reported.



             In conjunction with his abnormal report ambulatory EEG I would
             be  most  grateful  if  you  could  review  him  for   further
             management.  I also noted that he has  not  according  to  our
             records any cranial imaging in the past and judging  from  his
             behaviour in the past two clinics I have seen him I suspect he
             may need an MRI.  If he needs an MRI scan this requires to  be
             under general anaesthetic."

      d) A letter dated 17th  December  2012  from  Dr  Puri,  an  Associate
         Specialist.  He states that AM was at the clinic on  17th  December
         2012 for follow-up examination.  He had earlier been admitted  from
         5th  November  2012  to  7th November  2012  for  an  unresponsive
         episode/seizure and moderate obstructive sleep apnoea.  He had  had
         an episode at school witnessed by the teacher.   He  complained  of
         chest pain prior to it.  There as no tongue-biting or incontinence.
          He was admitted for  observation  and  investigation  and  had  no
         further unresponsive episodes whilst  in  hospital.   He  had  been
         reported to have had two floppy episodes  one  in  August  and  the
         second on 23rd September 2012.  He was admitted on  24th  September
         2012 for observation and given the impression  of  a  fit/migraine.
         He had an EEG on 6th November 2012 and one  on  4th  December  2012
         which was reported within normal limits.  There had been an episode
         the day before when he complained of pain in the abdomen and became
         weaker and floppy.  This episode lasted about ten minutes.   It  is
         noted that his teachers describe him as "a brilliant boy".   It  is
         noted in this report that there was family history of fits.

      e) A letter from Dr Kayode Adeshina,  a  Consultant  Paediatrician  in
         Lagos.   He  was  asked  to  provide  some  information  about  the
         treatment of people suffering from epilepsy in Nigeria and also  to
         comment on the effect  there  would  be  on  a  6  year  old  child
         returning to Nigeria suffering from complex partial  epilepsy.   He
         states the following:-

             "Epilepsy is a  complex  disorder  that  requires  specialised
             knowledge for correct diagnosis, classification and treatment.
              It is estimated that in Nigeria over 3,600,000 people  suffer
             from epilepsy and over 80% of  people  with  epilepsy  do  not
             receive any form of treatment or care.  Nigeria does not  have
             a protocol  for  the  treatment  of  epilepsy.   There  is  no
             cohesive programme for identifying and treating patients  with
             epilepsy.  There is  no  clear  statement  on  who  should  be
             responsible  for  the  treatment  whereas  in  many  developed
             countries neurologists and epilepsy  specialists  are  charged
             with that responsibility.  On paper there  are  anti-epileptic
             drugs which can be taken by sufferers to reduce the  incidence
             of seizures but the  truth  is  that  drugs  are  not  readily
             available.  Effective  management  of  epilepsy  demands  that
             preliminary tests should be carried out to establish the right
             drug and also while medication is  still  ongoing  proper  and
             thorough investigation is required to move to the  next  level
             in care management.  There are no facilities  to  do  this  in
             Nigeria.  Neuro-imaging which is an essential requirement  for
             effective diagnosis and treatment is not available  and  as  a
             result sufferers who  can  afford  to  travel  abroad  do  so.
             Recent statistics show that Nigeria has about 50  neurologists
             which means one  neurologist  is  'responsible'  for  treating
             72,000 epileptic patients alongside patients with other  forms
             of neurological disorders.  He says 'for epileptic patients in
             Nigeria the picture is gloomy with no hope of succour'."

12. Dr Adeshina goes on to say that people in Nigeria  still  believe  that
    evil spirits are responsible for epilepsy.  Another issue is that it is
    common practice for relatives of epileptic sufferers to seek help  from
    traditional herbalist homes and churches but because  the  majority  of
    Nigerians and indeed  Africans  believe  that  epilepsy  is  due  to  a
    spiritual attack and that the demon must be cast out  of  the  patient,
    many patients have been subjected to massive cruelty  and  even  death.
    Demons have been thought responsible and therefore herbalists homes try
    to beat it out of sufferers.  Social  attitudes  towards  epilepsy  can
    cause more distress to patients and  the  relatives  than  the  disease
    itself.  They believe that epilepsy  is  infectious  and  transmissible
    through saliva.  This adds a social and economic burden to the physical
    burden of illness.  There have been many instances where sufferers have
    been stoned while convulsing in public places.  Some  communities  burn
    the feet of a sufferer during convulsion while others give  concoctions
    such as urine, alcohol etc.  As a result of this social  stigma  school
    attendance and academic performance of children as well as  adolescents
    suffering from epilepsy have been negatively affected.   Children  with
    epilepsy are highly stigmatised and  discriminated  against  by  fellow
    students and by teachers.  In fact society does not  protect  sufferers
    and schools have a way of discriminating against them for admission and
    where it is discovered post-admission the schools tactically find a way
    to expel such children because  of  the  belief  that  the  disease  is
    infectious.  It is estimated that over 36% of children with epilepsy in
    Nigeria have never attended school and about half of those  who  attend
    school  withdraw  prematurely  because  of  their  seizures   and   the
    associated shame.  Some patients have committed  suicide  because  they
    cannot cope with the treatment meted out to them  by  the  public.   He
    concludes that there is no cure for AM in Nigeria.  He  has  a  genuine
    fear that he would suffer the same fate as many  others  and  that  his
    interests would be best served by receiving treatment in  the  UK  most
    especially to protect his education as he has been made  to  understand
    that he is a very intelligent boy.  He concludes:-

         "Until the Nigerian Government makes a  conscious  effort  to  help
         people with epilepsy not only in the area of care and management of
         the disorder but also  into  the  area  of  general  awareness  and
         reorientation of the  Nigerian  public  to  debunk  the  myths  and
         misconceptions around the disease epilepsy in Nigeria will continue
         to be a dark, lonely and silent world of shame."

13. In his submissions Mr McVeety conceded that there  are  no  credibility
    issues.  He relied on Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74.   He  accepted  that  the
    Appellants have always been here lawfully and that this is not  a  case
    where there has  been  "health  tourism".   He  submitted  that  family
    support is available.  He asked me to take into account paragraph  117B
    of the 2002 Act.  He said that the  issue  here  is  purely  one  under
    Article 8 ECHR.

14. I have a skeleton argument which was prepared by Ms Mair.   She  points
    out that the Appellants  have  always  lived  lawfully  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  They have always remained in compliance with the  Immigration
    Rules.  She cites case law in support of her submission that there  are
    circumstances in which the high threshold for Article 8 in health cases
    may be lower where children are involved.  She points out that a  final
    diagnosis has not been made with regard to the child.  He benefits from
    the intervention of a specialist epilepsy nurse at school.  There is  a
    letter from the head  teacher  dated  25th  June  2015  expressing  his
    concern at the possibility that the child may  no  longer  be  able  to
    attend school or stay in England given that he has complicated  medical
    needs that need care, attention and medical expertise.   He  says  that
    they have at the school witnessed three epileptic attacks during school
    time over the past six months.  She asks that I take into  account  the
    evidence of the Appellant's parents and of Dr Adeshina on  difficulties
    for  people  suffering  from  epilepsy  in  Nigeria.   She  asks   that
    consideration be given to the following matters:-

      a) The likely extent and severity of the child's seizures and epilepsy
         if removed without his condition being fully diagnosed and treated.



      b) The consequences of such seizures and  disability  on  the  child's
         life chances, welfare and best interests.

      c) The extent of discrimination and stigma that the child  may  suffer
         as a consequence.

    She goes  on  to  submit  that  in  particular  these  issues  must  be
    considered against the background of the child's achievements  and  his
    life chances in the UK such as schooling, societal  discrimination  and
    societal abuse.  She points  out  that  at  school  in  the  UK  he  is
    performing  above  age-related  expectations  whereas  in  Nigeria  the
    evidence is that he most likely would  not  finish  his  schooling  and
    would be likely to suffer discrimination and potential  exclusion.   He
    suffers  no  discrimination  in  the  UK.   The  level  of  stigma  and
    discrimination would affect a child much more than an adult.  He  would
    not get treatment in Nigeria.  He will have lived in the UK  for  seven
    years on 17th October 2016 and in those circumstances there would  have
    to be strong reasons for justifying  his  removal  from  the  UK  under
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).  The policy guidance on considering  the  best
    interests of a child when determining an application under Appendix  FM
    states that the longer the child has resided in the  UK  the  more  the
    balance will begin to swing in terms of it being unreasonable to expect
    the child to leave the UK and strong reasons will be required in  order
    to refuse a case with continuous UK residence of more than seven years.
     The decision maker must consider whether in the specific circumstances
    of the case it would be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to  live  in
    another country.  The child does not yet have  seven  years'  residence
    but there are other considerations and the guidance says that  relevant
    considerations  are  likely  to  include  whether  there  would  be   a
    significant risk to  the  child's  health,  for  example  if  there  is
    evidence that the child is undergoing a course of treatment for a  life
    threatening or serious illness and treatment will not be  available  in
    the country of return.  Another consideration is whether the  child  is
    likely to be able to integrate readily into life  in  another  country.
    The difference in health and education facilities will not normally  be
    a relevant consideration particularly if the parents have the means  or
    resources  to  support  the  child  but  there   may   be   exceptional
    circumstances which would  mitigate  against  this.   The  parents  are
    putting this case squarely on the grounds that  owing  specifically  to
    the child's disability he  would  potentially  be  barred  access  from
    education and owing to discrimination, would be prejudiced in terms  of
    his social development.  She cites SS (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA  Civ
    550 in which the Court of Appeal said:-

         "None of  this,  I  apprehend,  is  inconsistent  with  established
         principle, and the approach I have outlined is  well  supported  by
         the  authorities  concerning  the  decision   maker's   margin   of
         discretion.   The  leading  Supreme  Court  cases   ZH   and   H(H)
         demonstrate that the interests of a child  affected  by  a  removal
         decision are a matter of substantial importance, and that the court
         (or Secretary of State) must proceed on a proper  understanding  of
         the facts which illuminate those interests."

15. In her submissions Ms Mair said that AM has not responded  to  the  two
    drugs he has been given up to now.  There are newer experimental  drugs
    which are not available in Nigeria.  Even the usual  common  drugs  are
    not readily available.  If these experimental drugs are to be tried  by
    Dr West there will be some years of experimentation.   The  child  also
    needs a scan which cannot be done while he is so young.  Ms  Mair  said
    it is possible that no proper diagnosis will ever  be  made.   Curative
    surgery may be possible but this would not  be  available  in  Nigeria.
    Diagnosis and cure are only available in the UK  and  not  in  Nigeria.
    Without treatment  the  seizures  will  continue.   There  are  special
    circumstances in this case  in  that  the  half-brother  of  the  First
    Appellant killed himself  because  of  the  abuse  he  suffered  as  an
    epileptic.  He wants to protect his child from this.  He also wants  to
    protect his younger son.  It would be difficult for the First Appellant
    to go back to Nigeria where  his  brother  suffered  so  and  committed
    suicide.  He had left a suicide note explaining why he had done what he
    did.  Ms Mair submitted that one of the crucial factors in this case is
    the education of the child.  The  letters  from  the  school  are  very
    helpful.  The school is dealing exceptionally well with the  situation.
    The evidence is that in Nigeria he would be likely to be excluded.   He
    would certainly not get the level of understanding and assistance  that
    he is getting in the UK.  She referred me to GS (India) v  SSHD  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 40.  The First Appellant has been here for nine years.  He has
    studied and worked here.  The family  are  financially  self-sufficient
    and fluent in English.

My findings

16. I have carefully considered all  the  evidence  put  before  me  and  I
    proceed to consider that evidence in  terms  of  Article  8  ECHR.  The
    effect of removal on the child AM is the basis on which this appeal has
    been made. I take account of the public interest factors set out in  s.
    117B of Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and I  give  weight
    to the fact that the family have always been  in  the  UK  legally  and
    lawfully, that the First Appellant has been here  for  nine  years  and
    that the child AM has been here for over six years.  The  family  speak
    English and are financially self sufficient. The First Appellant is  in
    employment and has a  contribution  to  make  to  the  economy  and  to
    society.

17. In Razgar, R (on the Application of) v. Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2004] UKHL 27 (17 June 2004) the court said that there  are
    5 questions that must be asked in considering the question of a  breach
    of Article 8,

    (1)  Is there an interference with the right  to  respect  for  private
    life (which includes the  right  to  respect  for  physical  and  moral
    integrity) and family life?

    (2)  If so, will such interference have consequences of such gravity as
         potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

    (3)  Is that interference in accordance with the law?

    (4)  Does that interference have a legitimate aim?

    (5)  Is the interference proportionate in a democratic society  to  the
         legitimate aim to be achieved?

18. There is of course a family life but I accept that as the family  would
    all be removed together there would be no interference with that family
    life. Mr McVeety on that point rightly relied on Zoumbas.  It  is  also
    clear from current caselaw and in particular from GS that the fact that
    there is better medical treatment and  in  the  UK  than  there  is  in
    Nigeria is not a factor that does in general engage Article  8.  Indeed
    the findings in GS were unequivocal on that point and left very  little
    room for manoeuvre. The Courts have however  said  that  the  test  for
    children is  not  so  strict  and  cases  involving  children  must  be
    considered differently and carefully, the starting point being what  is
    in the best interests of the child. The Secretary of State is of course
    bound by s55 of the Borders Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009  to
    consider in every case the best interest of any child affected  by  her
    decision.

19. In MK (best interests of child)  India  [2011]  UKUT  00475  (IAC)  the
    Tribunal said,


         (i)   The best interests of the child is a  broad  notion  and  its
         assessment requires the taking into  account  and  weighing  up  of
         diverse factors, although  in  the  immigration  context  the  most
         important of these have been identified by the Supreme Court in  ZH
         (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4, the Court of Appeal in AJ (India)  [2011]
         EWCA Civ 1191 and by the Upper Tribunal in  E-A  (Article  8  -best
         interests of child) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00315 (IAC).

         ii)          Whilst an important part of ascertaining what are  the
         best interests of the child is to seek to discover the child's  own
         wishes and views (these being given due weight in  accordance  with
         the age and maturity of the child)  the  notion  is  not  a  purely
         subjective one and requires an objective assessment.

         iii)       Whilst consideration of the best interests of the  child
         is an integral part of the Article 8 balancing  exercise  (and  not
         something apart from it), ZH (Tanzania) makes clear that  it  is  a
         matter which has to be  addressed  first  as  a  distinct  inquiry.
         Factors relating to the  public  interest  in  the  maintenance  of
         effective immigration control  must  not  form  part  of  the  best
         interests of the child consideration.

         iv)        What is required by consideration of the best  interests
         of the child is an "overall assessment" and  it  follows  that  its
         nature and outcome must be reflected  in  the  wider  Article  8(2)
         proportionality assessment. Consideration of the best interests  of
         the child cannot be reduced to a mere  yes  or  no  answer  to  the
         question of whether removal of the child and/or relevant parent  is
         or is not in the child's best interests. Factors pointing  for  and
         against the best interests of the child being to stay  or  go  must
         not be overlooked.

         v)          It is important when considering a child's education to
         have regard not just to the evidence  relating  to  any  short-term
         disruption of current schooling that will be caused by any  removal
         but also to that relating to the impact on  a  child's  educational
         development, progress and opportunities in the broader sense.


20. Clearly it is in the best interests of AM  to  remain  in  the  UK  and
    continue with his medical treatment here but given what was said in GS,
    even taking a softer approach to children, this of itself  is  arguably
    not sufficient to render the decision to refuse leave disproportionate.
    As was said in MK what is required is an 'overall assessment'.

21. In making an overall assessment I  can  do  no  better  than  begin  by
    adopting the submissions of Ms Mair and I so do.  There is  no  adverse
    immigration history and the Appellants are self sufficient. AM has been
    in the UK for over 6 years. He has been attending school here.  He  has
    fairly recently been diagnosed with epilepsy but a final diagnosis  has
    not been made and cannot be made until he is old enough to undergo  the
    required scan. It may well be that some basic treatment is available in
    Nigeria but it appears from the evidence before me that the  likelihood
    of more advanced diagnosis and treatment is small. It is possible  that
    the child would be left with only the treatment he is currently  having
    which is not working. He has been  given  the  expectation  of  further
    investigation and treatment and he would lose that if removed.

22. Just as important is the fact that this is  a  young  child,  diagnosed
    with what must be a very frightening illness for a child, who  has  had
    so much support from his school as well as from medical  professionals.
    His teachers have a plan for dealing with his episodes. They know  what
    to do. He will have come to know that they know what to do. He knows he
    will be safe and cared for.  To  take  that  away  from  him  would  be
    devastating. He has suffered no stigma or discrimination.  No  one  has
    told him he will have limited prospects in life or that he cannot go to
    school. No one has suggested he is any different to  any  other  child.
    This is not a situation where he previously lived with his epilepsy  in
    Nigeria. He knows only what he has experienced in the UK. I was told he
    is a clever and hard working child who  will  have  a  good  future  in
    education in the UK. The evidence before me suggested that  that  would
    not be the case in Nigeria and the Respondent put nothing before me  to
    refute that.

23. The evidence of the difficulties for sufferers of epilepsy  in  Nigeria
    is strong and shocking. I accept the evidence  of  AM's  father  and  I
    accept that the death of his half brother and indeed the  treatment  he
    witnessed will have affected him badly. I formed the impression that he
    and his wife are finding it hard to  deal  with  their  son's  epilepsy
    because of the past and their fears of what he would endure in Nigeria.
    The First Appellant has long lived under a shadow caused  by  epilepsy.
    I also take into account that AM has a younger  brother  who  may  also
    have to deal in his childhood with discrimination and  societal  stigma
    against his brother in Nigeria.

24. Having considered the overall situation of  the  family  and  the  best
    interests of AM and  indeed  his  brother,  I  find  that  in  all  the
    circumstances the interests of AM outweigh any public interest  in  the
    removal of the family from the UK and I find that their  removal  would
    be disproportionate.

Notice of Decision

The appeals are allowed on human rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   Date: 29th February 2016

N A Baird
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal








