
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38791/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th March 2016                            |On 11th May 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                         mr Olusegun Timothy Kehinde
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Noor, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 11th  October  1982.   On
    18th June 2014 the Appellant  had  applied  for  a  residence  card  as
    confirmation as a right to  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom.   On  6th
    October 2014 his application was refused as set out  within  a  reasons
    for refusal letter.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal  came  before  Immigration  Judge
    Cruthers and Immigration Judge Paul sitting as a panel at Manchester on
    2nd March 2015.  In a decision and reasons promulgated  on  11th  March
    2015  the  Appellant's  application  was  dismissed   under   the   EEA
    Regulations and on human rights grounds.

 3. On 18th March 2015 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds of  Appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  On 8th May 2015 Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Kelly granted  permission  to  appeal.   Judge  Kelly  noted  that  the
    Secretary of State had refused the Appellant's application for  an  EEA
    residence card as the spouse of an  EEA  national  who  was  exercising
    community treaty rights in the United Kingdom.  He considered  that  it
    was arguable that  it  was  unfair  for  the  Tribunal  to  refuse  the
    Appellant's application to  adjourn  the  hearing  in  order  to  avoid
    possible prejudice as the result of the Respondent's late  service,  on
    the day of the hearing,  of  what  purported  to  be  an  accurate  and
    complete transcript of interviews conducted with the Appellant and  his
    spouse.  Although the Tribunal addressed the claim that  the  Appellant
    would otherwise be deprived of an opportunity for his spouse to comment
    upon the interview record it arguably failed to address  the  need  for
    verification of the accuracy of the written record by reference to  any
    audio recording of the interview  that  may  have  been  in  existence.
    Judge Kelly considered that this was arguably material, given  that  as
    the Tribunal  itself  had  acknowledged  the  Appellant  and  his  wife
    "strongly contested almost the entirety of the questions and answers in
    the transcript provided".

 4. Judge Kelly considered the other grounds  were  difficult  to  separate
    from the principal grounds and may also be argued.  These included  the
    complaint that is made in the supporting statement of Counsel but  only
    fleetingly  referred  to  at  the  very  end  of  paragraph  6  of  the
    application  that  the   Tribunal   unfairly   and/or   inappropriately
    questioned the  witnesses.   However,  contrary  to  the  assertion  in
    Counsel's statement, the Tribunal was not  limited  to  clarifying  the
    matters that had been raised by the representatives in their questions.
     That limitation applies only where an Appellant is unrepresented.

 5. Within the grant of permission Judge Kelly indicated that  in  view  of
    the contesting by the Appellant and his wife about  the  questions  and
    answers in the transcript that it would be appropriate for any Rule  24
    notice that the Respondent may choose to serve to specifically  address
    the question of whether such a recording exists.

 6. On 4th June 2015 the Secretary of State responded  to  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal  under  Rule  24.   Therein   the   reporting   officer   states



         "The grant of permission requests that the Respondent  should  make
         it known if there is an audio recording of the marriage  interview.
         I have made inquiries on the matter and  have  been  informed  that
         there is such a recording.  It is likely that it can be provided in
         CD form in time for the next hearing.   However  the  Secretary  of
         State is firmly of the view that the transcript provided  does  not
         contain any inaccuracies and would reiterate that the Appellant was
         clearly on notice that the Secretary of State was of the view  that
         his marriage was one of convenience".

 7. In addition the Rule 24 response notes that the grounds seek  to  argue
    that the judge should have granted an adjournment to the  Appellant  on
    the basis that the marriage interview transcript was only served by the
    Home Office on the day of the hearing.  The Rule 24  reply  points  out
    that the Appellant was on notice from the refusal of 6th October  2014
    that the Secretary of State was relying on the discrepancies that arose
    in the interview as these were outlined in the refusal.

 8. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant appears by Mr Noor.  Mr  Noor
    is only instructed in this matter at the very last minute.  Indeed  the
    court file indicates that  the  Appellant  is  acting  in  person.   He
    advises that he appears by way of direct access as an advocate and  not
    on instruction from solicitors.  Mr Noor is familiar with this  matter.
    He appeared before the First-tier Tribunal and he is also the author of
    a letter dated 19th March  2015  which  sets  out  his  record  of  the
    proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal panel.  Albeit  that  it  is
    written as a letter the document is a witness statement and attests the
    requisite paragraph that the content of this statement are  true.   The
    Secretary of State appears by her Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  Mr
    Harrison.

Submission/Discussion

 9. Mr Noor acknowledges  that  the  Grounds  of  Appeal  were  drafted  by
    solicitors and that the main thrust of the Grounds of  Appeal  was  the
    refusal of the First-tier Tribunal panel to grant an adjournment.   The
    marriage interview was not disclosed to  the  Appellant  prior  to  the
    hearing.  He points out that whilst there is  an  acknowledgement  that
    interview records can be disclosed late, each case  turns  on  its  own
    facts and there were 170 questions which he contends were far too  many
    for  the  Appellant  and/or  his  legal   representatives   to   digest
    immediately prior to the hearing.  He  relies  on  Miah  (interviewers'
    comments;  disclosure:  fairness)  [2014]   UKUT   00515   (IAC).    He
    acknowledges that the issue has been addressed at paragraph 11  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision and points out that it was only at
    10:30 a.m. that the Secretary of State served the interview  record  on
    him.  He emphasises the difficulty in  getting  instructions  from  the
    Sponsor.  It was clear she had only just seen it.   Further  there  had
    been no previous requests for a Czech interpreter and he  submits  that
    it was impossible for the Sponsor to know that the interview  would  be
    in dispute and she would be questioned and that the situation would not
    have arisen had disclosure taken place at an earlier and  proper  time.
    He asks me to find that there is an error of law which is material  and
    to remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

10. Mr Harrison takes an extremely sensible and pragmatic approach.  Whilst
    he relies on the  Rule  24  and  admits  it  is  unfortunate  that  the
    interview record was not provided earlier,  he  agrees  that  there  is
    procedural unfairness which must impact on the ability of  the  Sponsor
    and the representative to have known what was recorded and  to  prepare
    for the hearing.  He notes what is said at paragraph 13 and 14  of  the
    decision but  actually  (albeit  that  he  represents  the  Respondent)
    disagrees with it.

The Law

11.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

12. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Case Law

13. The law with regard to disclosure and fairness is succinctly set out in
    the authority of Miah (interviewers'  comments;  disclosure:  fairness)
    [2014] UKUT 00515 (IAC).  This states

    Conduct of pre-decision interviews

    (i)  A decision that a marriage is a marriage of  convenience  for  the
         purposes of regulation 2(1) of the Immigration  (European  Economic
         Area) Regulations  2006  is  a  matter  of  some  moment.  Fairness
         requires that the affected person must be alerted to the  essential
         elements of the case against him.

    (ii) In addition, those involved must  be  alert  to  the  question  of
         whether, in an unusual or exceptional  case,  anything  further  is
         required in the interests of  fairness.  There  may  be  difficult,
         borderline cases in which fairness will require  identification  of
         the third  party.  These  do  not  admit  of  general  guidance  or
         resolution and will have to be addressed on a case by  case  basis,
         guided by the overarching requirement of fairness and balancing all
         interests in play.

    Disclosure

    (iv) However, the document enshrining the interviewer's comments - Form
         ICV.4605 - must be disclosed as a matter of course. An  appellant's
         right to a fair hearing dictates this  course.  If,  exceptionally,
         some  legitimate  concern  about  disclosure,  for   example,   the
         protection  of  a  third  party,  should  arise,  this  should   be
         proactively brought to the attention of the Tribunal, for a  ruling
         and directions. In this way the principle of  independent  judicial
         adjudication will provide adequate safeguards  for  the  appellant.
         This will also  enable  mechanisms  such  as  redaction,  which  in
         practice one would expect to  arise  with  extreme  rarity,  to  be
         considered.

14.  In  Nwaigwe  (adjournment:  fairness)  [2014]  UKUT  00418  (IAC)  The
    President, the Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey, said

         "If a Tribunal refuses to accede to an  adjournment  request,  such
         decision could, in  principle,  be  erroneous  in  law  in  several
         respects: these include a failure to take into account all material
         considerations; permitting immaterial  considerations  to  intrude;
         denying the party concerned a fair hearing; failing  to  apply  the
         correct test; and acting irrationally.  In practice, in most  cases
         the question will be whether  the  refusal  deprived  the  affected
         party of his right to a fair hearing.  Where an adjournment refusal
         is challenged on fairness grounds, it  is  important  to  recognise
         that the question for the Upper Tribunal is  not  whether  the  FtT
         acted reasonably.  Rather, the  test  to  be  applied  is  that  of
         fairness: was there any deprivation of the affected  party's  right
         to a fair hearing?"

Findings

15. I start by reminding myself that the issue extant before me is  whether
    or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.  I am not rehearing  the  matter.   The  issue  is
    whether or not there was procedural unfairness, in the failure  of  the
    first-tier panel not to adjourn the hearing.  I am well aware that  the
    panel gave time as set out within Mr Noor's  statement  (which  is  not
    challenged by Mr Harrison as being an  accurate  record)  and  this  is
    alluded to within paragraphs  13  and  14  of  the  first-tier  panel's
    decision for  the  Appellant  to  consider  the  interview  transcript.
    Whilst I accept that there is an argument for saying that  the  failure
    to grant the adjournment has been fully and properly considered by  the
    First-tier Tribunal and what is being put forward  amounts  to  nothing
    more than disagreement, I take into account:-

      i) The acceptance on behalf of the Secretary of State by  Mr  Harrison
         that the Secretary of State accepts that it was procedurally unfair
         not to adjourn.

     ii) That the general principles set out in Miah need to be followed and
         addressed.

    iii) That whilst considerable criticism can be levied at  the  Secretary
         of State at the late service  of  the  interview  record,  that  in
         itself may not necessarily require  an  adjournment  because  other
         factors need to be considered, in particular  the  issues  involved
         and the number of questions involved.  In  this  instant  case  the
         issues are highly contentious.  In addition the number of questions
         total 170.  It is not, I accept, reasonable even with the  latitude
         of the Tribunal in putting the case back in the list to  expect  an
         Appellant and Sponsor to digest a document running to 170 questions
         at the door of the court.

     iv) I acknowledge further that the position of the Appellant  was  made
         more  difficult  by  the  failure  to  have   requested   a   Czech
         interpreter.  It is difficult not to be critical of the Appellant's
         instructing solicitors for having failed to  do  so.   I can  well
         understand the lack of sympathy that this created within the  panel
         and  it  was  strongly  emphasised  by  Mr  Noor  in  his  previous
         submissions  that  an  adjournment  would  be  beneficial  for  the
         interests of justice for both the Appellant and the Sponsor so they
         could see their solicitor in the presence of  a  Czech  interpreter
         and prepare thereafter a schedule of exactly  which  questions  and
         answers they disagreed with and which they accepted.

16. When  looked  at  in  the  round  and  considering  all  these  factors
    particularly bearing in mind the agreement/consent of the Secretary  of
    State through her representative Mr Harrison, I find that  there  is  a
    material error of law in the failure  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    grant the adjournment on the basis of procedural unfairness and  I  set
    aside the decision and  give  directions  for  the  rehearing  of  this
    matter.  The parties will of course appreciate that  the  Secretary  of
    State maintains her position with regard to the marriage being  one  of
    convenience and the questions and answers  set  out  in  the  interview
    record.

Notice of Decision and Directions

      1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error
         of law and is set aside.  The matter is remitted to the  First-tier
         Tribunal sitting at Manchester with none of the findings of fact to
         stand.

      2) The matter is to be reheard before any Immigration Judge other than
         Immigration Judges Cruthers and Paul on the first available date 42
         days hence with an ELH of two hours.

      3) That there be leave to either  party  to  file  additional  witness
         statements and supplemental  documentary  evidence  in  support  of
         their positions, such statements/evidence to be served on the other
         party and filed at court  at  least  fourteen  days  prior  to  the
         restored hearing.

      4) That a Czech interpreter do attend the restored hearing.

    No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

