
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38311/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 26 November 2014                           |On 16 December 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        THE HONORABLE LORD BURNS AND
                           DESIGNATED JUDGE MURRAY


                                   Between

                            MOLLY MANKHAMBA PHIRI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THESECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Akomolade, Nathan Aaron Solicitors, London


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Malawi,  born  on  10  April  1986.   She
    appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated 4 September 2013,
    refusing to grant her settlement in the United Kingdom under  paragraph
    276B of the Immigration Rules, on the basis that she  has  accrued  ten
    years lawful residence in the United Kingdom.  The Appeal was heard  by
    Judge of the First  Tier  Tribunal  Shamash  and  dismissed  under  the
    Immigration Rules, under Article 8 of ECHR and on  Section  47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum  and  Nationality  Act  2006,  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 11 September 2014.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First Tier Tribunal White on 22  October  2014.
    The  grounds  claim  that  discretion  should   have   been   exercised
    differently but they do not identify any  discretion  afforded  to  the
    Respondent the exercise of which is  amenable  to  appeal  before  this
    Tribunal.  The grounds state  that  the  Judge  set  out  a  discursive
    exposition on the law and it is difficult to discern what approach  the
    Judge has actually adopted  to  the  question  of  human  rights.   The
    Judge's statement at paragraph 40, that the Appellant does not meet the
    terms of paragraph 276ADE of Appendix FM, which requires  an  Appellant
    to be living in the  United  Kingdom  for  20  years,  is  arguably  an
    incorrect statement of law which  might  have  materially  tainted  his
    consideration of the issue of human rights.

The Hearing

 3. The Appellant's representative submitted that there is an error of  law
    at paragraph 40 of the determination as the Judge  failed  to  properly
    consider Article 8.  He submitted that the Respondent should have  used
    discretion when making her decision.  The Appellant came to the  United
    Kingdom in 2004 and became pregnant in 2005.  He submitted that because
    of this she forgot to renew her leave for a short period  of  time  but
    after she had her baby she asked for her leave to be continued  and  at
    that point, after the Respondent saw her medical report, discretion was
    used and her leave was renewed.

 4. He submitted that the Appellant applied for  settlement  on  the  basis
    that she had accrued ten years lawful residence in the  United  Kingdom
    but at the date of application and the date of the decision she had not
    been in the United Kingdom for ten years lawfully.  He  submitted  that
    at the date of the Hearing she had been in the United Kingdom  lawfully
    for more than ten years and because of this discretion should have been
    used by the Judge.

 5. He referred us to the case  of  FD  (EEA)  [2007]  UK  AIT  00049.   He
    submitted that when the Appellant overstayed  in  2005  the  Respondent
    showed discretion by granting her an extension in her leave and because
    of this the Judge should have used discretion when considering the  ten
    year period.  He submitted that the Appellant's child is now in Malawi.

 6. The date of the decision is the relevant date.

 7. We referred to paragraph 42 of the determination  in  which  the  Judge
    carefully considers the ten year point but finds that  because  of  the
    five months the Appellant was not legally in the  United  Kingdom,  the
    application does not meet the terms of the Rules.

 8. We also asked the representative if the Appellant has  always  been  in
    the United Kingdom as a student and he said she  was  a  student  until
    2012 and then was granted leave as a post study worker.  He referred us
    to the appellant's immigration history at paragraphs 5  to  10  of  the
    determination.  This states that from 2011 until 2013 the Appellant was
    a post study work migrant.

 9. The Presenting Officer submitted that the grounds  of  application  are
    only a disagreement with the outcome of the Appeal.  He submitted  that
    the said case of FD is a case under the EEA Regulations as amended  and
    is therefore not an authority for this Appeal.

10. He referred us to paragraph 40 of  the  determination  submitting  that
    there is an error in this paragraph but that it is only a slip  by  the
    Judge.  Instead of saying paragraph 276ADE he should have  referred  to
    paragraph 276 of HC395.

11. The Presenting Officer referred to paragraph 42  of  the  determination
    and the freestanding Article 8 claim.  He referred  to  proportionality
    and submitted that the Appellant has factors in her favour, in that she
    can speak English and has been in the  United  Kingdom  for  over  nine
    years.  He submitted that the Judge weighed against that the fact  that
    there are no  compelling  circumstances  and  that  ten  years  is  not
    determinative.  He submitted that there are  no  cultural  reasons  why
    this Appellant should remain in  the  United  Kingdom  and  if  she  is
    returned to Malawi this will not result  in  a  breach  of  the  United
    Kingdom's obligations under ECHR.  He  submitted  that  the  Judge  has
    taken into account the Appellant's private life in the United  Kingdom.
    We were  referred  to  page  29  of  the  Appellant's  bundle  and  the
    chronology.  He submitted that the appellant studied and attained a  BA
    in Business Studies and then obtained post study  work.   He  submitted
    that she has achieved what she came to the United Kingdom for  but  she
    is now saying she should get discretionary leave to remain  because  of
    her work and her studies.  He submitted that there is  nothing  in  the
    determination to suggest that the Judge erred  in  his  proportionality
    assessment.

12.  At  paragraph  42  the  Judge  took  into  account   the   Appellant's
    difficulties  in  2005.   These  difficulties  were  because   of   her
    pregnancy.  He submitted that because of the pregnancy the Appellant is
    looking for discretion.  He submitted  that  at  paragraph  38  of  the
    determination this issue is dealt with properly by the Judge.  In  this
    paragraph the Judge asks himself whether  pregnancy  is  of  itself  an
    exceptional circumstance and refers to  the  fact  that  there  was  no
    medical evidence relating to  complications  in  the  pregnancy  so  no
    evidence was available for consideration.  He found that an application
    for indefinite leave to remain, where the Appellant  is  relying  on  a
    period  of  time  when  she  no  longer  had  leave,  is  in  his  view
    insufficient and that  pregnancy  alone  would  not  be  sufficient  to
    justify departing from the Rules.

13. The Presenting Officer referred to paragraph 42 and the fact  that  the
    Home Office accepted an application from the Appellant out of time  and
    used her discretion but  he  submitted  that  that  discretion  is  not
    relevant in this Appeal.

14. He submitted that the findings made by the Judge were open to  him  and
    there is no error of law in the determination but purely a disagreement
    with the decision.  We were asked to dismiss the Appeal.

15. The Appellant's representative submitted that the Appellant came to the
    United Kingdom  to  study  and  was  in  a  position  to  make  further
    applications.  She  obtained  leave  to  complete  her  degree  and  he
    submitted that if she had been here for ten years she would  have  been
    in  a  position  to  apply  for  settlement.   He  submitted  that  the
    documentary evidence shows that the Appellant got entry to  the  United
    Kingdom in 2004 and remained in the United Kingdom legally, apart  from
    five  months  when  the  Home  Office  applied  their  discretion.   He
    submitted that the Judge found that she had told the truth and that the
    Judge could have used his  discretion  and  granted  this  Appeal.   He
    submitted that the judge did not consider Article 8  of  ECHR  properly
    and in paragraph 42 of the determination  it  is  clear  that  all  the
    factors have not been taken into account.  He  submitted  that  as  the
    Home Office found it right to use  discretion  in  2006,  the  Tribunal
    should now use discretion to allow the Appeal  in  spite  of  the  five
    month period when the Appellant was not legally in the United Kingdom.

Determination

16. This Appellant's application does not meet the terms of the Immigration
    Rules.  The relevant date is the date of the decision and at  the  date
    of the decision the Appellant had not been in the  United  Kingdom  for
    ten years.  She had only been in the United Kingdom for nine years  and
    seven months.  She was not legally  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  five
    months between 2005 and 2006.  Discretion was used by the Respondent at
    that time and she was granted further leave  to  study.   The  decision
    today is a different matter entirely.

17. With regard to the error at paragraph 40 we find that this is a slip by
    the Judge and it does not require further consideration.

18. We find that the Judge was correct to find that  pregnancy  is  not  an
    exceptional circumstance.  It is clear  that  this  Appellant  has  not
    established ten years lawful residence and  there  are  no  exceptional
    circumstances in her application.

19. The  Appellant  has  private  life  in  the  United  Kingdom  but  when
    considering this we  have  also  to  consider  paragraph  117B  of  the
    National Immigration & Asylum  Act  NIAA  and  the  legitimate  aim  of
    immigration control which is in the  public  interest.   The  Appellant
    came to the United Kingdom to study and has now got a Bachelors  Degree
    so the reason she came to the United Kingdom has  now  been  satisfied.
    We find that the Judge was fully entitled not to exercise discretion in
    the Appellant's favour.  He has explained at paragraph 42  why  he  has
    not done this. For discretion to be exercised there would  have  to  be
    compelling reasons for Article 8 to be considered  outside  the  Rules.
    As explained in paragraph 42 that is not the case here.   There  is  no
    reason why she should not return to Malawi  as  her  family  life,  her
    child and her closest ties are there.

20. We find that the  Judge's  decision  is  correct  and  the  appellant's
    application cannot meet the terms of the Rules and  cannot  be  allowed
    under Article 8 of ECHR.  It would not be disproportionate for  her  to
    return to Malawi.


Decision

21. There is no material error of law in the Judge's determination.

22. The determination of Judge Shamash promulgated  on  11  September  2014
    must stand.




Signed        Date 16 December 2014

Designated Judge Murray
Judge of the Upper Tribunal




