
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38332/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 16 May 2016                           |On 11 August 2016                   |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     Ms
                           (anonymity ORDER MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Biggs, Counsel, instructed by Mayfair
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Malaysia born on [ ]  1960.   A  decision
    was made by the respondent on 8 September 2014 to refuse to  issue  the
    appellant a derivative residence card pursuant to regulations  15A  and
    18A of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006  ("the
    EEA Regulations").

 2. The appellant's appeal against that  decision  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge James ("the FtJ") on 30 July 2015  whereby  she  allowed
    the  appeal.   The  respondent  appealed  against  that  decision   and
    following a hearing on 12 February 2016 Upper Tribunal Judge  Pinkerton
    ("the UTJ") found an error of law in the decision of the  FtJ  and  set
    her decision aside.  To summarise, the UTJ concluded that the  FtJ  had
    not reasoned, or sufficiently reasoned, how the appellant  is  able  to
    satisfy the requirements of reg 15A(4A) of  the  EEA  Regulations.   He
    referred to the decision in Ayinde and Thinjom (Carers  -  Reg.  15A  -
    Zambrano) [2015] UKUT 560 (IAC).

 3. The appeal then came before me for the re-making of the  decision.   In
    the error of law decision at [10], the UTJ said as follows in terms  of
    what findings, if any, should be preserved:

         "Mr Biggs submitted that the findings should be preserved and  this
         was agreed by Mr Staunton.  Of necessity it seems to me that  those
         agreed findings are limited in the sense of those relating  to  the
         appellant's  personal   circumstances,   the   sponsor's   personal
         circumstances, and the family history.  There can be  no  agreement
         in  relation  to  findings  that  were   insufficiently   reasoned,
         particularly as identified above."

 4. There was some measure of disagreement between the parties before me in
    terms of the  effect  of  the  UTJ's  decision  relating  to  preserved
    findings.  I consider that matter further below, after setting out what
    the factual findings of  the  FtJ  were.   I  heard  oral  evidence  as
    follows.

    The oral evidence

 5. The appellant said in examination-in-chief that her mother had lost her
    husband and son.  She, the appellant, had been with her since childhood
    and her mother had counted on her since she had grown up  and  matured.
    Her mother is very attached to her.  They have such a strong bond.  The
    appellant's two elder sisters left Malaysia in their  teens,  which  is
    why her mother is very attached to her, the appellant.  The appellant's
    younger sister is disabled.  She is the "last pillar" for  her  mother,
    after she lost her husband and son.  Her mother feels  that  her  world
    has crumbled.

 6. Her son was her only son and there is a big hole in her life  now  that
    he is no longer around.  When he was alive he was the main carer but in
    terms of her mother's personal needs,  she  assisted  in  attending  to
    matters that he could not.  So far as reliance on  state  provision  or
    care is concerned, her mother is not one of those who  seeks  benefits.
    She feels that if she is here and has medical treatment  she  would  be
    looked after.  She has a pension here.  It is not  the  case  that  her
    mother would be adequately cared for if she,  the  appellant,  was  not
    able to live in the UK.  She would not be adequately cared for in terms
    of her being taken to hospital appointments or in terms of her personal
    care.

 7. Having been referred to [22] of the FtJ's decision she  said  that  she
    agreed that Social Services are reliant on the care  that  they  (as  a
    family) provide.  They do not provide daily meals.  Her mother is  very
    religious and only  eats  vegetarian  meals.   Frozen  meals  that  are
    provided from outside contain eggs but she does not eat eggs.   She  is
    more of a vegan.  Her mother offers freshly cooked meals to "the deity"
    at mealtimes and carers cannot provide that.

 8. As found by the FtJ, there were  problems  with  washing  and  personal
    hygiene.

 9. Her mother would not be able to live on her own if she were not  there.
    She is registered blind and has a lot of  medical  complications.   She
    values her dignity and  had  heard  stories  of  elderly  people  being
    abused.  Her father had not been cared for properly.  Her mother  could
    not be on her own.  She would have to leave the country with  her,  the
    appellant.  In residential care she would not get the support  provided
    by the appellant.

10. In terms of whether her mother would choose to be in  residential  care
    or leave with the appellant, she said that her mother would reluctantly
    choose to go with her as she could not survive without her.  Her mother
    is emotionally dependent on her as well as dependent  on  her  for  her
    care.  The council in Warrington said that they could not  provide  the
    care that she provides.  They said that they could only  provide  basic
    microwave meals.

11. In cross-examination she said that her mother came to the UK  in  2004.
    The last time she went to Malaysia, she thought,  was  in  2006.   They
    have no close family in Malaysia and no property.  It is true that  her
    mother is quite heavily reliant on the NHS.

12. She sees a doctor when she needs a check-up, which  is  about  twice  a
    month.  Her GP is five minutes away by  car  and  the  hospital  twenty
    minutes by car.  The council are going to put in a lift at her mother's
    property.  At the moment she walks on her hands to  go  upstairs.   She
    receives attendance allowance and a state pension.  They do not receive
    carer's allowance.

13. In Malaysia there is free medical treatment for locals  but  she  would
    not be able to  obtain  it  because  she  is  a  foreigner.   She,  the
    appellant, is herself 55 years of age and she needs to look  after  her
    mother 24 hours a day.

14. As to whether because she has NHS support in  the  UK,  carers  and  no
    property in Malaysia she would in reality decide to stay in the UK, the
    appellant said that for her mother, she is her life, repeating that she
    is very emotionally attached to her having lost her son and husband.

15. It is true, as found by the  FtJ,  that  she  had  cancelled  the  care
    provided by the local authority because the carers used to stand around
    and do nothing and her mother used to have to bathe herself.   She  got
    new carers each time.  Whatever they do they do it together.  If she is
    unwell, her mother provides support for her.  They provide support  for
    each other.

16. If she were not around, the quality of  care  provided  to  her  mother
    would not be as good.  It would shorten her life and she would not  get
    the care that she provides  her.   She  had  complained  to  the  local
    authority about the care provided.

17. In re-examination, asked again whether if she had to leave the UK  what
    her mother would do, she said that her mother would  follow  her.   She
    was very sure about that.

18. In examination-in-chief Dalbit Kaur adopted her witness statement.  She
    said that her daughter is her life.  She looks  after  her,  cooks  for
    her, bathes her and  does  everything  for  her.   She  gives  her  her
    medication.

19. If her daughter had to leave the UK, her daughter would not survive  in
    Malaysia.  "They" would force her to go with her.   The  government  is
    saying that she should go with her.  However, she is a British national
    and why should she leave the country?  There is no way that they  could
    survive in Malaysia because they have no house and would  have  nothing
    to eat.  She is very happy in the UK, and has all facilities here.  The
    carers only come for half an hour a day, however.  One day a  different
    one would arrive.  She does not understand them as they speak English.

20. She had thought about what would happen if her  daughter  was  made  to
    leave the UK.  She would not like her daughter to go  to  Malaysia  and
    she would not want to go there either.  They should stay here, as  what
    else would they do.  After the question was repeated she said that  she
    would have to leave the country.  However, she said that it  is  an  18
    hour journey and she could  not  sit  for  that  long.   Who  would  be
    responsible for her if something happened to her?

21. In answer to my question on this issue, as to whether if  her  daughter
    had to leave the UK she would stay in the UK or go with her,  she  said
    that she was not happy to go there but as a last resort she would  have
    to go because she could not leave her daughter on her own.

22. In cross-examination she agreed that the reason she would choose to  go
    back to Malaysia with her daughter was because she was worried for  her
    welfare.  Her daughter had nowhere to live and no means of  subsistence
    or maintenance.

23. In terms of help she is getting from the NHS, she said  that  she  sees
    her doctor sometimes three times a week, sometimes more or  less.   She
    agreed that her house was going to be adapted for her.  It is true that
    the doctor and the hospital are close to where she is and she  receives
    medication.  She  accepted  that  she  did  not  pay  for  her  medical
    treatment.  As to whether she would therefore be prepared to  give  all
    that up and start again in a country where she had no property, if  her
    daughter were sent back, she asked what  else  she  could  do.   For  a
    mother her child is so important.  Her son had died and it would not be
    easy to part with her daughter.  Her son's body was brought to  the  UK
    and cremated here.  Her daughter is still alive and she could not  part
    with her.

24. In answer to my questions she said that she wants to stay in the UK but
    there should be someone to look after her.  Her daughter cares for her.
     At first her son looked after her.  Her daughter  then  accepted  full
    responsibility from him.

25. In further cross-examination she said that it was true that she stopped
    the care provided by Social Services because  they  did  not  wash  her
    properly.  That is also why her daughter took over her care.

    Submissions

26. Mr Kotas submitted that the appellant's circumstances are on all  fours
    with the appellants in Ayinde and Thinjom.  He relied on  the  decision
    in MA and SM (Zambrano: EU children outside EU) Iran [2013] UKUT 380 to
    the effect that the right of residence is a  right  to  reside  in  the
    territory of the EU but not a right to any particular quality  of  life
    or standard of living.  If the appellant's mother were alone in the  UK
    the local authority would have to fulfil its statutory duty and provide
    care for her.  Various aspects of the decision in  Ayinde  and  Thinjom
    were relied on.  In particular it was submitted that  the  Tribunal  is
    entitled to look critically at a claim that a person will be forced  to
    leave the EU because of a refusal of leave to remain for  the  person's
    carer.  It was submitted that it was "far-fetched" to contend that  the
    appellant's mother would be forced to go with the appellant to Malaysia
    bearing in mind the availability of services to her where she lives  in
    the UK, with her GP and the hospital very close by.   In  Malaysia,  as
    was said in evidence, the family have no property and  the  appellant's
    mother would have no access to benefits.

27. It was also to be remembered that it was  insufficient  for  it  to  be
    argued that there would be a disparity in the quality of care were  the
    appellant's mother to remain in the  UK  without  the  appellant.   The
    appellant's mother stopped the carers attending her.

28. Although the outcome of an Article 8 claim might be different,  Article
    8 is not available to the appellant in this appeal, it was submitted.

29. Mr Biggs accepted that this was not an Article 8 case, having regard to
    the decision in Amirteymour and  others  (EEA  appeals;  human  rights)
    [2015] UKUT 00466 (IAC).

30. So far as reg 15A(4A) is concerned,  'unable  to  reside'  requires  an
    assessment  of  whether  the  substance  of  the  EU  rights  would  be
    destroyed.  That involves a qualitative assessment  and  is  consistent
    with the decision in Hines v London Borough of  Lambeth  [2014]  1  WLR
    4112.  In this case, the appellant's mother  has  particular  religious
    and physical needs. She would be required to go into  residential  care
    and her son and husband have died.  It was conceded  however,  that  it
    was decided in Ayinde  and  Thinjom  that  it  was  not  a  qualitative
    assessment that was required.

31. Mr Biggs relied on Mr Kotas'  acceptance  of  the  credibility  of  the
    witnesses. Although it was argued for the respondent that that does not
    dispose of the issue of whether the appellant's mother  would  in  fact
    leave, the appellant's mother would have to remain in  the  UK  without
    the appellant, with no family support and with the cultural issues that
    have been described.  It is true that in having to leave the  UK,  life
    in Malaysia would be less than  ideal.   It  was  a  question  for  the
    Tribunal as to which the appellant's mother would choose.  She said  in
    evidence that she would leave.  She is an  elderly  woman,  is  plainly
    very dignified and has said that for her daughter she would  leave.  It
    was submitted that I did not have to accept  that  that  would  be  her
    reason for leaving but the fact is that she said she would  leave.   As
    was said in Ayinde and Thinjom at [55] "unable to reside" is not to  be
    taken literally.

    The FtJ's findings

32. At [9] the FtJ said that it was accepted by  the  respondent  that  the
    appellant's sister, MK, who suffers from spina  bifida,  is  unable  to
    care for their mother.  In a series of findings from [12]  -  [18]  the
    FtJ concluded that another sister, MB, and a further  sister,  JK,  are
    unable to care for their mother because of health  issues  and  matters
    relating to domestic violence which have involved the courts.  The  FtJ
    found that the appellant, her  mother,  and  sister  MK  were  credible
    witnesses in those respects.  No issue is taken as to those findings on
    behalf of the respondent.

33. So far as the appellant's mother is concerned, it was found that she is
    a widow aged 84 whose husband and son had died and are  buried  in  the
    UK.  She visits their graves often  and  offers  prayers  as  a  devout
    orthodox Sikh.  The appellant's mother's initial  carer  was  her  only
    son, SS, who came to the UK in 2005 in order to care  for  his  mother,
    and again in 2007.  However, he died in Malaysia on 8 December 2012 and
    his remains were repatriated to the UK for burial.  During  the  period
    that her son SS cared for her, the appellant in any event attended  her
    mother to provide intimate personal care that her  son  was  unable  to
    provide.

34. So far as the appellant's mother's health problems are  concerned,  the
    FtJ made a number of findings about those at [21].  The evidence before
    her included various reports and  documentary  evidence.   She  uses  a
    walking stick and Zimmer frame in the house and a  wheelchair  outside.
    She has memory problems and short-term memory loss.  She  needs  to  be
    assisted to take her daily  medication  and  her  partial  eyesight  is
    deteriorating.  The assistance  with  medication  is  undertaken  by  a
    family member.  She needs help to shower and dress, being unable to  do
    so independently.  She requires a carer  to  apply  medication  to  her
    arms, legs and feet.  The  professional  care  worker  is  required  to
    dispose of incontinence pads in the outside bin.  The carer also  needs
    to prepare and cook food for the appellant's mother  according  to  her
    religious vegetarian dietary beliefs  and  prayer  times,  being  three
    times a day.  The carer is needed to wash, dry and  iron  her  clothes,
    and this is undertaken by "the  family  member".   Various  adaptations
    have been made to the  appellant's  mother's  home,  including  to  the
    shower, toilet and stairs.  She needs help using the stairs, as well as
    the shower, and also needs help getting up in the morning.  The  family
    help with her shopping and the paying of bills and bank transactions.

35. At [22] the FtJ found that there was  a  significant  gap  between  the
    services that are provided by the local authority and what is  provided
    by the family, in  terms  of  the  help  provided  by  the  appellant's
    mother's son  when  he  was  alive.   Since  his  death  the  appellant
    undertakes all these tasks, as well as the more intimate personal  care
    tasks.  The local authority care  package  is  highly  reliant  on  the
    family providing intensive daily care in order  fully  to  address  the
    appellant's mother's care needs.  It is the appellant's mother's choice
    that her daughter cares for her and has done for a  significant  number
    of years.

36.  Other  health  issues  suffered  by  the  appellant's  mother  include
    diabetes, hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, heart failure, chronic  kidney
    disease, cerebrovascular disease, osteoarthritis,  peripheral  vascular
    disease, and she  is  partially  sighted.   She  takes  nine  different
    medications and the medication regime requires significant input from a
    sighted person who reads and can translate into Punjabi.  The appellant
    acts as her mother's interpreter  for  her  appointments  at  the  GP's
    surgery and the like.

37. Since the death  of  her  son  it  was  noted  by  the  community  care
    specialists that the appellant's mother lacks motivation and relies  on
    her daughter, the appellant, for emotional support.

38. During her oral evidence the appellant's mother confirmed that she  was
    doubly incontinent.  At [32] the FtJ explained in detail  the  problems
    that that presented in terms of the input from the carers and the  need
    for the appellant ultimately to undertake the  intimate  care  for  her
    mother that was required.

39. At [33] the FtJ said that the  appellant's  mother  is  in  receipt  of
    mobility payments and attendance allowances due  to  her  disabilities.
    She would lose these payments should she leave the UK.

40. She also found that it would not be an adequate alternative arrangement
    to expect the appellant's mother to be placed in residential care.  Nor
    would it be appropriate for her to live with her  two  other  daughters
    who are in a violent relationship with  a  convicted  criminal  and  in
    respect of whom the appellant's mother has previously taken out a  non-
    molestation order from the courts.

41. At [40] she found that the quality  and  standard  of  the  appellant's
    mother's life would  be  seriously  impaired  by  the  removal  of  the
    appellant from the UK.

    Conclusions

42. Initially, Mr Kotas suggested that the preserved  findings  should  not
    extend to conclusions as to the assistance that could  be  provided  by
    other family members, apart from the appellant.  It was submitted  that
    UTJ Pinkerton would have expressly stated that no  other  person  could
    look after her if that was to be a preserved finding.

43. However, it was accepted that there was no direct  challenge  to  those
    findings on behalf of the respondent.  Indeed, it is to  be  remembered
    that Judge Pinkerton said that the agreed findings are limited to those
    relating  to  the  appellant's  personal  circumstances,  her  mother's
    personal circumstances and the family  history.   He  said  that  there
    could be no agreement in relation to findings that were  insufficiently
    reasoned "particularly as identified above".  It seems to me that  what
    Judge  Pinkerton  meant  by  "particularly"  as  identified  above  was
    'specifically' those identified above.  The insufficient reasoning  was
    confined to the conclusion that the appellant's mother would be  unable
    to reside in the UK.  Nothing else is identified in  Judge  Pinkerton's
    decision  as  being  a  matter   that   is   insufficiently   reasoned.
    Furthermore, at [10] it is clear that the  respondent's  representative
    before Judge Pinkerton agreed that the  findings  should  be  preserved
    (except as indicated by Judge Pinkerton).

44. The findings of the FtJ that I have set  out  at  [32]-[41]  above  are
    those which are the preserved findings.  I have not  included  in  that
    the conclusion that the appellant's mother would not be able to  reside
    in the UK if the appellant had to leave.

45. So far as the evidence before me is concerned, it was  accepted  by  Mr
    Kotas that the appellant and her mother gave credible evidence.

46. So far as material, reg 15A of the EEA Regulations provides as follows:

         "15A.    (1)  A person ('P') who is not an exempt  person  and  who
                  satisfies the criteria in paragraph (2), (3), (4), (4A) or
                  (5) of this regulation is entitled to a  derivative  right
                  to reside in the United Kingdom for as long as P satisfies
                  the relevant criteria.

                  ...

              (4A)    P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if -

                  (a)  P is the primary carer of a British citizen ('the
                      relevant British citizen');

                  (b)  the relevant British citizen is residing in the
                      United Kingdom; and

                  (c)  the relevant British citizen would be unable to
                      reside in the UK or in another EEA State if P were
                      required to leave.

                  ...

              (7) P is to be regarded  as  a  'primary  carer'  of  another
                  person if

                  (a)  P is a direct relative or a legal guardian of that
                      person; and

                  (b)  P -

                      (i)  is the person who has primary responsibility for
                           that person's care; or

                      (ii) shares equally the responsibility for that
                           person's care with one other person who is not an
                           exempt person."

47. Under reg 18A the Secretary of State  is  to  issue  a  person  with  a
    derivative residence card on application  and  production  of  a  valid
    passport and proof  that  the  applicant  has  a  derivative  right  of
    residence under reg 15A.

48. The critical question in this appeal is whether the appellant's  mother
    would be "unable" to reside in the UK if the appellant were required to
    leave.

49. In Ayinde and Thinjom it was said that the effect of reg  15A  is  that
    the carer, that is to say the appellant, must establish as a fact  that
    the British citizen would be forced  to  leave  the  territory  of  the
    European Union.  That requirement is not met by an assumption that  the
    citizen will leave and does not involve a consideration of  whether  it
    would be reasonable  for  the  appellant/carer  to  leave  the  UK.   A
    comparison of standards of living between the UK  and  the  destination
    country is only material in the context of whether the British  citizen
    will leave the UK.  It was also said that a critical examination of the
    contention that the British citizen  will  leave  is  required  if  the
    benefits the person currently receives in the UK  are  unlikely  to  be
    matched in the destination country (see [61]).

50. Mr Kotas relied on the decision in Ayinde and Thinjom, submitting  that
    it would be far-fetched to say that the  appellant's  mother  would  be
    forced to go to Malaysia with her.  The  appellant's  mother  would  in
    effect have to "start again" in terms  of  seeking  medical  and  other
    care.  Furthermore, the appellant's mother does not have a right to any
    particular quality of life or any particular standard of living, as was
    made clear in MA and SM.

51. Although Mr Biggs submitted that Hines  v  London  Borough  of  Lambeth
    endorsed a qualitative assessment,  he  accepted  that  in  Ayinde  and
    Thinjom that was not found to be the case.

52. It seems to me that a qualitative assessment cannot be determinative of
    an appeal of this sort, and certainly not on the facts of this  appeal.
    The differential in the standard of care that could  be  provided  may,
    depending on the facts, be a relevant consideration.  Indeed,  arguably
    contrary to Mr Biggs' submissions, the Tribunal in Ayinde  and  Thinjom
    concluded that the greater the differential  the  more  critically  one
    would need to examine a claim that a British citizen would leave the UK
    if  the  standard  of  care  in  the  destination  country   would   be
    significantly lower.

53. Nevertheless, in a sense once it was conceded that the  evidence  given
    to me was credible, the answer to the appeal is clear.  The appellant's
    mother said in evidence that she could not be without her daughter.  In
    other words, if her daughter left she would leave.

54. Of course, the phrase "unable to reside in  the  UK"  cannot  literally
    mean unable because a British citizen cannot be required to  leave  the
    UK as a matter of law.  "Unable  to  reside"  means  that  the  British
    citizen would, as a matter of fact, be compelled to leave.

55. As is clear from my summary of the evidence,  whilst  it  was  apparent
    from the appellant's evidence that her view was that her mother  would,
    albeit reluctantly, choose to go with her to Malaysia, the  appellant's
    mother's evidence required some exploration in order to understand  her
    view on whether she would stay or go.  I do not consider that that  was
    because she did not have a strong view on the matter, or that  she  was
    being deliberately vague or evasive.  It was  my  impression  that  the
    appellant's mother simply found it  almost  impossible  to  contemplate
    living without her daughter.  I do not consider it necessary to resolve
    the issue of whether she would  feel  compelled  to  leave  because  of
    concern for her daughter or because of her need for her daughter's care
    and the emotional attachment between them, or a combination of the two.
     It is perfectly possible for a person to be unable to reside in the UK
    in accordance with reg 15A(4A) for more than one reason.

56. Aside from her concern for  her  daughter's  welfare,  the  appellant's
    mother's circumstances  are  inextricably  linked  with  the  death  in
    particular of her son, who used to provide care for her,  although  not
    the intimate care that she has come to need  and  which  the  appellant
    provides.

57. My impression of the appellant's mother's evidence  was  that  she  was
    aware of the state  provision  that  she  is  getting  in  the  UK,  in
    particular in terms of medical care, but her desire not to be separated
    from her daughter was paramount.

58. It is also clear that the appellant's mother does not want to leave the
    UK and feels that she should not have to. But I am  entirely  satisfied
    that if the appellant was removed from the UK  the  appellant's  mother
    would inevitably leave with her.  It is for those  reasons  that  I  am
    satisfied that  the  conditions  in  reg  15A(4A)  are  satisfied.   In
    particular, I am satisfied that the appellant's mother would be  unable
    to reside in the UK if the appellant were required to leave.   That  is
    the clear import  of  the  appellant's  and  the  appellant's  mother's
    evidence.  It is also consistent with the (preserved) findings of  fact
    made by the FtJ, including the absolute impossibility  of  there  being
    any other family member to care for her in the UK, given  the  personal
    circumstances of the appellant's sisters.

59. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the appellant has established that she
    is entitled to a derivative right of residence, and thus to  be  issued
    with a derivative residence card.

    Decision

60. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  Its decision having been set aside, the decision is
    re-made, allowing the appeal under the EEA Regulations.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            9/08/16
