
[pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Ia/38491/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 March 2016                              |On 21 March 2016              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                               SAEED MUZAFFAR
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss. L. Marshall-Bain, Counsel instructed by Gull
                    Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Miss. C. Johnstone, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Kirvan, promulgated on 5 May 2015, in which he dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision to  refuse  to
    grant a residence card as confirmation of his right to  reside  in  the
    United  Kingdom  under  the  Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006 (the "Regulations").




 2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


    "The grounds point to use of an IS96 where the  Respondent  suspects  a
    marriage of convenience and argue failure to take account of regulation
    5(7)(a) 2006 Regulations which treat an EEA national as  continuing  to
    exercise Treaty rights where periods of inactivity are for reasons  not
    of the person's own making.  Although there is no record in the judge's
    notes of this having been argued in terms at the hearing, the point  is
    arguable and material.  However no clear findings are made in paragraph
    65 on the issues raised by the Respondent  regarding  evidence  of  the
    Sponsor's previous employment, which may mean that the whole  issue  of
    employment needs to be redecided."


 3. At the hearing I heard  oral  submissions  from  both  representatives,
    following which I reserved my decision.


Submissions


 4. Miss. Marshall-Bain relied on the grounds of appeal  and  the  skeleton
    submissions.  The judge had failed  to  take  into  account  regulation
    5(7)(a).  However she accepted that this point had not been  raised  at
    the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.  She further submitted that the
    judge had considered whether the Sponsor  had  been  exercising  Treaty
    rights at the wrong date: the relevant date was not  the  date  of  the
    hearing but the date of the application.  It had been conceded  at  the
    hearing by the Appellant's representative  that  the  Sponsor  was  not
    exercising Treaty rights at the date of the hearing  (paragraph  [29]).
    This point had not been raised either in the grounds of  appeal  or  in
    the skeleton submissions.  Miss. Johnstone objected to  anything  being
    added to the grounds of appeal.  I asked  Miss.  Marshall-Bain  whether
    she was seeking to amend the grounds of appeal,  and  she  stated  that
    there was no reason why this point had  not  been  raised  earlier.   I
    stated that I was going to proceed with the grounds of appeal  as  they
    were and would not be taking any new grounds.


 5. Miss. Marshall-Bain accepted that Article 8 was not relevant,  although
    this is referred to in the  grounds  of  appeal  and  in  the  skeleton
    submissions.


 6. In relation to whether regulation 5(7)(a)  should  have  been  applied,
    Miss. Marshall-Bain submitted that the rights of member citizens should
    be protected and that in order to do this it was necessary to  go  back
    to the Directive itself.  It was unfair that the Sponsor could not work
    on the basis that the  Respondent  considered  the  marriage  to  be  a
    marriage of convenience.  The rights of the Sponsor as at the  date  of
    the application should continue uninterrupted.


 7. Miss. Johnstone relied on the Rule 24 response.  Regulation 5(7)(a) was
    not a stand-alone provision.  It had not been argued before the  First-
    tier Tribunal that regulation 5(7)(a) was relevant.  I was referred  to
    the grounds of appeal before the First-tier  Tribunal.   She  submitted
    that therefore it could not be a material error of law.   It  had  been
    conceded that the Sponsor was not exercising Treaty rights at the  date
    of the hearing.


 8. Miss. Marshall-Bain submitted in response that in  paragraph  [64]  the
    judge should have considered whether  or  not  the  Appellant  met  the
    requirements of regulation  5(7)(a)  as  being  the  true  and  correct
    position.  That was where "worker" was defined.  She submitted that the
    error of law was in paragraph [64]  where  the  judge  found  that  the
    Sponsor had not established that she was  a  worker  exercising  Treaty
    rights but without referring back to the specific regulation.


Error of law


 9. In paragraph [29] the judge states:


    "At the commencement of the hearing it was conceded that at the date of
    the hearing the Appellant's EEA Sponsor, Mrs Ruta Janutyte,  could  not
    qualify as a person who was exercising Treaty rights by working in  the
    United Kingdom because on 6th March she had been served with a document
    by Home Office Immigration Enforcement with a notification of temporary
    admission to a person liable to be  detained.   It  appears  that  this
    document was issued following the interview that is referred to  above.
    It was a condition that she did not work."


10. In paragraph [64] the judge states:


    "However, the Appeal as at today's  date  cannot  succeed  because  the
    Appellant's EEA Sponsor, Ruta Janutyte, has not been  working  in  fact
    since the time of  the  marriage  interview  because  she  was  put  on
    temporary admission restrictions which included a  condition  that  she
    should not work or engage in business.  Consequently, at  the  date  of
    the hearing I have to find that the Appellant has not established  that
    she is a worker exercising Treaty rights in the United Kingdom."


11. It was accepted at the hearing that it had not been put  to  the  judge
    that regulation 5(7)(a) was  relevant.   This  regulation  is  entitled
    "Worker or self-employed person who has ceased  activity".   Regulation
    5(1) provides that "in these  Regulations,  "worker  or  self-employed
    person who has ceased activity" means an EEA national who satisfies the
    conditions in paragraph (2),  (3),  (4)  or  (5)."   It  has  not  been
    submitted that the Sponsor satisfies the conditions  in  any  of  these
    paragraphs.


12. It was submitted that the judge should have applied regulation  5(7)(a)
    despite the fact  that  it  was  not  brought  to  his  attention,  nor
    submitted that the Appellant was exercising Treaty rights  through  the
    application of this regulation.  It provides as follows:


    "(7) For the purposes of this regulation-

       (a) periods of inactivity for reasons not of the person's own
       making;

       (b) periods of inactivity due to illness or accident; and

       (c) in the case of a worker, periods of involuntary unemployment
       duly recorded by the relevant employment office,

    shall be treated as periods of activity as a  worker  or  self-employed
    person, as the case may be."

13. It is clear from the wording at the start of regulation 5(7) that it is
    only applicable for the purposes of regulation 5.  It is not  a  stand-
    alone provision.  Therefore in order  for  the  Appellant  to  rely  on
    regulation  5(7),  he  must  submit  that  the  Sponsor  meets  one  of
    regulation 5(2), (3), (4) or (5), but it has not  been  submitted  that
    this is the case.


14. It was not submitted either at  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  or  at  the
    hearing before me, that the Sponsor  was  a  "worker  or  self-employed
    person who has ceased activity" by reference to regulation 5.  From the
    evidence provided, the Sponsor does not meet any of the requirements in
    regulation 5(2), (3), (4) or  (5).   These  apply  when  a  person  has
    retired, when he has a permanent incapacity to work, and  where  he  is
    active in another EEA state but returns to the United Kingdom as a rule
    at least once a week.  There was no suggestion that the Sponsor  fitted
    any of these descriptions.


15. It was not put to the judge that regulation 5(7)(a)  was  relevant.   I
    find that it is not a stand-alone provision, and has no application  to
    the Appellant's appeal.  I find that the decision does not involve  the
    making of an error of law.


Notice of Decision

The decision does not involve the making of an error of law  and  I  do  not
set it aside.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


Signed                                  Date 14 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

