
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38513/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 March 2016                               |On 8 April 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                               shabana naureen
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Mohammad, Counsel, instructed by Legis Chambers
For the Respondent:    Miss J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge J W H Law (the judge), promulgated on 3 March  2015,  in
    which he dismissed the appeal on all grounds.  That appeal was in  turn
    against the Respondent's decision dated 28 September 2014 to remove the
    Appellant from the United Kingdom by way of directions under section 10
    of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.


 2. On 17 February 2014 the  Appellant  had  made  an  application  to  the
    Respondent based  upon  Article  8.   That  application  was  initially
    refused without an accompanying right of  appeal.   A  judicial  review
    claim was made and eventually proceedings were compromised  by  way  of
    consent.  The  Respondent  agreed   to   reconsider   the   Appellant's
    application, which she duly did and the appealable decision referred to
    previously was made. It was said by the Respondent that  the  Appellant
    could not meet any of the Rules relating to Article 8  and  that  there
    were no other exceptional circumstances in her case. The Respondent had
    relied upon a conviction of the Appellant in  respect  of  shoplifting.
    It was said that this had a bearing  on  the  suitability  requirements
    under the relevant provisions of the Immigration Rules.

The judge's decision
 3. At paragraph 10 the judge records a concession made by  the  Presenting
    Officer, namely that the suitability issue was not relevant because the
    Appellant had not in fact made an application under Appendix FM to  the
    Rules but rather an  application  outside  of  the  Rules.   The  judge
    himself went on to find that in any event a conditional discharge (that
    being the sentence for the shoplifting) was not  a  conviction  for  an
    offence, and he relied on the Tribunal decision in Omenna  [2014]  UKUT
    314 (IAC).


 4. The judge considers the Article 8 case within the scope of the Rules at
    paragraphs 26 and 27, concluding that the Appellant could  not  satisfy
    Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE. There is a specific and clear  finding
    that there were  no  "very  significant  obstacles"  to  the  Appellant
    reintegrating into Pakistani society.

 5. The judge then goes on to consider the claim outside of the Rules.   At
    paragraph 29 he finds that the Appellant had  a  private  life  in  the
    United Kingdom, albeit to a  somewhat  limited  extent.   A  number  of
    findings of fact are made at paragraph 35 relating to  the  Appellant's
    situation here and  also  in  Pakistan  (both  in  terms  of  her  life
    previously and if she were to return to that country).

 6. Progressing through the well-known Razgar methodology the judge arrives
    at the proportionality issue.  Whilst not specifically  mentioning  the
    provisions of Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002, he goes through a  number  of  relevant  factors  and  ultimately
    concludes that the Appellant's Article 8 claim  outside  of  the  Rules
    failed.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission
 7. The Appellant's grounds are limited to two points.  Firstly, it is said
    that the judge in fact relied  upon  the  Appellant's  conviction  when
    making his decision, and this  was  an  error  given  the  Respondent's
    concession  on  the  point.   Secondly,  it  is  said  that  the  judge
    misdirected himself in respect of section 117B of the 2002 Act  because
    the Appellant had not been in the United  Kingdom  unlawfully.   It  is
    said in the grounds that there was  section  3C  leave  in  the  United
    Kingdom and that this had been "restored" because  of  judicial  review
    proceedings.


 8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge McDade on
    20 May 2015.


The hearing before me
 9. Mr Mohammad relied on the two grounds  of  appeal.  He  suggested  that
    whilst not explicitly referred to by the judge, the conviction had been
    implicitly relied upon when making the  assessment  of  the  Article  8
    claim outside of the Rules.  Mr Mohammad  made  the  additional  points
    that the Appellant had worked in this country, was well integrated into
    United Kingdom society, and that the application should succeed.


10. I did not call on Miss Isherwood for submissions.


Decision on error of law

11. In my view there are clearly no material errors of law in  the  judge's
    decision.


12. The first ground is entirely misconceived.  All the judge was doing  in
    paragraph 4 of his decision was to set out  the  Respondent's  case  as
    expressed in the Reasons for Refusal Letter.  At paragraph 10 the judge
    rightly notes the Presenting Officer's concession  and  concludes  that
    the criminality point had been erroneously relied on all along  in  any
    event.  There  is  absolutely  no  indication  thereafter  (express  or
    otherwise) that the judge has in any way relied on the conviction  when
    assessing the Appellant's Article 8 claim.

13. Paragraph 4 the grounds of appeal is  equally  misconceived.  The  last
    period of leave of the Appellant expired on 2 March 2012.  She  had  at
    that point made an in-time application for an  extension  (this  having
    occurred on 22 February 2012).  However, this application  was  refused
    by the Respondent and her subsequent appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissed by Judge Bagral in 2013.  In light of this the Appellant  was
    in fact an overstayer as of 2 March 2012.  She has never  been  granted
    any leave thereafter.  in paragraph 14 the judge correctly states  that
    the Appellant had not had leave since March 2012.  He took into account
    the precarious nature of her status even when she  did  have  leave  in
    this country.

14. In all other respects the judge's decision is entirely sound. He  makes
    relevant findings of fact supported  by  reasons,  none  of  which  are
    challenged in  the  grounds.  He  directs  himself  correctly  in  law,
    reaching sustainable conclusions on the Article 8  claim,  both  within
    the Rules and without. No other errors of law have been  identified  in
    any way either in the grounds or in the hearing before me and in  light
    of this the judge's decision stands.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                                  Date: 23 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


