
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38497/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16 December 2014                           |On 18 December 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M LEWIS


                                   Between

                             Mr KENJI YOKATACHI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Talacchi, Counsel, instructed by Farani Javid
                    Taylor Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Miss A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The History of the Appeal

1.   The Appellant,  Mr  Kenji  Yokatachi,  a  citizen  of  Japan,  appealed
    against the refusal of the Respondent to vary his  leave  to  enter  or
    remain the UK.  His ensuing appeal was heard on 20 August 2014 by Judge
    Clapham, sitting at Taylor House.  Both parties were  represented,  the
    Appellant by Mr Talacchi.  In a determination of 22, promulgated on 25,
    August 2014, the  appeal  was  dismissed  on  Article  8  human  rights
    grounds.

2.   The Appellant sought permission to appeal,  which  was  granted  on  23
    October 2014 by Judge Hollingworth, who summarised them thus:

         "The judge has not  referred  to  the  criteria  in  Razgar  before
         proceeding to consider whether there would be a breach  of  Article
         8.  An arguable error of law has arisen in relation to the  way  in
         which the judge has directed himself in these circumstances.  It is
         arguable that the proportionality exercise  has  been  affected  in
         these circumstances."

3.   In a Rule 24 response of 20  November  2014  the  Respondent  submitted
    that the judge had  directed  himself  appropriately  and,  whilst  not
    referring to Razgar,  had  at  paragraphs  18  and  19  comprehensively
    assessed proportionality.

4.   The error of law hearing took the form of  submissions,  which  I  have
    taken into account, together with the permission  application  and  the
    Rule 24 response.  I reserved my determination.

Determination

5.   The judge did not refer in his determination to Razgar, nor  articulate
    the five stage step-by-step process.  Finding at paragraph 17 that  the
    Appellant did not succeed under the Immigration Rules, he undertook  at
    paragraphs 18 and 19 a proportionality assessment.   He  clearly  found
    the existence of private life,  as  he  stated  at  paragraph  20,  and
    clearly considered the other Razgar criteria to be satisfied  in  order
    to reach the stage of assessing proportionality.

6.   At first impression the Appellant was not  therefore  disadvantaged  by
    this compressed legal process.  Mr Talacchi, however, submitted that he
    had been, because  the  way  in  which  the  judge  had  appraised  the
    Appellant's situation had led him to confine  the  Appellant's  private
    life to a matter of months spent in the UK  and  to  some  social  ties
    which he had forged there.  Had  the  judge  considered  his  situation
    holistically he would have found his private life  to  be  weighty  and
    perhaps therefore have assessed proportionality differently.

7.   To this Miss Everett responded that the judge had  taken  all  relevant
    material into account.  The Appellant's evidence was in his  statement,
    particularly at paragraphs 6 to 9, where he dealt with the abuse  which
    he  had  suffered  in  Japan.   His  evidence  was  properly  reflected
    throughout the  determination,  culminating  in  a  fair  and  balanced
    proportionality assessment at paragraphs 18 and 19.

8.   I accept the submissions of Miss Everett.  As a matter  of  law  it  is
    not necessary for a judge  to  articulate  the  Razgar  paradigm.  Most
    recently, R (on the application of Esther Ebun Oludoyi & Others) v SSHD
    (Article 8 - MM (Lebanon) and  Nagre)  IJR  [2014]  UKUT  00539  (IAC),
    revisiting Nagre, Gulshan and Shahzad, has so  held  at  paragraph  23.
    The judge found the existence of private life,  implicitly  found  that
    the  intervening  Razgar  steps  had  been   satisfied   and   assessed
    proportionality.  In  so  doing  he  took  into  account  all  relevant
    evidence  as  he  had  summarised  it  in   his   determination.    His
    proportionality assessment is fair and  balanced  and  the  conclusions
    which he reached were reasonably open to him from  the  evidence.   His
    determination does not reflect any error of law.

Decision

9.   The determination does not contain any error of law, and it upheld.



Signed        Dated: 17 December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Lewis

