
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38068/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 26 August 2014                             |On 2 October 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                       cleopatra richenda rose manning
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H Sarwar, Counsel instructed by Bassi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Hussain, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a Jamaica citizen, born on 8 March 1967.

2.   She entered the United Kingdom as  a  visitor  on  26  June  1997  with
    leave.  Further leave was granted on a number  of  occasions  until  31
    October 1999.  Thereafter, further leave to remain  was  refused  on  5
    December 2000.  The appellant applied for further leave to remain on 19
    February 2003 but  this  was  refused  on  21  November  2008.   On  14
    September 2011 the appellant was granted discretionary leave to  remain
    until 14 March 2012.

3.   On 23 February 2012 the appellant submitted an application for  further
    leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules on the basis that she had
    been in the United Kingdom for over  fourteen  years.   The  respondent
    rejected that application for the reasons as set  out  in  the  refusal
    letter dated 6 September 2013.

4.   In particular, it was said  that  the  appellant  failed  to  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules because she had
    not completed a period of ten years' lawful residence.  Indeed, she had
    been sentenced to eighteen months' imprisonment on 8 February 2008.  It
    is said that she did not meet the requirements of paragraph  276B(i)(a)
    or (b).  Neither did she meet the requirements  of  paragraph  276B(ii)
    because it would be undesirable to allow her to remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom on  the  basis  of  her  criminal  conviction.   The  grant  of
    discretionary leave had been on the basis of the best interests of  her
    daughter, Sashania.  Her circumstances  were  such  however  that  that
    daughter was now an adult.

5.   The respondent  also  considered  the  application  under  the  current
    Immigration Rules, and particularly  under  Appendix  FM  -  Section  -
    LTR.1.4 and paragraph 276ADE.  The appellant failed to meet such  Rules
    because she had not lived in the United Kingdom  continuously  for  the
    requisite period nor indeed was her presence in the UK conducive to the
    public good because of her conviction.

6.   The respondent considered Article 8 of the ECHR but did not find  there
    to be any compassionate or compelling circumstance such as to allow her
    to remain in the United Kingdom.

7.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Khan  on  9  April  2014.   In  a
    detailed judgment  the  Judge  considered  first  of  all  whether  the
    appellant met  the  requirements  of  the  old  Immigration  Rules  and
    concluded that she did not.  It was found that she did not meet the new
    Immigration  Rules  nor  were  there  any   circumstances   that   were
    exceptional or compelling as to grant the appeal on the  basis  of  her
    human rights.

8.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision  and  submitted
    detailed grounds of appeal.  Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  with
    certain caveats to that grant.

9.   Thus the matter comes before me in pursuance of that permission.

10.  It was the contention made  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  by  Mr  Sam
    Sarwar, who represents her, that because her application was  submitted
    before the coming into effect of the new Rules, her application  should
    have been considered in the light of the then Immigration Rules, and in
    particular in the light of paragraph 276B of HC395.   The  decision  in
    Edgehill  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  402  is  cited  as  authority   for   that
    proposition.

11.  Although it is accepted by Mr Sarwar that the  appellant  does  not  in
    fact meet the requirements of the old Immigration Rules  she  fails  to
    meet the requirements only by a very small margin and accordingly  that
    factor should have weighed heavily with the First-tier Tribunal  Judge,
    particularly in the assessment as to Article 8 of the ECHR.  It is also
    submitted that the Judge was wrong  to  consider  that  the  period  of
    imprisonment broke the continuity of  residence  with  the  expectation
    that the period of  residence  be  re-started  from  the  release  from
    imprisonment.

12.  The appellant was imprisoned from 8 February 2008 to 26 November  2008.
     Although she had been sentenced to a long  imprisonment  she  in  fact
    served in the order of nine months' imprisonment.  Thus  it  is  argued
    that the appellant had almost completed a period  of  lawful  residence
    from her entry in June 1997 until the imposition  of  the  sentence  in
    February 2008.

13.  I am not persuaded  that  that  is  a  correct  interpretation  of  the
    matter.  As I have indicated, the appellant had lawful  leave  from  26
    June 1997  until  5  December  2000  allowing  for  the  3C  leave  and
    thereafter there was a break  of  some  two  years  or  more  when  the
    applicant resided as an overstayer.  It was only in September 2011 that
    the appellant was granted discretionary leave to remain.

14.  Clearly therefore the appellant fell far short  of  having  ten  years'
    lawful residence.

15.  As  to  the  period  of  fourteen  years'  residence  the  sentence  of
    imprisonment did not break the continuity  but  neither  did  it  count
    towards that period.  Therefore the proper course is  to  exclude  that
    from the fourteen year period.

16.  As Mr Sarwar indicated, taking the concept of the fourteen year  period
    at the time the application was made on 23 February 2012 and  less  the
    period of time spent in custody, the appellant would have been only one
    month short of that particular period.  It is to be noted however  that
    leave was refused in December 2000 and 2008.

17.  In any event Mr Hussain, who represents the respondent, submitted  that
    because of the serious nature of the offending as  highlighted  by  the
    Judge in the determination, the appellant would undoubtedly have fallen
    to be refused on the grounds that her presence was not conducive to the
    public good.  Indeed  the  refusal  letter  makes  it  clear  that  the
    Secretary of State was satisfied that it would be undesirable  for  the
    appellant to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  on  the  basis  that  her
    personal history would not meet the requirements of paragraph 276B(ii).

18.   It  was  clear  from  the  determination  that  the  Judge   spent   a
    considerable amount of time in the determination looking at  the  issue
    as to whether or not the appellant met with the requirements of the old
    Immigration Rules which clearly she did not.

19.  Consideration was given as to whether or  not  the  appellant  met  the
    current Immigration Rules and the finding was that she did not.  It was
    not suggested before me in argument that she did.

20.  What is argued on behalf of the appellant as part  of  the  grounds  of
    appeal, is that the Judge failed  to  give  sufficient  weight  in  the
    assessment of Article 8  to  the  health  of  the  appellant  and  more
    particularly the inter-dependence between herself  and  her  daughters,
    Sashania in particular.  It is submitted that the Judge  was  wrong  to
    find that there was no evidence of family life  between  the  appellant
    and her daughter.  Accordingly the determination was defective in  that
    regard.

21.  Mr Hussain invites me to find that that was not a  criticism  that  was
    properly held against the Judge.   The  Judge  considered  the  medical
    history of the appellant, particularly in paragraphs 22 and 23  of  the
    determination and looked at the decision in Kugathas, in paragraph  24.
    It was the finding that the appellant  had  sought  to  exaggerate  the
    difficulties she would face in Jamaica and indeed he did not find  that
    the appellant was credible in her account of having no  connections  or
    ties with Jamaica.  The Judge looked at the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and her two daughters.

22.  The grounds seek to criticise the Judge's comment  that  he  found  the
    appellant's account to be grossly  exaggerated  as  a  comment  without
    reason.  It is clear, however, from  reading  the  determination  as  a
    whole that the finding as to exaggeration  in  evidence  comes  in  the
    context of the appellant claiming that she would be on the scrapheap in
    Jamaica and that disabled people would be ridiculed.  The  Judge  found
    that to be an exaggeration in all the circumstances.

23.  There was no suggestion that the Judge  failed  to  note  the  relevant
    aspects of the ill-health of the appellant.

24.  It is argued that the Judge failed to give  sufficient  weight  to  the
    family life that exists as between  the  appellant  and  her  daughter.
    Because of her ill-health  she  has  become  very  dependent  upon  her
    daughter for support by building  between  them  a  special  degree  of
    dependency.  It is contended that the Judge failed to  deal  with  that
    matter.  It is clear however that the issue of dependency was carefully
    considered by the Judge, particularly at paragraph 24.  The Judge noted
    in particular that there was no up-to-date medical evidence to say that
    the appellant's medical condition had deteriorated.  The Judge did  not
    find  there  to  be  a  special  degree  of  dependency   having   been
    established.

25.  I find, having regard to the  determination  as  a  whole,  that  those
    findings were properly open to be made  and  were  well-reasoned.   The
    Judge has paid careful note not only to the medical conditions  of  the
    appellant but, as is clear from paragraph 21, her private life as well.
     The issue of the grant of discretionary leave was also dealt  with  by
    the Judge in paragraph 26.

26.  The Judge noted  therefore  that  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the
    relevant requirements of the Immigration Rules and  no  exceptional  or
    compelling circumstances existed outside the Rules so as  to  allow  an
    appeal on that basis.

27.  It is contended that once again the  appellant  was  entitled  to  rely
    upon the case of Edgehill and expect the Judge to determine  the  issue
    of Article 8 under the law that existed prior to 2012  i.e.  apply  the
    simple five stage Razgar test.

28.  As the grounds granting  permission  make  clear  there  is  a  tension
    between the decision of Edgehill  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  402  and  that  of
    Haleemudeen [2014] EWCA Civ 558.  That seemed to indicate that  Article
    8 had to be determined as at the date of hearing in the  light  of  the
    understanding of Article 8 that was current at that time.

29.  It seems to me that it would be wholly artificial  to  seek  to  freeze
    the Article 8 rights as confined to those set out prior to  the  change
    in the Immigration Rules.  The element of family and private life is an
    ongoing  process.   It  is  understandable  therefore  that  it   falls
    generally to be determined as at the date of hearing when all  relevant
    factors can be weighed in the balance.  One such factor of course being
    the weight that should be given to the control of immigration  and  the
    desirability to remove an overstayer was someone who has  committed  an
    offence in the United Kingdom.  This is clearly not a deportation  case
    but nevertheless the Secretary of State in the refusal letter sets  out
    why it is that the further leave to remain in the United Kingdom is not
    to be granted.

30.  Clearly the health of the appellant is a significant topic as  is  also
    the fact that she has been in the United Kingdom for a  lengthy  period
    of time.   The  Judge  in  a  detailed  determination  considered  both
    matters.  The Judge did not consider that the case of  Ogundimu  [2013]
    UKUT 00060 (IAC) had an application  in  this  case  upon  the  factual
    findings that were made.

31.  Having considered with  care  the  grounds  of  appeal  that  had  been
    submitted and the oral arguments by Mr Sarwar upon them, I do not  find
    that the determination discloses any material error of law.  The  Judge
    has properly noted matters that can  be  held  to  the  credit  of  the
    appellant and those that are not.

32.  In all the circumstances therefore the appellant's  appeal  before  the
    Upper Tribunal is dismissed.  The decision of  Judge  Khan  is  upheld,
    namely that the appeal is dismissed under the Immigration  Rules  (both
    old and new) and also dismissed in respect of human rights.



Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

