
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                  Appeal
Numbers: IA/38881/2014

                                                             Ia/38862/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                 |                 Decision and Reasons |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 14 October 2015                    |                 On 18 November 2015  |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

                                  MS C A R
                                  Miss K R
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:          Mr S Nwaekwu, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr A Holmes, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.      The appellant before the Upper Tribunal is the  Secretary  of  State
   for the Home Department and the respondents are citizens of St Lucia born
   on 3 March 1972 and  2  January  2002.  They  are  mother  and  daughter.
   However, for the sake of convenience I shall refer to the latter  as  the
   "appellant" and to the Secretary of the State as the "respondent",  which
   are the designations they had in the proceedings  before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal.



2.    The appellants appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  against  the
   decision of the respondent to refuse  their  applications  for  leave  to
   remain in the United Kingdom under paragraph 276 ADE of  the  Immigration
   Rules as over stayers.



    3.      A Judge of the First-tier Tribunal,  Youngerwood  allowed  both
       their appeals.  First-tier Tribunal Judge JM Holmes  in  a  decision
       dated 16 July 2015 granted the respondent permission  to  appeal  to
       the Upper Tribunal, it being found to be arguable  that  the  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge approach to this appeal was flawed.



4.      Thus the appeal came before me.


               First-tier Tribunal's findings

5.       The First-tier Tribunal allowed the appellant's appeal,  concluding
   the following  which  I  summarise.  It  is  absolutely  clear  that  the
   appellant brought her daughter into this country when  she  was  aged  16
   months old in 2003 and has lived continuously in the UK since then.  This
   has not been challenged by the respondent. Now the first appellant  seeks
   to rely on her daughter's continuous residence in the United  Kingdom  to
   support a claim under Article 8.




6.       The reliance is made even clearer by the fact  that  the  appellant
   has produced absolutely no evidence as to any problems being  encountered
   by her daughter in the United Kingdom, or  any  anticipated  problems  in
   relation to her education in general welfare, were she to be returned  to
   St Lucia-although something was said in oral evidence. The appellant,  to
   some extent still has roots in St Lucia given that she spent most of  her
   life there, still has a family home, albeit, it is asserted,  in  a  poor
   state of repair, and some, albeit apparently limited, contact with one or
   more friends there.




7.      The appellant's case has been  approached  on  the  well-established
   principle in Razgar in relation to the Convention. Article 8 was  engaged
   given the simple fact that  the  appellant's  have  been  in  the  United
   Kingdom for over 11 years and  ultimately  would  have  had  to  consider
   whether the respondent has established that the  removal  decisions  were
   are  lawful  and  proportionate.  Especially  taking  into  account   the
   daughter's best interests as a primary consideration. The best  interests
   might have been finely balanced because there is absolutely no  evidence,
   as I say, to indicate that the second appellant would have  any  problems
   in assessing the provisions of public education and medical facilities in
   St Lucia. I am certainly not willing to infer that these facilities would
   not be available, in the absence of  any  evidence  from  the  appellant,
   especially as they were put on  notice,  in  the  second  refusal  letter
   especially, that there is according  to  the  respondent,  a  functioning
   public education system and signature. There are of course  countries  in
   the world where even in the total absence of evidence from an  appellant,
   the Tribunal would be able to find, or refer, that return to that country
   would not be in the best interests  of  a  child  because  of  the  well-
   established conditions in that country.  This  is  not  the  position  in
   relation to St Lucia, where clear evidence would be needed  right  to  be
   invited to find to the contrary.




8.       Given that the first appellant, on  any  basis,  has  been  in  the
   United Kingdom entirely unlawfully, her only  apparent  visit  these  are
   having been obtained by deception on her own evidence, I would ultimately
   have concluded that removal  decisions  pre-July  2012  would  have  been
   lawful in the interests of immigration control and economic well-being of
   the country, the  public  being  rightly  concerned  by  the  appellant's
   actions, driving a coach and horses through lawful  immigration  control,
   and relying upon her daughter, in respect  of  whom  there  would  be  no
   significant obstacles on returning to St Lucia.




9.       Given that there  is  no  challenge  to  the  genuine  relationship
   between the appellant and her daughter, it is clear that  the  only  real
   issue on this appeal before me is whether the appellant establishes  that
   it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to  leave  the  United
   Kingdom paragraph EX 1 of the Rules.




10. In the absence of any guidance case law, my view might  well  have  been
   that, in the  total  absence  of  any  evidence  from  the  appellant  to
   establish any anticipated problems for  her  daughter  on  return  to  St
   Lucia, she has simply not established the essential burden to  show  that
   it would not be reasonable to expect her daughter to  leave  the  UK  for
   Saint Lucia. Children of all ages frequently accompany their parents than
   the parents choose to immigrate and to countries with a child has  little
   or no knowledge and in the absence of evidence  to  the  contrary,  where
   there is no reason 20 sic paid that they cannot adapt to their new lives.
   Finding on that basis would in my view be reasonable  and  understood  by
   the public concerned by the appellant's flagrant  breach  of  immigration
   law.




11. Taking into account the relevant case law, the case law makes  it  clear
   that long residence of a child must be relevant to the proportionality of
   removal but that in particular residents of seven years or more and seven
   years from the age of 4  to  11  is  particularly  relevant.  The  second
   appellant of course meets all  those  criteria.  Therefore  even  in  the
   absence of any evidence from the appellant to  indicate  problems  to  be
   anticipated in St Lucia, the appellants are entitled  to  argue  that  it
   must be inferred from the length of residence of  the  second  appellant,
   that she has put down effective routes and social  relationships  in  the
   United Kingdom.




12.  That  being  so,  the  appeals   must   succeed,   notwithstanding   my
   confirmation  that  I  regret  having  to  make  this  decision  in  this
   particular case, in light  of  the  first  appellant's  behaviour.  That,
   however is the outcome of the respondent's policy, enacted in immigration
   rules, being in  effect  more  generous  to  applicants  that  under  the
   Convention.




       Grounds of appeal




13. The grounds of appeal state the  following  which  I  summarise.  It  is
   submitted by the respondent that the Judge made a  material  misdirection
   of  law.  The  judge  reaches  the  conclusion  that  it  would  not   be
   unreasonable to expect the second appellant to leave the  United  Kingdom
   notwithstanding her earlier finding that the first appellant has been  in
   the United Kingdom entirely unlawfully. Her finding that it would not  be
   reasonable for the appellant to return to St Lucia without  any  evidence
   of significant obstacles amounts to an error.




14. Any consideration of reasonableness in this  context  must  be  holistic
   and could not be assessed without for example, consideration of something
   as fundamental as to whether the first  and  second  appellant  would  be
   leaving the United Kingdom with their parents. It is generally  the  case
   that it is on the child best interests to remain with their  parents  and
   therefore generally it is reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave  the
   United Kingdom with their parent, particularly if  the  parents  have  no
   right to remain in the United Kingdom. The Judges' comments that "in  the
   absence of any guidance" is not accurate in light of the case law on  the
   subject.



       Decision as to whether there is an error of law



15. The Judges approach to the  appeal  was  materially  flawed.  The  Judge
   having found that there is no evidence of any  anticipated  problems  for
   the second appellant to return to St Lucia, nevertheless  found  that  it
   would not be reasonable for her to return to merely because she has  been
   in this country for more than seven years.




16. The Judge failed to take into account that the second appellant  is  not
   a British citizen and will be returning to her country with her mother as
   a family unit. The Judge has not applied the case law to this appeal in a
   holistic manner but has concentrated one aspect  of  the  case  that  the
   second appellant has been in this country for 11 years.




17. The Judge has fallen into material error by her analysis of  the  second
   appellant's best interests. He failed  to  take  into  account  that  the
   appellants are not lawfully settled in this  country.  They  have  always
   been here unlawfully in the first appellant is deception when she entered
   the United Kingdom. He also failed to take into account that  that  as  a
   starting point the best  interests  of  children  is  to  be  with  their
   parents. Having found that there are  no  obstacles  to  both  appellants
   returning to St Lucia, the conclusion that the  second  appellant  should
   not have to leave is perverse.



18. I find that the  Judge  has  made  a  material  error  of  law  and  the
   determination cannot stand. I therefore set it aside in its entirety.




19. I find that the appellants can return to St Lucia as have been  in  this
   country unlawfully. The first appellant was  deceptive  in  the  original
   grant of entry as a  visitor.  They  lived  here  for  a  lengthy  period
   unlawfully. The best interests of the second appellant is to remain  with
   her mother. There is no evidence that it would be  unreasonable  for  the
   second appellant to return to St Lucia with her mother and carry on  with
   life in that country.




20. I have considered all the case law including Agyarko [2015]  EW  CA  Civ
   440 the Court of Appeal held  that  where  a  party  who  had  overstayed
   unlawfully and married or formed a relationship with  a  British  citizen
   sought leave to remain, the "insurmountable obstacles" test as to  return
   under the Immigration Rules was a stringent test and more demanding  than
   a mere test of whether it would be  reasonable  to  expect  a  couple  to
   continue their family life outside the United Kingdom, although the  test
   was always to be interpreted in a  sensible  and  practical  rather  than
   purely literal way. I find that there are no obstacles insurmountable  or
   otherwise for both appellants returning to St Lucia.



21. In the case of EV Philippines [2014] EW CA Civ 874. In EV it was  stated
   that notwithstanding a finding that the best interests  of  the  children
   lay in continuing with education in the United Kingdom with both  parents
   also remaining in the United Kingdom, the Tribunal has been  entitled  to
   find that  the  need  to  maintain  immigration  control  outweighed  the
   children's best interests.




22. Section 117B makes public  interest  considerations  applicable  to  all
   cases and states:


         "(1)     The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
             the public interest

         .....................

         (5)       Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a   private   life
             established  by  a  person  at  a  time  when   the   person's
             immigration status is precarious.


23. The first appellant's immigration status in  the  United  Kingdom  has
   always been unlawful. The second appellant's  best  interest  lies  with
   remaining with her mother. There are no insurmountable obstacles to  the
   second appellant accompanying her mother to St Lucia and continuing with
   their life in that country.







       Decision



                For the reasons given above, the determination of the First-
tier Tribunal is set
                aside.

               I remake the decision on appeal and dismiss the  appellants'
        appeals pursuant to the Immigration  Rules  and  Article  8  of  the
        European Convention on Human Rights.

               Appeal is dismissed for both appellants


                Signed by

       Mrs S Chana
       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge                                     16th
       day of November 2015





