
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38229/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 April 2016                      |On 28 April 2016                     |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE



                                   Between

                             ngozi may ogbuitepu
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Judge Nkwocha, Counsel, instructed by K&S Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                             EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT

 1. The appellant appeals a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Manyarara
    promulgated on  1  October  2015  in  which  the  judge  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal against the refusal of her Human rights  application
    on private and  family  life  grounds.  The  application  and  decision
    followed an earlier cancellation of leave on  the  basis  of  deception
    following the respondent's interview with the appellant on  her  return
    to the United Kingdom from Nigeria.  The respondent had interviewed the
    appellant about the English language certificate  used  to  support  an
    application for further leave to remain as a student and the  appellant
    was subsequently issued with a notice of cancellation of her leave.

 2. The  judge  had  the  benefit  of  documentary  bundles  filed  by  the
    respondent and also  by  the  appellant.   The  appellant  was  legally
    represented and attended the hearing  and was afforded the  opportunity
    to provide her documentary and oral evidence.

 3. The judge noted that the evidence in respect of the  false  certificate
    allegation came from the respondent by way of documents which were  set
    out in the respondent's bundle and consisted of affidavit  evidence  of
    Peter  Millington  and  Rebecca  Collings  as  well  as  a  spreadsheet
    providing  information  from  subsequent  enquiries  conducted  by  the
    qualification  provider  ETS.   The   appellant's   qualification   was
    withdrawn to the point that it followed that the certificate which  had
    been obtained is invalidated.

 4. The grounds before this Tribunal assert that the  evidence  before  the
    judge was insufficient to meet the burden of proof on the respondent of
    establishing that the certificate was a forgery.  The judge  noted  the
    evidence in respect of the appellant setting  out  her  claim  and  the
    evidence that the appellant provided at the hearing. The judge notes at
    paragraph 25 in the context of   her  Decision  and  Reasons  that  the
    evidence that she was taking into account included the  interview  that
    the appellant had had with the respondent in  which  she  had  asserted
    that she had only taken an IELTS test,  after  having  taken  the  test
    twice and failed. The judge refers to Appendix G  of  the  respondent's
    bundle. The appellant also said that she had taken her  test  initially
    at Southwark College, and then at a  college  in  Lewisham.  The  judge
    notes that the appellant made no reference to having taken a TOEIC test
    at all.

 5. In the context of the evidence concerning the TOEIC test that had  been
    submitted in support  of  the  application  the  judge  considered  the
    evidence put forward by the respondent,  and  found  it  sufficient  to
    establish the  burden  of  establishing  a  level  of  suspicion  which
    required the appellant to adduce evidence in rebuttal.

 6. The judge concluded on the evidence provided that the appellant had not
    rebutted the suspicions and that overall the  respondent  had  met  the
    necessary burden. The judge was not provided with any  expert  evidence
    by way of a report, and had no  oral  expert  evidence  in  rebuttable.
    Although there is no specific reference to the case of Gazi, that  self
    direction and conclusion is consistent with the jurisprudence  relevant
    at the time of the judge's decision.

 7. Before me Mr Nkwotcha for the appellant sought to place a gloss on  the
    grounds  for  permission  arguing  that  there  had   been   procedural
    unfairness because the appellant  had  only  been   provided  with  the
    evidence of the interview transcripts at the hearing,  and  accordingly
    there had  been  insufficient  opportunity  to  address  the  interview
    evidence.  I find no merit in that contention, firstly I note  that  it
    was not raised in the grounds, and, secondly  the  judge  has  set  out
    clearly that the representative had indicated that Appendix F had  been
    omitted from the bundle, the documentation already provided meant  that
    there was nothing that had taken the appellant by surprise.  The  judge
    provided a short adjournment in order to ensure that the late provision
    of evidence had  been  satisfactorily  dealt  with  and  also  admitted
    evidence filed after the date of hearing.

 8. Looking at the decision in the round, I am satisfied that the judge has
    not made a material error of law.  On the evidence as it was as at  the
    date of hearing, the judge was entitled to conclude that the respondent
    had met the burden upon them and further entitled to conclude that  the
    appellant had failed to establish that she had in fact taken the  TOEIC
    test as she asserted.

 9. I am satisfied that the judge correctly self-directed and  has  reached
    conclusiona which were open to her on the evidence.

Notice of Decision

10. For all the reasons above the appellant's appeal is dismissed  and  the
    decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  her  appeal  stands.
    There being no other issues before me that is sufficient  to  determine
    the appeal.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge

