
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/38290/2013
                                                               IA/38294/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13 August 2014                             |On 28 August 2014            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GIBB

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         ESPeranza Requilme Dumagan
                            Romulo Barbon Dumagan
                          (NO ANONYMITY order MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   None (and the appellants did not attend)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This was an appeal that was allowed at the First-tier.   The  appellant
    before the Upper Tribunal is therefore the Secretary of State.  In  the
    interests of clarity and convenience, however, I am  referring  to  the
    parties as they were at the First-tier.

2.   The appellants  are  wife  and  husband,  and  the  second  appellant's
    application and appeal is dependent on that of the first appellant, who
    was in the UK as a student, with  the  second  appellant  here  as  her
    dependant.  Both appellants  are  citizens  of  the  Philippines.   The
    appellants were both refused further leave, as a  student  and  student
    dependant respectively, on 22 August  2013.   Following  a  hearing  at
    Taylor House before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Herbert OBE  their
    appeals were allowed on Article 8 grounds.  The appellants attended the
    hearing but were not represented.  The respondent was  not  represented
    because the appeals were on the float list.

3.   The appeals were allowed on Article 8 grounds only, on the  basis  that
    removing the appellant before the conclusion of her  course  in  August
    2014 would be disproportionate.  The refusal had been on the basis that
    the appellant had switched to a different college, which was prohibited
    by section 50 of the 2009 Act.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted to the Secretary of  State  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Chohan on 27 June 2014.

The Hearing

5.   The appellants did not  attend  the  hearing,  and  did  not  send  any
    message explaining their absence or asking for  an  adjournment.   They
    were not legally represented.  There were no telephone numbers  on  the
    file, and it was not possible for a call to be made to  enquire  as  to
    their whereabouts.

6.    I  decided  to  proceed  with  the  hearing  in  the  absence  of  the
    appellants, in accordance with Rule 38 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008.  I was satisfied that  the  appellants  had  been
    notified of the hearing, or that reasonable steps had been taken to  do
    so.  Notice of hearing had been sent to the  first  appellant,  at  the
    only address provided, on 7 July 2014.   I  noted  the  fact  that  the
    appellants had not responded to the  decision  granting  permission  to
    appeal to the respondent, which was  also  sent  to  them,  along  with
    directions.  In deciding to proceed, taking account of the test in Rule
    38 of whether it would be in the interests of justice, I also took note
    of the fact that the judge's decision referred to the first appellant's
    course being due to end in August 2014.   Taking  account  of  all  the
    circumstances I decided that it was in  the  interests  of  justice  to
    proceed with the hearing in the absence of the appellants.

7.   Mr Walker, for the respondent, made brief submissions.   He  relied  on
    the grounds.  He also sought leave  to  add  an  additional  ground  in
    relation to the judge's decision on the lawfulness of  the  section  47
    removal decisions in paragraph 14 of the determination.  I  gave  leave
    for that ground to be added.

8.   I have decided that  the  judge's  decision  allowing  the  appeals  on
    Article 8 grounds did involve an error on a point of  law.   Since  the
    decision of the Supreme Court in Patel and Others v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72
    the practice of using Article 8 to allow students to  complete  courses
    where they have failed to comply with some of the requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules, which followed the Upper Tribunal  decision  in  CDS
    (Brazil), has been brought to an end.  This is made clear by  paragraph
    57 of the  Supreme  Court  judgment,  which  ends  with  the  following
    sentences:

         "However, such considerations do not by themselves provide  grounds
         of appeal under Article 8,  which  is  concerned  with  private  or
         family  life,  not  education  as  such.   The  opportunity  for  a
         promising student to complete his course in this  country,  however
         desirable in general terms, is not  in  itself  a  right  protected
         under Article 8."

9.   This is not to say that the door has  been  closed  on  Article  8  for
    students as a whole.  It may that there will be particular cases  where
    students have significant family or private life ties, which could lead
    to an appeal being allowed on Article 8 grounds.  What does  appear  to
    me to be clear, however, is  that  the  CDS  (Brazil)  route  of  using
    Article 8 as a way of allowing students to complete  courses,  where  a
    technical failure to meet the arcane and complex  requirements  of  the
    points-based system leads to unfairness,  is  a  route  that  has  been
    closed by the Supreme Court decision in Patel.

10.  On that basis, for failure to consider the effect of the Supreme  Court
    judgment in Patel, it appears  to  me  that  the  judge's  approach  in
    allowing the appeal involved an error on a point of law.

11.  The judge, at paragraph 14 of the determination,  treated  the  section
    47 removal decisions as  being  unlawful  following  the  principle  in
    Adamally and Jaferi  [2012] UKUT 00414.  The decisions in these appeals
    were made on 22 August 2013.  The legal status of  section  47  removal
    decisions changed on 8 May 2013, well before this  date.   This  change
    was brought about by section 51 of the Crime and Courts Act 2013.   The
    judge's finding that the section  47  removal  decisions  were  not  in
    accordance with the law therefore involved an error on a point of law.

12.  The decision allowing the appeals under Article 8  therefore  falls  to
    be set aside,  as  does  the  decision  that  the  section  47  removal
    decisions were not in accordance with the law.

13.  In remaking the decisions I have decided that the appeals  fall  to  be
    dismissed under Article 8.  Nothing further has been put forward by the
    appellants, and there is no basis for any consideration  of  family  or
    private life rights that go beyond the desire to complete the course.

14.  I note that the first appellant was  due  to  complete  her  course  in
    August 2014.  Due to the delays in the appeal process it  may  well  be
    that the first appellant has in fact been able to complete her  course,
    and this may explain her absence, on the basis that the matter has  now
    become academic, in more ways than one.

15.  It was not suggested that there was any need  for  anonymity  in  these
    appeals.  The First-tier Judge made  fee  awards.   Having  remade  the
    decisions in the appeals by dismissing them there can be no fee awards.

Decision

16.  The judge erred in law in allowing the appeals  on  Article  8  grounds
    and those decisions are set aside.  The  appeal  of  the  Secretary  of
    State is therefore allowed.

17.  The decisions in the appeals  are  remade  by  dismissing  the  appeals
    under the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Having dismissed the appeals, in remaking them, there can be no fee awards.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Gibb
