

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
IA/38206/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                  |       Decision and Reasons         |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On: 17th April 2015                    |       On: 02nd June 2015           |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                          Imran Ahmad Khan Durrani
                           (no anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 Secretary of State  for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:       Mr Chakmakjian, AMR Solicitors
For the Respondent:  Mr Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan date  of  birth  25th  November
    1969.  He appeals with permission[1] the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Easterman) to dismiss his appeal against a decision  to
    refuse to vary his leave and to remove  him  from  the  United  Kingdom
    pursuant to s47 of the Immigration Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.
 2. The Appellant's case  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  that  his
    removal from the UK would be a disproportionate interference  with  his
    Article 8(1) rights in the UK. He relied inter alia on the fact that he
    had been in the UK since  2002  and  has  established  a  private  life
    including a business, the fact that he  has  a  heart  condition  which
    requires treatment, and that he is in a  relationship  with  a  British
    woman.


 3. It was conceded that the Appellant could not meet the  requirements  of
    any of the Immigration  Rules.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  went  on  to
    consider the appeal on freestanding Article 8 grounds.  It  appears  to
    have been accepted that the Appellant has established a private  and/or
    family life  in  the  UK  since  the  determination  goes  straight  to
    consideration of proportionality.   The Appellant's health concerns are
    not considered to merit any great weight, since the Tribunal finds that
    there was no evidence that treatment was not available in Pakistan.  As
    for the Appellant's private life the Tribunal accepts that he  has  his
    own business but finds that this could continue under the direction  of
    someone else, possibly the Appellant's wife, who also works there.   In
    relation to the claimed relationship the Tribunal finds as follows:


         "59. However it was a relationship formed  at  the  time  when  the
         appellant's status was precarious, his leave was predicated on  his
         relationship with a different person, and as a result of  the  2014
         Act I place little weight on the current new  relationship,  either
         as a private or family life...."

      The appeal was, accordingly, dismissed.

 4. The grounds of appeal are:


        i) The  Tribunal  made  a  material  misdirection  in  law  in  its
           application of s117B (5)  of  the  Nationality  Immigration  and
           Asylum Act 2002 (as amended by  the  Immigration  Act  2014).  S
           117B(5) mandates that little weight should be given to a private
           life established when the person's leave is precarious;  this is
           to be contrasted with s117B(4) which states that  little  weight
           should be given to either a private or family  life  established
           when the person was in the UK unlawfully.  It is submitted  that
           the  Appellant's  relationship  with  his  current  partner  was
           established when he had limited leave to remain and so the Judge
           erred in attaching "little" weight to it.


       ii) There has been  a  failure  to  consider  relevant  factors,  in
           particular  the  impact  of  the  Appellant's  removal  on   his
           business, whether the impact on  him  of  having  to  wind  that
           business up and leave his life here would be disproportionate.

      iii) The Tribunal erred in  failing  to  give  due  consideration  to
           whether it was reasonable to  expect  the  Appellant's  wife  to
           relocate to Pakistan.
 5. The Respondent opposes the appeal on all grounds.    If  there  was  an
    error in respect of (i) it is submitted that it is not material.




    My Findings

 6. In granting permission Judge Osbourne comments that  grounds  (ii)  and
    (iii) appear to be little more than disagreements with the  conclusions
    reached in the determination. I would respectfully agree. The  Tribunal
    clearly did consider the effect  of  the  Appellant's  removal  on  his
    business, because a specific paragraph is directed at  that  matter  at
    paragraph 60.  In respect of the Sanade point that the Appellant's wife
    could not be expected to relocate away from the UK it does  not  appear
    that the case turned on any such suggestion. The  determination  points
    out that if this is a genuine relationship the Appellant can return  to
    Pakistan and make a proper application  for  entry  clearance  in  that
    capacity. This was not a Chikwamba situation since at the date  of  the
    appeal the Appellant was not married according to UK law  (having  only
    contracted a nikah) and he had not lived with his partner for  2  years
    or more.   It was therefore a reasonable conclusion for  the  Judge  to
    have reached.


 7. Permission was expressly granted in respect of  ground  (i).  There  is
    arguably an error at paragraph 59 of  the  determination  in  that  the
    Judge appears to attach little weight to the relationship "as a  result
    of the 2014 Act". I am not however satisfied that if that is an  error,
    it is such that the decision should be set aside. That is because it is
    clear from the determination that the Tribunal attaches  little  weight
    to the relationship a) because  it  was  formed  at  a  time  when  the
    Appellant had limited leave to  remain  as  a  result  of  his  alleged
    relationship with someone completely different and b) it  had,  at  the
    date of the hearing, only subsisted for a matter of five  months.    On
    those facts the Tribunal was entitled to attach  little  weight  to  it
    regardless of what is said in the statute.




      Decisions


 8. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error  of  law
    and it is upheld.










                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                     17th
                                 April 2015
                           -----------------------
[1] Permission was granted on the 13th February 2015 by First-tier Tribunal
Judge VA Osbourne

