
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38554/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |             Decision & Reasons     |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 1 July 2015                           |             On 7 July 2015         |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

                             KAZI WAZEDAR RAHIM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr V Makol, Legal Representative, Maalik & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

There is no need for any order restricting publication of any facts
relating to this case and I make no order.


1.   The appellant is a citizen of India and his date  of  birth  is  3  May
    1981.  He made an application on 24 July 2014 to vary his  leave  as  a
    Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant under the points-based system (PBS).  The
    respondent refused the application. It became apparent at  the  hearing
    before me that there were two decisions; one dated  18  September  2014
    ("the first decision") another dated 24  September  2014  ("the  second
    decision").

2.   The  appellant  appealed  against  the  decision  and  his  appeal  was
    dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Woolf in a decision  that
    was promulgated on 30 January 2015 (following a hearing  on  2  January
    2015).  Permission to appeal against this decision was granted  to  the
    appellant by First-tier Tribunal Judge Levin in a decision of 13  April
    2015.

3.   At the hearing before Judge Woolf the appellant did not attend  despite
    having requested an oral hearing. He made  an  application  to  adjourn
    claiming that he was too unwell to attend. On 10 December 2014  he  was
    admitted to St. Thomas' Hospital as a result of  severing  one  of  his
    fingers. Surgery followed and he was then discharged into the  care  of
    his GP.  The judge found that there was no evidence that the  appellant
    was unfit to attend court. He found that the injury to his finger would
    not prevent him from attending court.

4.   The judge took into account that there had in fact  been  two  previous
    applications for an adjournment on the basis that the  appellant  could
    not find representation to  cover  the  hearing  on  2  January.   Both
    applications had been refused by a duty  judge  who  decided  that  the
    appellant could represent himself.  Judge Woolf took into account  that
    the notice of the hearing had been sent to the appellant on 4  November
    2014 and considered that he had had  ample  time  in  which  to  obtain
    representation.

5.   The injury to the appellant's finger was no doubt very serious. I  have
    taken into account the photographic evidence produced by the appellant.
     However, the injury occurred on  10  December  2014  and  the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal was on 2 January 2015.  It may well have
    been difficult for the appellant to prepare a witness statement in  the
    light of the injury, but it  was  open  to  the  judge  to  refuse  the
    application for an adjournment on the basis that there was no  evidence
    that the appellant was unable through ill-health to attend the  hearing
    and that the appellant could represent himself.  No error of law arises
    from the judge's decision to refuse to adjourn the hearing.

6.   The appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    maintain that he had sent documents with his application which had  not
    been considered by the respondent.  The appellant  did  not  produce  a
    witness statement and nor did he specify in the grounds  the  documents
    he referred to.

7.   At the hearing before me it came to light that the judge did  not  have
    a complete respondent's bundle.  Mr  Nath  indicated  that  there  were
    additional documents submitted by  the  appellant  in  support  of  his
    application relating to paragraph 41-SD(e)(iii)(1) of the rules,  which
    were not in the respondent's bundle  which  had  been  filed  with  the
    Tribunal and which was before the judge.   The issue  under  41-SD  (e)
    (iii) (1) was raised in both the first  and  second  decision  and  the
    judge found that the appellant was unable to meet this  requirement  of
    the rules, but he did not have before him all of the documents that the
    appellant had submitted with his application. There was an issue raised
    in the first decision only which related to a UK bank  account.  It  is
    clear that Judge Woolf considered the first decision only and that  one
    of the reasons he dismissed the appeal related to the issue of  the  UK
    bank account (see [14)) which was not raised in  the  second  decision.
    It was the appellant's case that he had  prepared  the  appeal  on  the
    basis of the second decision and was not aware of this issue  and  that
    he had in any event submitted the required documents.

8.       The judge was not in any way assisted by the parties in this  case.
    He had an incomplete picture of the application made by  the  appellant
    and  he  considered  the  appeal  against  a  decision  which   differs
    materially from a later decision made by the respondent. The failure of
    the appellant to comply with  directions  and  to  attend  the  hearing
    further  compounded  matters.   Notwithstanding   this,   the   defects
    identified above amount to procedural irregularities which amount to  a
    material error of law.

 9.    Mr Nath was unaware of the  second  decision  and  was  not  able  to
    confirm on which decision the  respondent  seeks  to  rely.  There  was
    another problem  with  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    observed that the neither of the respondent's decisions or  indeed  the
    determination make it clear under which paragraph of 41-SD  the  issues
    relating to corporation tax and the UK  bank  account  relate  and  the
    parties were unable to assist me.

10.      I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss  the
    appeal under the Rules pursuant to Section 12(2)(a) of  the  Tribunals,
    Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.  I remit the case  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in accordance with Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007  Act  .  It
    was not possible to obtain a date of hearing at the First-tier Tribunal
    but a notice of this will be issued to the parties in due course.


Directions

    (1)  The respondent is to serve and file a complete  bundle  not  later
          than fourteen days before the substantive hearing.


    (2)  The respondent is to identify the correct  decision  under  appeal
          not later than fourteen days before the substantive hearing.


    (3)  The respondent is to serve and file the relevant  version  of  the
          rules and identify the rules in issue in this case not later  than
          fourteen days before the substantive hearing.

    (4)  Both parties are referred to the standard  directions  which  were
         issued to them on 4 November 2014. These still stand. Both  parties
         must ensure that all evidence relied upon is filed and  served  not
         later than fourteen days before the substantive hearing.


    (6)   It is expected that the appellant produces  a  witness  statement
         which makes it clear which documents he states were sent  with  his
         application and which were not considered by the respondent.



No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Joanna McWilliam                        Date 3 July 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam






