
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Ia/38690/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at UT(IAC) Birmingham                  |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 17 February 2016                          |On 13 April 2016              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER

                                   Between

                               mr shahbaz imam

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SecretARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Miah, Counsel, instructed by Lee Valley
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Petterson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This appeal is not subject to an  anonymity  order  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.  Neither  party
    has invited me to make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI  2008/2698)  and  I
    have not done so.

 2. The appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge  Wedderspoon)  dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal  against   a
    decision taken on 23  September  2014  to  refuse  an  application  for
    further leave to remain and to remove the appellant from the UK.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of  Pakistan  born  on  21  April  1991.  He
    entered the UK in January 2011 with valid entry clearance as a  student
    from 31 December 2010 until  31  May  2014.  On  17  October  2013  the
    appellant submitted an application for leave to remain as a student and
    on 19 November 2013 leave to remain was granted until 30  August  2015.
    On 6 June 2014, the appellant married JEJ, a British citizen, and on 14
    July 2014 he submitted an application for consideration as  the  spouse
    of a settled person.

 4.  The  Secretary  of  State  accepted  the  appellant's   identity   and
    nationality but concluded that his English language  test  scores  with
    ETS were  obtained  by  deception  and  there  were  no  insurmountable
    obstacles for the appellant and JEJ to live in Pakistan.

The Appeal

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an  oral
    hearing at Stoke IAC on 18 May 2015. He was represented by Ms  Bull  of
    Counsel. The First-tier Tribunal found that the respondent  had  proved
    that the test scores were obtained  by  deception  and  that  the  test
    results amounted to false information  because  the  appellant  used  a
    proxy test taker in 2013. The fact that the  appellant  was  fluent  in
    English and passed a  further  test  in  English  with  distinction  at
    another test centre did not establish that he  attended  the  ETS  test
    centre in London in 2013. The appellant was not a suitable person under
    Appendix FM. The judge accepted that the appellant  had  established  a
    private life in the UK but JEJ was not at risk in residing in  Pakistan
    because she would not practise Christianity there. The appellant was an
    intelligent, articulate young man  who  was  likely  to  find  work  in
    Pakistan. JEJ could take reasonable steps to learn Urdu and could  keep
    in regular telephone contact with her parents and family and friends in
    the UK. There were no insurmountable obstacles to the appellant and JEJ
    residing in Pakistan. The appeal was dismissed  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the
    basis that the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  erred  in  law  because  the
    evidence of the respondent did not prove that  ETS  had  cancelled  the
    test  scores  due  to  a  proxy  test  taker,  there  was  no  positive
    confirmation that deception was used, there  were  inconsistent  First-
    tier decisions in relation to ETS cases, the judge had failed  to  make
    any decision in relation to the Article 8 claim outside the  Rules  and
    the judge had failed to exercise discretion to grant  leave  to  remain
    outside the Rules.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Bird  on
    28 August 2015. It was arguable that the judge erred in accepting  that
    the  respondent's  generic  evidence  was  sufficient  to  prove   that
    dishonesty or deception  had  been  practised  and  the  assessment  of
    deception may have raised an arguable error of law in relation  to  the
    assessment of Article 8. Permission to appeal was not  refused  on  any
    ground.

 8. Thus, the appeal came before me

Discussion

 9. Mr Miah submitted that what should have happened was a  request  for  a
    voice recording and then expert evidence obtained. However,  the  first
    ground  of  appeal  was  relied  upon  in   any   event.   Insufficient
    consideration was given to family and private  life  in  the  UK;  just
    paragraph 18  of  the  decision.  There  was  an  absence  of  relevant
    consideration under section 117B of the 2002 Act and the  decision  was
    not safe.

10. Ms Petterson submitted that the grounds were simply a disagreement. The
    judge decided to admit the ETS test results. There was no reason to  go
    through every requirement of the Rules. The judge did deal with private
    and family life at paragraph 18. Effectively, the judge carried  out  a
    proportionality assessment. The discretion to consider the  application
    outside the Rules rested with the respondent.

11. Mr Miah submitted in response that there was no explanation as  to  why
    the appellant's evidence had been rejected in  favour  of  the  generic
    evidence. The Article 8 consideration was woefully  lacking.  This  was
    not simply a matter of disagreement with the findings.

12. I am satisfied that the consideration  of  Article  8  was  inadequate.
    There was no proportionality assessment under Razgar  or  consideration
    of the SS Congo test; i.e. were there compelling circumstances such  as
    to justify the grant of leave to remain outside the Rules.  That  is  a
    material error of law. There was also no consideration of section  117B
    of the 2002 Act and that is a  further  material  error  of  law  under
    Forman (ss 117A-C considerations) [2015] UKUT 412 (IAC). The judge  did
    not make a decision under Article 8 at paragraph 19; which only  refers
    to dismissal of the appeal under the Rules.

13. I find that the judge did not give any detailed consideration as to why
    the appellant would arrange a proxy test taker given his proficiency in
    English or to his explanation for attending an ETS  centre  in  London.
    The failure to give adequate reasons is a  further  material  error  of
    law. This issue is particularly significant  in  light  of  the  recent
    Upper Tribunal decision of SM and Qadir v SSHD (ETS - Evidence - Burden
    of Proof [2016] UKUT (IAC).

14. The burden of proof was improperly reversed at the end of paragraph  16
    of the decision. The judge stated that, "The fact that the Appellant is
    fluent in English and passed a further test centre does  not  establish
    that he attended the ETS test centre in London in  2013  and  I  reject
    this submission". There was no burden of proof on the appellant and the
    form of words used by the judge is a further material error of law.

15. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's decision to dismiss  the  appeal  under
    the Rules involved the making of an  error  of  law  and  its  decision
    cannot stand.

Decision

16. Both representatives invited me to order a rehearing in the  First-tier
    Tribunal if I set aside the judge's decision. Bearing in mind paragraph
    7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statements I  consider  that  an
    appropriate course of action. I find that the errors of law infect  the
    decision as a whole and therefore the re-hearing will be de  novo  with
    all issues to be considered again by the First-tier Tribunal.

17. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    order the appeal to be heard again in the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined de novo by a judge other than the previous First-tier judge.








Signed   [pic]                      Date   6 April 2016


Judge Archer

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
