
IAC-AH-VP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38854/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 June 2015                       |On 12 June 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                              SAVDA BALIKCIOGLU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Hashmi, instructed by Kingswell Watts,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant Savda Balikcioglu was born on 23 August  1977  and  is  a
    female citizen of Turkey.  The appellant  had  been  granted  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom for the purposes of self-employment (under
    the "Ankara" Agreement) for a period of twelve months.  Her application
    to extend her leave on that basis had been refused by a decision of the
    respondent dated 15 September 2014.  She  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Mensah) which, in a  determination  promulgated  on  19
    February 2015, dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant does not take issue with the judge's  findings  regarding
    her application to remain on the basis of self-employment.  Rather, the
    appeal proceeds entirely on Article 8 ECHR grounds.  Those grounds  are
    brief:

         'The FTT Judge failed to make a proper Article 8 ECHR assessment in
         light of the case law relating to the appellants who have  a  child
         who is a British citizen residing in the United  Kingdom  (see  for
         example Omotunde (Best  interests  -  Zambrano  applied  -  Razgar)
         Nigeria [2011].

         The appellant's daughter from a relationship with a British citizen
         (whom she married under Islamic law) is a British citizen.

         The FFT Judge has failed to make a proper assessment under  Article
         8 ECHR.'

 3. Miss Hashmi, for the appellant, submitted that the refusal  letter  had
    made no mention of Article 8 ECHR.  However, this is hardly  surprising
    since it did not form any part of the appellant's application to remain
    on the basis of her self-employment.  Article 8 ECHR  had  been  raised
    for the first time in the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.



 4. Judge Mensah dealt with Article 8 ECHR at [12].  She incorrectly stated
    that the Court of Appeal judgment in MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ  1192
    "confirmed that the Immigration Rules are a complete code ..." As Judge
    Gibb noted when granting permission to appeal, the Court of  Appeal  in
    MF  held  that  that  part  of  the  Immigration  Rules  (relating   to
    deportation) does constitute a complete code; the entire Rules  do  not
    do so.  However, the judge's error is not necessarily material  to  the
    outcome of the appeal.  The judge went on to find that the  appellant's
    partner is originally from Turkey and had spent the last  twenty  years
    living in the United Kingdom.  He was previously married  and  has  two
    children age 12  and  16  years  old.   The  judge  noted  that,  "[the
    appellant's partner] also told me that if this appeal failed  he  would
    go back to Turkey with the appellant, her son and their daughter."  The
    judge went on to consider Section 55 of the Borders Act 2007  and  also
    Section 117B of the Immigration Act 2014.  The judge had  not  referred
    specifically to Section 117B(6) which provides:

         'In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
             the United Kingdom.'

 5. The judge went on to find that:

         "I am wholly satisfied that it would be reasonable in this case for
         the family to leave the United Kingdom and the  best  interests  of
         the appellant's son and their daughter are served with  the  family
         all returning together to Turkey."

    She attached very little weight indeed to  the  partner's  relationship
    with his children by a previous marriage in finding that

         "... the appellant has failed to demonstrate the existence  of  the
         relationship [between the partner and his children] as claimed, the
         regulatory  and  quality  of  the  contact   and   therefore   that
         exceptional circumstances exist to  make  removal  disproportionate
         under Article 8."  [12]

 6. Miss Hashmi submitted that the determination was flawed  and  that  the
    judge erred by finding that the family could pursue their life together
    in Turkey.  She submitted that it would not be reasonable for a British
    child to be expected to leave the United Kingdom.

 7. As I have noted above (Section 117B(6)) the public  interest  does  not
    require a person's removal in circumstances where they have  a  genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship with a  qualifying  child  and  it
    would not "be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom."  That provision is not, however, an absolute  prohibition  on
    British children leaving the jurisdiction.  I  accept  Mrs  Pettersen's
    submission that the judge was entitled to rely, in this instance,  upon
    the evidence of the appellant's partner that  he  would  accompany  the
    appellant and their child to Turkey.  I acknowledge that  the  analysis
    of the judge [12] has the appearance of  being  somewhat  slapdash  and
    hurried; it is her assessment that "little weight should  be  given  to
    the appellant's relationship with [the partner]  or  her  private  life
    (sic)" sitting somewhat uneasily with her finding in the next  sentence
    that it would be "reasonable  for  this  family  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom ... with the family all returning together to Turkey."   I  am,
    however, satisfied having read the entire determination that the  judge
    accepted  that  there  was  a  subsisting  relationship   between   the
    appellant, her partner and their child (I understand that, at the  date
    of the Upper Tribunal hearing, the appellant  is  pregnant  again)  and
    also that the partner's claimed relationship with  his  children  by  a
    previous marriage did not constitute any major hindrance to family life
    being continued abroad in Turkey.  I am also satisfied that  the  judge
    has made clear that the public interest concerned with the  appellant's
    removal is a strong one in the light of her finding that the  appellant
    was an individual who had "sought to circumvent the Immigration Rules."
     Ultimately, however, I am satisfied that the  judge  was  entitled  to
    rely upon the evidence that the family would leave the  United  Kingdom
    together to live in Turkey in reaching her finding  that  it  would  be
    reasonable  to  expect   the   child,   notwithstanding   her   British
    nationality, to live abroad.  I agree Mrs Pettersen that this is a case
    where the First-tier Tribunal Judge has, in effect,  been  required  to
    act as  a  primary  decision  maker,  there  having  been  no  previous
    engagement of Article 8 ECHR.  I find that she reached a decision which
    was available to her on the evidence and which is  in  accordance  with
    the law.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date 10 June 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed   Date 10 June 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

