











UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38314/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated on   |
|on 11 February 2016                  |on 29 March 2016                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between


                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                       Mr Roshan Fayas Mohamed Thalha
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Z Khan, Universal Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. I shall refer to the appellant as "the secretary of state" and to  the
      respondent as "the claimant."


   2. The secretary of state appeals with permission against the decision of
      the First-tier Tribunal Judge promulgated on 28 August  2015  allowing
      the claimant's appeal  under the Immigration  (EEA  Regulations)  2006
      ("the 2006 Regulations").


   3. The claimant applied for a residence card under the  2006  Regulations
      as an  extended  family  member  of  his  cousin,  a  German  national
      exercising Treaty rights here.


   4. The  Judge  found  that  the  claimant  satisfied  the  conditions  in
      Regulation 8(2)  of  the  2006  Regulations  and  allowed  the  appeal
      outright.


   5. On 29 December 2015, First-tier Tribunal  Judge  O'Garro  granted  the
      secretary of state permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  on  the
      basis that the Judge made an arguable error of  law  by  allowing  the
      appeal outright, having regard to the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal
      in Ihmedu (OFMs - meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00340 (IAC).


   6. Mr Bramble submitted that the secretary of state has not  applied  her
      discretion  to  this  case  under  Regulation  17(4)   of   the   2006
      Regulations. Accordingly, the correct course is to allow the appeal to
      the limited extent that it is "otherwise not in  accordance  with  the
      law" and to remit the matter back to the secretary of state  in  order
      that she may be allowed to consider an exercise of discretion. Mr Khan
      did not oppose this outcome.


   7. As submitted by Mr Bramble, Regulation 17(4) of the  2006  Regulations
      provides that the secretary of state "may" issue a residence  card  to
      an extended family member not falling within Regulation  7(3)  who  is
      not an EEA national on application if the  relevant  EEA  national  in
      relation to the extended family member is a  qualified  person  (which
      the claimant's cousin is); and in all the circumstances it appears  to
      the secretary of state appropriate to issue a residence card.


   8. Accordingly, Regulation 17(4) provides a discretion to  the  secretary
      of  state  relating  to  the  issue  of  a  residence  card  in  these
      circumstances.


   9. In the claimant's case, the secretary of state has not considered  the
      exercise  of  such  discretion  having  dismissed   her   application.
      Accordingly, the secretary of state is in the first instance  required
      to consider the exercise of discretion before the Tribunal  is  itself
      entitled to consider the exercise of discretion: FD (EEA Discretion  -
      Basis of Appeal) Algeria [2007] UKAIT 49.


      Notice of Decision


      I allow the appeal of the secretary of state to the extent that I  set
      aside the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  substitute  a
      decision allowing the appeal of the claimant against the  decision  of
      the secretary of state under Regulation 8(5) of the 2006  Regulations,
      to the extent that his application for an EEA residence  card  remains
      outstanding before the secretary of state.


       No anonymity direction is made.










      Signed                             Date  4 March 2016


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

