
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38571/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower Birmingham         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th April 2016                            |On 13th May 2016              |



                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH

                                   Between

                          fakhrolhajyhe kafayrabby
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss L Norman instructed by Aman Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant applies with permission against the decision of Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal I Ross promulgated on 21st July 2015, following
    a hearing at Hendon Magistrates' Court  on  17th  June  2015.  In  that
    decision Judge Ross dismissed the Appellant's appeal against a  refusal
    to grant leave on the basis of her private life in the  United  Kingdom
    and removal to Iran.  The  Appellant  had  not  been  present  at  that
    hearing and had not been represented.

 2. The basis of the appeal to this Tribunal was that  both  the  Appellant
    and her representatives had understood that the  hearing  was  to  take
    place on 18th June 2015 and had been prepared for  a  hearing  on  that
    occasion.  The circumstances said to have led to the failure to  attend
    the hearing on 17th June were that at an earlier hearing, on  15th  May
    2015 (before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Flynn),  the  proceedings
    had been adjourned and a new date agreed of 18th June 2015.   That  was
    the date entered into  the  diaries  of  the  representatives  although
    subsequently a notice of hearing  was  sent  out  giving  the  date  of
    hearing  as  17th  June  2015.   Immediately  after  the  hearing   the
    appellant's representatives had written to the Tribunal  on  19th  June
    2015 pointing out the  error  and  the  reason  for  it  and  enclosing
    statutory declarations both from the solicitor having  conduct  of  the
    matter and from the advocate who had appeared on 15th May 2015 and  had
    been  due  to  appear  on  18th  June  2015.   In   that   letter   the
    representatives requested that the Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    reconvene on a new hearing date but it appears that no action was taken
    upon that request and accordingly the judge's decision was promulgated.

 3. The statutory declaration from the advocate  sets  out  that  following
    adjournment of the hearing on 15th May he personally had  gone  to  the
    listing offices in Taylor House to relist the appeal for a date when he
    was available and the appeal had been listed for 18th  June  at  Hendon
    Magistrates' Court, following his checking that he would  be  available
    on that  date.   He  recited  that  the  Tribunal's  yellow  sheet  was
    completed by the judge at that time confirming that the  hearing  would
    take place on 18th June.  He had not been sent a copy of any notice  of
    a different date.  On 17th June he had been in the High Court.

 4. I checked the file and noted that the yellow sheet  giving  details  of
    the adjournment and the date for the rehearing did  indeed  state  that
    the date for the further hearing would be 18th June 2015 and  that  was
    initialled by a member  of  the  Tribunal  staff.   That  document  was
    entirely consistent with the statutory declaration from the advocate.

 5. Mr Mills accepted that there had clearly been confusion and agreed that
    there should be a rehearing of the appeal and it should be remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for this purpose.  I did not need to call  upon
    Miss Norman, who was of course in agreement with this course of action.
     Whilst in an ideal world action would have been taken upon the  notice
    of hearing giving an earlier date than that agreed it is also the  case
    that in an ideal world there would have been no variation from the date
    originally agreed and certainly not an earlier listing without consent.

 6. In the circumstances the only fair and appropriate course is  for  this
    appeal to be remitted for a further hearing under the provisions of the
    Practice Statement for this chamber of the Upper  Tribunal  7.2(a)  and
    Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act  2007.
    As the Appellant lives in Birmingham the appropriate venue would be the
    Birmingham Hearing Centre of the First-tier Tribunal.  I  was  informed
    that a  Farsi  interpreter  would  be  required.  There  would  be  two
    witnesses and the time estimate would be three hours.




Notice of Decision

The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.   The  appeal  is
remitted  for  rehearing  before  the   First-tier   Tribunal   sitting   at
Birmingham, no findings being preserved.

There was no request for an anonymity order and none is made.






Signed                              Date 9 May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French


