
[pic]

UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38931/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 14 July 2015                      |On 28 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Mr Oghene Tejiri Oteri
                         no anonymity direction made
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Karim, counsel (instructed by MA Consultants)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the secretary of  state  and  to  the
    respondent as"the claimant".

 2. The claimant is a national of Nigeria, born on  30  October  1987.  His
    appeal against the decision of the respondent dated 17  September  2014
    refusing his application for further leave to remain in the UK  and  to
    set removal directions was allowed under the Immigration Rules by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Symes in a determination promulgated  on  18  March
    2015.

 3. Two earlier applications for leave to remain had  been  refused  on  18
    February 2010 and on 6 June 2013. The present application was based  on
    his relationship with a  British  citizen  whom  the  claimant  met  in
    London. They have been together for two and a half years and have spent
    significant time together, at least twice a week.

 4. The application was refused as their  relationship  did  not  meet  the
    partner definition. Nor was the existence of the relationship  accepted
    given the lack of evidence provided. Nigeria was  a  country  where  he
    could be expected to return. There were no exceptional factors  outside
    the rules.

 5. Judge Symes assessed the appeal on the basis of rules established since
    9 July 2012.

 6. He dismissed his claim under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration  Rules
    as he would not find it impossible to re-integrate in Nigeria.

 7. He directed himself in accordance with authorities including Nagre  and
    MM and Others [2014] EWCA Civ 985. He had regard to the European  Court
    of Human Rights' decision in Uner v Netherlands which he considered  to
    be useful in demonstrating circumstances in  which  the  removal  of  a
    person with long residence from the  UK  was  likely  to  infringe  his
    private life.

 8. There was no previous criminality in this case; there was thus less  of
    a public interest in removal. Judge Symes found that his presence  here
    had always been "precarious" [26]. However,  he  was  brought  to  this
    country by adult members when he was a  child,  just  before  his  14th
    birthday; he had had no real choice in the matter.

 9. Removing him from the UK would interfere with his private life and take
    him away from a society where he had numerous  friends  as  well  as  a
    girlfriend who resides here and where he had studied with  success.  He
    had a real prospect of employment. To remove him would take  him  to  a
    country where he had not lived for half his  life  and  where  he  last
    resided as a youth and where he has no current connections [27].

10.  Judge  Symes  considered  whether  the   proposed   interference   was
    proportionate.  He  had  regard  to  the  importance   of   maintaining
    immigration control and having a clear and consistent system  of  rules
    by which foreign students are regulated. The claimant is  a  person  of
    good character which is a relevant consideration as stated  by  Burnton
    LJ, in Miah and Others v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 261. He  found  that  the
    claimant had consistently sought to play by the rules [28].

11. Judge Symes found that whilst  not  meeting  the  requirements  of  the
    rules,  the  claimant  had  been  present  in   circumstances   broadly
    consistent with the policy they enshrined. His length of residence here
    was not far short of the 14 year benchmark where a person of immaculate
    character such as the claimant who had made  an  application  before  9
    July 2012, would ordinarily expect to be granted settlement [29].

12. He had lived in the UK for over 13 of his 27 years, close to  half  his
    life. He made his application when he was  under  25.  The  rule  which
    almost had benefited him 'conclusively' namely, the  case  of  a  young
    person under 25 who is not a minor, was not then  in  existence.  There
    was no "reasonableness" requirement in such a case [29].  He would have
    had a strong application any time following his arrival here and before
    he reached majority, as a child of relatives present and  settled  here
    who had sole responsibility  for  his  care.  He  had  not  formed  any
    independent family unit before turning 18. Rule 298 was in  force  over
    that period.

13. However, Judge Symes realised that a near miss was as good  as  a  mile
    [29]. It was nevertheless relevant that his  circumstances  tally  with
    the  circumstances  under  which  leave  under  the  rules   would   be
    appropriately given. He had regard  to  Lord  Carnwath's  statement  in
    Patel and Others v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72 [at 55] that the  balance  drawn
    by the rules may be relevant to the consideration of proportionality.

14. Judge Symes had regard to s.117B of the 2002 Act which he  set  out  in
    full at [30].

15. Whilst the claimant's Article 8 rights have been built on a stay  which
    is precarious, that was referable to decisions made by adult  relatives
    for which he cannot be held  responsible.   Although  there  are  cases
    where it is appropriate to expect a person to recognise that his future
    does not lie in the UK once he reaches majority, in the claimant's case
    he was already well established in education at the time. He would  not
    be a burden on the taxpayer. He speaks good English. Overall, the Judge
    found that this is a case where  there  would  be  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences rendering  his  return  to  Nigeria  disproportionate.  He
    accordingly allowed the appeal.

16. On  9  June  2015,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Frankish  granted  the
    secretary of state permission to appeal. He found that it was  arguable
    that the near miss principles relied on [29] were contrary to Miah  and
    Patel.

17. Mr Whitwell submitted that the Judge applied a near miss  argument  and
    attached undue weight to the possibility that the claimant  might  have
    come close to meeting the requirements under the rules. He referred  to
    SSHD v SS  (Congo)  and  Others  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387.  At  [54]  and
    following, "near  miss"  cases  were  debated.  At  [56]  Lord  Justice
    Richards stated that it cannot be  said  that  the  fact  that  a  case
    involves a "near miss" in relation to the requirements set out  in  the
    rules is wholly irrelevant to the  balancing  exercise  required  under
    Article 8.  If  the  applicant  can  show  that  there  are  individual
    interests at stake covered by Article 8 which give  rise  to  a  strong
    claim that compelling circumstances may exist to  justify  a  grant  of
    leave to enter outside the rules, the fact that  the  case  is  also  a
    "near miss" may be a relevant  consideration  which  tips  the  balance
    under Article 8 in their favour. In such a case, he will be able to say
    that the detrimental impact on the public interest in issue if leave is
    granted in his favour will be somewhat less than in a case where a  gap
    between the applicant's position and the requirements of the  rules  is
    great and the risk that they may end up having recourse to public funds
    and resources is therefore greater.

18. That was different from  a  case  where  the  claimant  contended  that
    improvements in the position of their sponsors were on the horizon  and
    that there was a reasonable prospect within a  period  of  months  that
    they would be able to satisfy  the  requirements  of  the  rules.  That
    afforded weak support for a claim for a grant of leave to enter outside
    the rules. The secretary of state is entitled to enforce the  rules  in
    the usual way.

19. Mr Whitwell submitted that with regard  to  length  of  residence,  the
    Judge had dismissed the claim under paragraph 276  ADE.   The  claimant
    had not been here for 20 years. Nor were there significant obstacles to
    his returning to Nigeria. Accordingly, 14 years do  not  on  their  own
    constitute a basis for rendering the decision disproportionate.

20. Since he has become an adult,  the  claimant  has  taken  no  steps  to
    regularise his position.

21. He can be described as having "good character"  as  the  Judge  did  in
    paragraph 29 ("immaculate character").  Taken  as  a  whole,  then,  it
    cannot be said that this contributed towards tipping the balance in his
    favour.

22. Mr Whitwell also submitted that the Judge failed to  apply  the  public
    interest factors particularised in s.117B of the 2006  Act.  There  was
    nothing to show that the Judge gave little weight to his  finding  that
    the claimant's  presence  has  always  been  precarious.  Although  the
    grounds in support of the application for permission contend  that  his
    stay  in  the  UK  has  always  been  unlawful  for  the  purposes   of
    s.117B(4)(a), that would not make any  significant  difference  to  the
    approach required.

23. The claimant was only basing a claim on his  private  life.  There  was
    little evidence of his circumstances. At [31] no reasons were given  as
    to why he would not be a burden on the taxpayer. Mr  Whitwell  referred
    to the claimant's Barclays  bank  account  (42-47).  This  contained  a
    summary of his account between July  and  August  2009  and  between  1
    January 2011 to 2 February 2011. It is evident  from  those  statements
    that the claimant might have funded himself through his  education  but
    the Judge has given no reasons and  it  would  not  be  appropriate  to
    "glean" from the determination that that was in the Judge's  mind  when
    making the finding.

24. There was accordingly no evidence of financial independence  justifying
    a finding that he would not in the future be a burden on public  funds,
    contrary to s.117B(3).

25. There are other grounds Mr Whitwell relied on, including the contention
    that the Judge failed to take proper account  of  the  public  interest
    factor as particularised in s.117B(1), either explicitly or implicitly.
    The importance of maintaining immigration control although referred  to
    was not taken into account or given any weight in  the  proportionality
    exercise.

26. On behalf of the claimant, Mr Karim submitted that the Judge had  given
    a full and detailed determination with  adequate  reasoning.  He  noted
    that counsel had applied for an adjournment before Judge Symes  as  the
    claimant was no longer in a relationship with  the  partner  which  had
    formed the basis of the initial application. He was however  in  a  new
    relationship with a French national who could not come to court on  the
    date of the hearing. Judge Symes refused the adjournment application as
    there was no evidence as to the  existence  of  that  new  relationship
    indicating that it was too insubstantial to form part of EEA or Article
    8 rights.

27. The Judge had also heard oral evidence including from the claimant. The
    secretary of state had been unrepresented. The Judge had taken  account
    of the Surendran  guidelines.  There  had  been  no  challenge  to  the
    claimant's evidence in the refusal letter. It was generally  consistent
    with the documents available. He  accepted  that  the  claimant  was  a
    witness of truth and he  accepted  the  historical  facts  set  out  in
    establishing the foundation upon which the appeal should be  determined
    [19].

28. The Judge took into account authorities such as Nagre and Aliyu  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 3319 and the Court of Appeal decision in MM and Others  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 985.

29. The Judge also bore in mind the general immigration policy  represented
    in the rules insofar as they  provide  for  the  regular  migration  of
    individuals to  the  UK  and  make  express  provision  for  long  term
    residence in limited situations, such as where a person has lived  here
    for a specified period of his life [24]. That is an example  of  having
    regard to immigration policy.

30. The Judge at [26] had regard to a case where there  is  no  criminality
    and where there is less of a public interest in removal. On  the  other
    hand the Judge expressly noted that the claimant had always  been  here
    "precariously." The  Judge  has  accordingly  taken  into  account  the
    provisions of s.117B(4) and (5).

31. it was further submitted that  Judge  Symes  had  full  regard  to  the
    claimant's immigration history in the context of deciding  whether  the
    serious interference with private life is proportionate. He had  regard
    to the impact of that interference. It would be to take  him  from  the
    society where he had numerous friends and a girlfriend who resides here
    for much of the time and where he has studied with success.  He  has  a
    real prospect of employment  in  the  financial  services  industry  or
    elsewhere. If returned he would be placed in a country where he has not
    lived for half his life  and  where  he  last  resided  as  a  youthful
    adolescent. He does not have any current connections there [27].

32. At paragraph  28,  the  Judge  again  acknowledged  the  importance  of
    maintaining  immigration  control  which  means  having  a  clear   and
    consistent system of rules by which foreign students are regulated.

33. Mr Karim noted that the Judge also had regard to the test under Article
    8, which is whether his removal would be unjustifiably harsh, which was
    a "higher test" than paragraph 276.

34. The Judge was aware [24] that a free standing Article  8  consideration
    was justified only where there were exceptional circumstances producing
    unjustifiably harsh consequences so as to outweigh the public interest,
    albeit having regard to the principles of proportionality [24].

35. Mr Karim submitted that the argument  that  the  Judge  attached  undue
    weight to the claimant's good character was misconceived. The issue  of
    weight is a matter for the Judge.

36. Nor could the Judge have only referred to the fact  that  the  claimant
    had a good immigration history. It also means that the claimant has not
    committed any criminal offences  or  committed  deception.   Hence  his
    reliance and reference to Uner v Netherlands was appropriate. The Judge
    expressly stated that this is a case  where  there  is  no  criminality
    which means there is less of a public interest in his removal.

37. Mr Karim submitted that the Judge did not "arguably focus upon  a  near
    miss  argument"  as  contended  in  ground  1(c)  of   the   permission
    application. He expressly stated that a "near miss is as good as a mile
    in human rights terms." However, he properly identified the context  in
    which it might be relevant, namely when considering the proportionality
    of a proposed interference with Article 8 rights.

38. Mr Karim referred to and relied on Patel v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72, at  [55
    - 56] where Lord Carnwath, although rejecting the  concept  of  a  near
    miss  principle  in  earlier  cases,  stated  that  the  practical   or
    compassionate considerations which underlay the policy are also  likely
    to be relevant to the cases of those who fall just outside it,  and  to
    that  extent,  may  add  weight  to  their  argument  for   exceptional
    treatment. There was no presumption  or  expectation  that  the  policy
    would be extended to embrace them.

39. He also referred to SSHD v SS (Congo), supra, at paragraph 56 where the
    Court of Appeal stated that it cannot be said that the fact that a case
    involves a "near miss" in relation to the requirements set out  in  the
    Rules is wholly irrelevant to the  balancing  exercise  required  under
    Article 8. If an applicant can show that there are individual interests
    at stake covered by Article 8 which give rise to a  strong  claim  that
    compelling circumstances may exist to justify the  grant  of  leave  to
    enter outside the rules, the fact that the case is also a  "near  miss"
    case may be a relevant  consideration  which  tips  the  balance  under
    Article 8 in their favour.

40. In such a case the applicant will be able to say that  the  detrimental
    impact on the public interest in issue if leave to enter is granted  in
    their favour will be somewhat less than in a case where the gap between
    the applicant's position and the requirements of the  rules  is  great,
    and the risk that they may end up having recourse to public  funds  and
    resources is therefore greater.

41. Accordingly, he submitted that it would be an injustice to characterise
    Judge Symes' determination as falling foul of the "near miss" rule.

42. With regard to the assertion that  the  s.117B  factors  had  not  been
    properly considered, he submitted  that  Judge  Symes  had  had  proper
    regard to them at [30]. He  set  out  the  whole  of  the  section.  He
    reminded himself of the need to take account of statutory factors which
    were relevant. Accordingly, this was at the forefront of  the  decision
    making process.

43. He also referred to Dube  (ss.  117A-117D)  [2015]  UKUT  00090  (IAC).
    Judges are required  to  take  into  account  a  number  of  enumerated
    considerations. The sections 117A-D are not  an  a  la  carte  menu  of
    considerations. Judges are duty bound to "have regard" to the specified
    considerations.

44. The Tribunal also stated that it is not an error  of  law  to  fail  to
    refer to s.117A-D considerations if the Judge has applied the  test  he
    or she was supposed to apply according to its terms;  what  matters  is
    substance, not form.

45. Mr Karim submitted that the Judge has expressly referred  to  this  and
    has taken the sections into account. Paragraph 31 of the  determination
    constitutes a summary which represents a "culmination of his findings."



46. Mr Karim also referred to Shizad (sufficiency of  reasons:  set  aside)
    [2013] UKUT 00085 (IAC). Although there is a legal duty to give a brief
    explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which an  appeal
    is determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as a
    whole makes sense, having regard to the material accepted by the Judge.



47.  Although  the  decision  may  contain  an  error  of  law  where   the
    requirements to give adequate reasons are not met, the  Upper  Tribunal
    would not normally set aside a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    where there has been no misdirection of law, the fact  finding  process
    cannot be criticised and the relevant Country Guidance has  been  taken
    into account, unless the conclusions the Judge draws from  the  primary
    data were not reasonably open to him or her.

48. Judge Symes has set these out. The claimant's background, including his
    education and residence here, as well as his realistic  prospects  that
    he will not be a burden on taxpayers, has been dealt with. There was no
    evidence that he has been a burden on the public purse.

49. Mr Karim accordingly submitted that the claimant's grounds constitute a
    disagreement with the  proportionality  findings.  There  was  moreover
    nothing irrational or perverse in those findings.

    Assessment

50. Judge Symes has  appropriately  directed  himself  in  accordance  with
    relevant authorities such as Nagre and MM and others to  which  I  have
    referred.

51. He has had regard to the length of the claimant's residence in the  UK,
    which was over 13 years. He has lived here for almost half his life. If
    he had made his application before 9 July 2012, it is expected that  he
    would have been granted settlement. However, he was no longer  able  to
    meet the requirements under paragraph 276. There  was  also  a  further
    basis in which he might have had a strong application  as  a  child  of
    relatives present and settled here.

52. Judge Symes recognised that a "near miss is as  good  as  a  mile".  He
    nevertheless had regard to Lord Carnwath's statement that  the  balance
    drawn  by  the  rules  may  be  relevant  to   the   consideration   of
    proportionality.

53. He had regard to SS (Congo), supra, that the fact that a case  involves
    a "near miss" in relation to the requirements set out in the  rules  is
    not wholly irrelevant to the balancing exercise under Article 8.  Where
    he has a strong  claim  that  compelling  circumstances  may  exist  to
    justify the grant of leave outside the rules, the fact that the case is
    also a near miss case may  be  a  relevant  consideration  tipping  the
    balance under Article 8 in his favour.

54. That is because the detrimental impact on the public interest in  issue
    if leave is granted in his favour will be somewhat less than in a  case
    where there is a great gap between his position and the requirements of
    the rules. That is because the risk that he may end up having  recourse
    to public funds and resources is therefore greater.

55. Judge Symes has appropriately directed himself in accordance  with  the
    relevant s.117B public interest considerations.

56. He was also aware of and thus took  into  account  the  fact  that  his
    Article 8 rights have  been  built  on  a  stay  which  is  precarious.
    However, that was mitigated by the fact that this was as  a  result  of
    decisions  made  by  adult  relatives  for  which  he  cannot  be  held
    responsible.

57. In this case, he was already well established in education at the  time
    that he reached majority. He found that he would not be a burden on the
    taxpayer and spoke good English.  That  was  a  finding  based  on  the
    evidence.  There was thus no suggestion  that  the  claimant  had  ever
    availed himself of public benefits.

58. The Judge had regard  to  the  effects  of  removing  him.  That  would
    significantly interfere with his private life. It would take him from a
    society in which he had numerous friends as well as  a  girlfriend  who
    resides here much of the time. He had a  real  prospect  of  employment
    here in the financial services industry. To  place  him  in  a  country
    where he has not lived for half his life and where he last resided only
    as a youthful adolescent,  with  no  extant  connections,  would  be  a
    significant interference.

59. Although the reasons for the findings might have been  more  fully  set
    out, I find that the Judge has given proper reasons for the conclusions
    on the central issue. I find that the decision as  a  whole  does  make
    sense, having regard to the evidence and facts accepted by the Judge on
    a cumulative basis.

60. Nor is this a case where the conclusions that he drew from the evidence
    available were not reasonably open to him. It  might  be  that  another
    Judge would  have  come  to  a  different  conclusion.  However,  I  am
    satisfied that the decision of Judge Symes has not been shown  to  have
    been materially flawed in any way.  Nor is it irrational or perverse in
    any way.



    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not  involve  the
    making of any material error of law.  The  decision  shall  accordingly
    stand.

    No anonymity direction is made.






    Signed   Date 25/7/2015


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer
