
                                                                   [pic]
Upper Tribunal    Appeal Number: IA/38443/2013
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Determined at Field House                     |Notice sent                  |
|On: 24 April 2014                             |On: 25 April 2014            |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                          Reenaben Punambhai Patel
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

                          NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL AND
                   REASONS FOR THE TRIBUNAL GIVING CONSENT

 1. The appellant is a citizen of India.  She  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State of the 2 September
    2013. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 30  December  2013.  Judge  King  granted  the  appellant
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. By way of a letter to the Upper Tribunal dated the  23  April  2014  the
    appellant's legal representative states that the  appellant  "wishes  to
    withdraw her appeal", having first set  out  the  appellant's  name  and
    appeal reference number.

 3. Consent of the Upper Tribunal is required for a party  to  withdraw  its
    case. Having carefully considered the facts of this appeal as  a  whole,
    and observing that the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  was
    the successful party before the First-tier Tribunal, I give such consent
    to the appellant to withdraw her case.

 4. Accordingly with my consent, and pursuant to rule 17(5) of the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,  this  appeal  is  recorded  as
    "Withdrawn with the consent of the Upper Tribunal".  This  is  a  Notice
    pursuant to rule 17(5) to inform the parties that the  appellant's  case
    is withdrawn.

 5. The effect of the  appellant's  case  being  withdrawn  from  the  Upper
    Tribunal is that the proceedings before the Upper  Tribunal  are  at  an
    end. There is no appeal before the Upper  Tribunal  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision shall stand.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 24 April 2014
















































