
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38530/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Columbus House, Newport             |Decision Promulgated          |
|On 29 September 2016                         |On 04 October 2016            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                  The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey, President,

                                   Between

                                ZIPENG ZHANG
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr  A  Joseph,  of  Counsel,  instructed  by  Yangde
                    Lawyers

For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


DECISION

 1. The underlying decision on behalf of the Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department (the "Secretary of State") giving rise to  this  appeal
    took the form of a refusal of  the  application  of  the  Appellant,  a
    citizen of the Republic of China, aged 29 years, for further  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom in the capacity of Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)
    Migrant. The ensuing appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  ("FtT")  was
    dismissed.


 2. The FtT made two principal conclusions.  First,  the  Appellant's  case
    did not satisfy the requirements of the Immigration Rules. Second,  the
    Appellant's alternative case (not previously advanced) under Article  8
    ECHR fell to be dismissed. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  in  the
    following terms:


         "An arguable error of law has arisen in relation to the  extent  of
         the reasoning in the  context  of  proportionality  in  considering
         whether there would be a breach of Article 8  with  regard  to  the
         degree of weight attached by the Judge to the contribution  to  the
         United  Kingdom  economy  by  the  Appellant   as   part   of   his
         consideration of proportionality."




      While a second reason for granting permission to appeal was expressed,
      this is formulated in opaque terms and, properly, was not  pursued  at
      the hearing: see [6] infra.




 3. The nexus between the grant of permission to appeal and the decision of
    the FtT is found in the following passage:


         "On the question of proportionality, I acknowledge  the  submission
         ....  that the Appellant's business  bank  statement  at  May  2009
         shows  considerable  funds  in  the  business  account   making   a
         contribution to the United Kingdom economy.  The Appellant  appears
         to be running a small but profitable business. Also,  I  appreciate
         that the Appellant is the software engineer who undertakes the work
         in the business.  However, there was no evidence before me that  he
         employed other  people  who  would  lose  their  employment  if  he
         returned to China.  Or  that  he  could  not  establish  a  similar
         business in China."




    In a later passage, the Judge gave specific  consideration  to  section
    117B  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act   2002   and
    articulated a conclusion (in  terms)  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision was not disproportionate.




 4. The question for this Tribunal is whether  the  FtT  erred  in  law  in
    making the aforementioned conclusion in the single  respect  identified
    by the permission Judge.  The grant of permission to  appeal,  properly
    analysed, identifies no arguable error of law.  The  vague  terminology
    employed by the permission Judge is that of "error"  and  this  is  not
    redeemed by what follows in the  text.   The  grant  of  permission  to
    appeal impels inexorably to the conclusion that  the  permission  Judge
    approached the matter as, in combination, (a) a right of appeal (b)  on
    the merits.


 5. This is a truly hopeless  appeal.   Permission  should  not  have  been
    granted.  The approach of the FtT to the issue  of  proportionality  is
    impeccable.  This conclusion flows inexorably from the  application  of
    the governing principles, to which no reference was made in either  the
    permission to appeal application or the grant  of  permission:  see  MF
    (Nigeria) [2014] EWCA Civ       at [   ]  especially  and,  in  helpful
    summary, SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ        at [       ],  per  Richards
    LJ.


 6. Finally, I draw attention to the terms of the second reason articulated
    in the grant of permission to appeal:


         "A further arguable error of law in respect of the  delineation  of
         the application of the criteria pursuant to  Section  117  and  the
         extent of the reasoning set out in that context."




      I reiterate that grants or refusals of permission to appeal are not to
      be equated with final judgments and do not require a  detailed  essay.
      However, they must satisfy the minimum requirement  of  coherence  and
      intelligibility.   The  abandonment  of  this  aspect  of  the  appeal
      requires no elaboration.


DECISION


 7. I dismiss the appeal and affirm the decision of the FtT.








                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                     Date: 29 September 2016

