
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38647/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 June 2016                      |On 27 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge conway


                                   Between

                           Mr NOEL EVERTON MURRAY
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mohammed
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born in 1959.  He appeals against
    a decision of the Secretary of State  made  on  22  September  2014  to
    refuse his application for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  outside  the
    Immigration Rules on the basis of his long residence and his long  term
    relationship with a British citizen.

 2. His immigration history is that he entered the UK on 3 October 2000  as
    a visitor for six months.  He overstayed.  His application for ILR  was
    made on 8 May 2014.  It was  refused  under  paragraph  322(1)  of  the
    Rules.

 3. He appealed.  Following a hearing at Taylor House on 23 April 2015  FtT
    Judge Wellesley-Cole dismissed the appeal.

 4. She noted  the  issues  to  be  whether  the  Appellant  satisfied  the
    requirements for leave to remain as a  partner  under  Appendix  FM  or
    alternatively  whether  there  were  exceptional  circumstances   under
    Article 8 of ECHR.  On the former, the issues identified  were  whether
    the Appellant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a  partner
    who is in the UK and is a British citizen and there are  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life with that partner continuing  outside  the  UK
    (paragraph  A276B and R-LTR.1.1(a)(iv)).  The  FtT's  findings  are  at
    paragraph 16 ff.  Having heard evidence  from  the  Appellant  and  his
    claimed partner Ms [H], she found there to be  discrepancies  in  their
    accounts.  Also, a lack of documentary evidence  in  support  of  their
    claim to  have  been  living  together  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship.

 5. The FtT also found that there would be no insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family life being continued outside the UK

 6. The Appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  which  was  refused.   On
    reapplication to  the  Upper  Tribunal  permission  was  granted  on  2
    September 2015.

    Error of Law

 7. Following the error of law hearing I issued the following decision:

         '...

         9.   At the error of law hearing before me Mr Mohammad's main point
             was that the FtT's analysis and findings in respect of whether
             the Appellant and Ms [H]  are  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship was inadequate.  In particular the fact that  the
             Appellant had lived at various addresses did not detract  from
             the genuineness of the relationship.   He  has  satisfactorily
             explained his history.  He had been itinerant.

         10.  Noting comments made by the judge who granted  permission,  Mr
             Mohammad submitted that there were  further  issues  with  the
             decision in particular why witness evidence was discounted  as
             "self serving", and how an entry clearance  application  might
             succeed as Ms [H] is now working when findings had  been  made
             that they are not in a genuine relationship.  Such did nothing
             for the clarity of the FtT's reasoning.

         11.  Mrs Sreeraman's position was that it was clear  that  the  FtT
             had considered the evidence in detail.  She had given adequate
             reasons  for  her  findings  that  the  relationship  was  not
             genuine.  Such findings were not  irrational.   She  had  then
             gone on to conclude that  no  freestanding  examination  under
             Article 8 was necessary and had  given  adequate  reasons  for
             reaching that conclusion.

         12.  In considering this matter the first material issue is whether
             the FtT showed inadequate reasoning in concluding  that  there
             was no genuine and subsisting relationship.   She  took  three
             points.

         13.  First, a discrepancy between the Appellant who said  they  had
             met eleven years before and been together for eight years, and
             Ms [H] who said she had known him for eight  years  but  could
             not recall when he moved in.  The FtT  considered  that  there
             would have been "clear recollection of such an important point
             in their relationship" [16]

         14.  Second, the judge was concerned  by  the  "numerous  different
             addresses" the  Appellant  had  resided  at.   These  included
             "Craven Park, a cousin's address, and also the  fact  that  in
             2012 it was a different address on his NHS  prescription  when
             he said he was visiting her and they were not living  together
             then which is at odds with his contention that they  had  been
             living at her address together for eight years".   Further,  a
             December 2008 patient registration status gave his address  as
             Craven Park Road.  It was "not addressed to Ms [H]'s residence
             suggesting they were not living together." [17]

         15.  Third, there was only one documentary item, a British Gas bill
             addressed to Ms [H] dated January 2014 with the  same  address
             on his application.

         16.  I agree with Mr Mohammed that certain comments by the judge on
             the issue of the  relationship  lack  clarity.   Thus,  it  is
             unclear at [17] why witness evidence was discounted  as  "self
             serving" also it is not explained why the judge found at  [18]
             that the Appellant and Ms [H]  were  "undermined"  during  the
             course of cross-examination.

         17.  However in my judgment,  the  conclusion  that  there  was  no
             genuine and subsisting relationship was open to  her  for  the
             reasons she gave.  Her analysis is adequate.

         18.  I agree with the comment that  the  judge's  handling  of  the
             other limb of EX.1 (insurmountable obstacles  to  family  life
             continuing outside the UK) is unsatisfactory.   She  does  not
             appear to have given it any  significant  analysis.   Further,
             her comment that an entry clearance application might  succeed
             as the partner is now working is at odds with her finding that
             the  relationship   is   not   genuine.    However,   as   the
             insurmountable obstacles requirement is  in  addition  to  the
             genuine and subsisting relationship requirement any errors  in
             that regard are not material.

         19.  The main problem with the decision is the judge's approach  to
             private life.  She referred to paragraph 276ADE  at  [19]  but
             did not give it  consideration.   Specifically,  she  gave  no
             regard to 276ADE (1)(vi)  and  whether  there  would  be  very
             significant  obstacles  to  the  Appellant's  integration   in
             Jamaica.  In that regard she made no findings and there was no
             analysis.  In failing to apply or properly consider the law as
             set out in the Rules the judge materially erred.

         20.  The decision is set aside to the extent  that  the  appeal  be
             reheard in the Upper Tribunal  by  myself,  on  the  issue  of
             private life.  The decision on family life stands.'

    Evidence at resumed hearing

 8. The case came before me at the resumed hearing on 22 June 2016.

 9. For that hearing I had before me a bundle dated 8 June 2016  containing
    several witness statements.  Also, two skeleton arguments (19 June  and
    22 June 2016).  There was also the bundle that was before the FtT.

10. I heard brief oral evidence from Mr Murray, the Appellant.  He  adopted
    his two statements (14 April 2015 and 6 June 2016).

11. In cross-examination he said he had been in a relationship with Ms  [H]
    for more than 8 years and they have lived together for 8 years.  Family
    members have supported him financially since 2000.

12. Asked how he had filled his time as an overstayer since 2000 he said he
    had helped with the children and cleaned the church and visited  social
    clubs.  Referred to NHS records lodged by him, he was asked how he  had
    been able to access NHS treatment. He said he went to the GP and signed
    on.

13. I also heard briefly from Mr Richard Murray. He adopted  his  statement
    (undated).  He is a cousin of the Appellant.

14. In cross-examination he said he had lived with the Appellant  for  four
    years.  He knew he was an overstayer but did not do anything about  it.
    It did not come up much in conversation.  He could not  recollect  when
    the Appellant started living with Ms [H].  He said that when  he  moved
    to another address, Weald Lane, in 2004 the Appellant did not  go  with
    him.  He thought that it was not long after that the Appellant  started
    the relationship with Ms [H].  They have been  together  a  long  time.
    Asked how if the Appellant has not been working since 2000 he was  able
    to get by financially, he said the Appellant and Ms [H] work things out
    between them.

15. In brief submissions Mr Walker sought to rely on  the  refusal  letter.
    However, he did appear to accept that there was now  some  evidence  of
    current family life which needed to be considered as an aspect  of  the
    Appellant's private life, namely Ms [H] and relatives.  That  apart  he
    left it for me.

16. Mr Mohammad simply referred me to the two skeleton arguments.  He asked
    me to look at the matter in the round in considering  paragraph  276ADE
    (1)(vi) and Article 8.  He submitted that it was not fatal  that  there
    had been a long delay before the Appellant  sought  to  legitimise  his
    status.







    Conclusions

17.  In  considering  this  matter  the   starting   point   is   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi).  The issue is whether there would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to the Appellant's integration into the country to  which  he
    would have to go, in this case Jamaica if required to leave the UK.

18. It is not in dispute that the Appellant has been in the UK  since  late
    2000 thus nearly sixteen years.  He  claimed  to  have  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with Ms [H] stretching back some eight years as
    well as having established a private life in the UK which  deserved  to
    be respected by the Respondent.  As indicated the claim that there  was
    a genuine and subsisting relationship  was  not  accepted  by  the  FtT
    Judge, a conclusion which on the evidence she was entitled to reach.

19. Some very limited documentary evidence (utility bills) was  lodged  for
    the current hearing.  They are in joint names for an address in Jamaica
    Street, London E1 and are dated  2016.   Such  gives  some  documentary
    support for the claim that the Appellant and Ms [H] are at present in a
    relationship.  Such appeared to  be  accepted  by  Mr  Walker  for  the
    Respondent.  However, the  documentary  evidence  before  me  does  not
    support the claim that they have been in a  relationship  for  anything
    like as long as is claimed. Mr Richard Murray's oral evidence  on  that
    matter was entirely vague and does not assist. Nor do  similar  general
    assertions contained in several other statements by relatives. The onus
    is on the Appellant.  I  find  on  the  evidence  before  me  that  the
    relationship is much more recent and I am not satisfied it is even  two
    years.  Nonetheless the fact that there is at present a relationship is
    an aspect of his private life that must be considered.

20. As for whatever other private life  the  Appellant  may  have  acquired
    during his time here there was a striking lack of evidence.  The thrust
    of Mr Richard Murray's evidence and that of  the  other  witnesses  who
    gave written statements, and almost all of whom are relatives, is  that
    the Appellant has been strongly involved in the local community,  e.g.,
    'a strong bond with  his  church  and  is  also  a  keen  volunteer  in
    community service' (Mr Noel [H]).   Such  claims  are  almost  entirely
    unsupported by independent evidence. Apart from a three line note  from
    a church (2015) saying  he  has  attended  for  years,  I  see  nothing
    indicating  wider  community  involvement,  evidence  which  one  would
    reasonably have thought would have been easily available.

21. My conclusion from the evidence is that apart from the  fact  that  the
    Appellant has been in the UK for nearly sixteen years, which is clearly
    a lengthy period, and what I find to be  his  fairly  recently  started
    relationship with Ms [H] and  family  members  there  is  a  dearth  of
    evidence of significant private life.  I note also  the  evidence  that
    the Appellant does not and has never had a paying job.  He also appears
    to own no property or any other significant assets.

22. As indicated the issue under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) is  whether  there
    are very  significant  obstacles  to  his  integration  into  his  home
    country, Jamaica.

23. The Appellant is in his late fifties.  Although he has been in  the  UK
    for nearly sixteen years, more than two thirds of  his  life  has  been
    spent in Jamaica.  It is claimed that he has no family in Jamaica. I do
    not believe him. As the Respondent noted in the refusal letter he  said
    in his application form (A10) that he still had family ties in Jamaica.
    Even if he has no family he is a man still  of  relatively  young  age.
    There is nothing to indicate that he is in  anything  other  than  good
    health.  There would on return be no language difficulties.

24. If the evidence of the Appellant and witnesses is true he has been able
    to get by financially through the kindness  of  family  here.   He  has
    never worked. I do not accept the submission in the  skeleton  argument
    that if returned he would be destitute. There seems no  reason  why  if
    necessary they could not continue to give him such support  on  return.
    I note further that a witness (Peter Matthews) says  in  his  statement
    that the Appellant is an 'experienced furniture maker and a  very  good
    builder' who he believes 'will not have  any  difficulties  in  finding
    employment'.  While the witness evidently means in the  UK,  I  see  no
    reason why such would also not apply on return to Jamaica.

25. I now consider the issue of his relationship with Ms [H].  I have found
    that whilst there is a relationship it has not been for  anything  like
    as long as claimed.  As indicated, on the documentary  evidence  before
    me it does not extend even two years.

26. Ms [H] is a woman of Jamaican origin who became a  British  citizen  in
    1985.  She entered the relationship in the full knowledge that  he  was
    an overstayer.  Her family situation is that she has a daughter in  her
    thirties and grandchildren.  It  may  well  be  that  she  has  a  good
    relationship with her daughter and grandchildren.  It may also be  that
    the Appellant has a relationship with them.

27. However, if the Appellant and Ms [H] wish the relationship to  continue
    I see no compelling reasons why such could not be in Jamaica.   Ms  [H]
    is a woman who was born in Jamaica in 1953  albeit  she  is  a  British
    citizen (from 1985) who has lived many years here.  She appears  to  be
    in reasonable health. No up to date medical evidence was put before  me
    suggesting otherwise. Like the Appellant she  would  have  no  language
    difficulties.

28. It appears that she does not own property  here,  rather,  the  Jamaica
    Street house is rented (A4).  She is in work and clearly has skills.  I
    see no obvious reason why such skills  would  not  be  transferable  to
    Jamaica so that she and the Appellant could work to support themselves.
     It has already been noted that  despite  it  being  claimed  that  the
    Appellant has never worked in  the  UK  he  and  Ms  [H]  have  got  by
    financially.  There seems no reason why they would not be able to do so
    as a couple in Jamaica.

29. Were they to go to Jamaica it is likely that Ms [H] and  the  Appellant
    would have less face-to-face contact with Ms [H]'s family and with  his
    own adult relatives here.  They have their own lives to lead.   I  also
    see no reason why regular contact could not be continued  between  them
    and respective family, adult children and grand children in the  UK  by
    visits and normal methods of communication.

30. In summary, for the reasons given I conclude that the Appellant has not
    shown that there would be very significant obstacles to his integration
    into Jamaica either as an individual or with Ms [H].

31. I proceed to consider whether in this case it is necessary to  consider
    the Appellant's right to a private life outside the Immigration  Rules.
    The case of SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 clarified that there must be
    something 'compelling' about a claim for it to succeed upon  Article  8
    grounds outside the Immigration Rules.

32. Further guidance was offered in the case of R (on  the  application  of
    Sunassee) v UTIAC  [2015]  EWHC  1604  (Admin)  at  [36]  which  states
    'Whether  the  circumstances   are   described   as   "compelling"   or
    "exceptional" is not a matter of substance.   They  must  be  relevant,
    weighty and not fully provided for within the Immigration Rules'.

33. In order for leave to remain to be granted outside  the  provisions  of
    the Immigration Rules, there  need  to  be  compelling  or  exceptional
    circumstances not sufficiently recognised under the Rules that outweigh
    the public interest in removal.  The fact that the decision  under  the
    Rules may result in some hardship and inconvenience for  the  Appellant
    is not of itself sufficient.  It is necessary to show  that  there  are
    circumstances in which the refusal would result in unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences for the Appellant such that the refusal of the application
    would not be proportionate.

34. In that regard the Appellant's stay in the UK was always temporary  and
    precarious and any  private  life  acquired  in  the  UK  in  the  full
    knowledge that his stay here  after  the  six  months  lawful  stay  in
    2000/01 has been unlawful, should be given less  weight  when  balanced
    against the facts in favour of removal.  It is a feature of the witness
    statements that emphasis is placed on the  Appellant  during  his  time
    here having been of good character  (other  presumably  than  remaining
    unlawfully).  Such does nothing to assist his  case.  As  the  Tribunal
    said in Nasim and others (Article 8)  [2014]  UKUT  00025  'A  person's
    human rights are not enhanced by not committing  criminal  offences  or
    not relying on public funds.' [head note]

35. Looking at the evidence in the round I see  nothing  to  indicate  that
    there are compelling or exceptional circumstances  which  require  this
    matter to be considered outside the Rules.

36. Even if I am wrong in that  regard  looking  at  the  totality  of  the
    evidence and considering the public interest factors in  s117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 I see no sufficient  basis
    to find that the circumstances of the  Appellant  individually  and  in
    terms of his relationship with his  partner  and  the  length  of  stay
    outweigh the Respondent's legitimate interest in removing him. Although
    he speaks English, he is not financially independent and, as indicated,
    his relationship with Ms [H] and  any  private  life  more  widely  was
    established when he was in the UK unlawfully.  As  such  it  should  be
    given little weight (s117 (4)).

37. I would add that if Ms [H] does not wish to return to Jamaica with  the
    Appellant it would be open to the Appellant to return alone and to seek
    entry clearance under the Rules.  I  do  not  find  that  it  would  be
    disproportionate to require him to do so.  In this case, it  could  not
    be said that an application for entry clearance upon return is bound to
    succeed so that it would be a mere bureaucratic interference to require
    him to return to Jamaica.  He has hitherto failed to establish that  he
    has been in a relationship for at least two years.  Also the  financial
    circumstances of Ms [H] have not been set out  in  detail.   I  see  no
    compelling reasons why he should be allowed  to  'jump  the  queue'  by
    circumventing the requirements of the Rules through a  grant  of  leave
    outside the Rules.

38. The appeal fails.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First tier Tribunal is set aside and remade as follows:

    The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules.

    The appeal is dismissed under Article 8.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway                      27 September 2016

