
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
              (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/38438/2014
                                                               IA/38440/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 20 May 2015                       |On 28 May 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MS ROSE CHINEZE NKIRUKA
                        MISS JENNIFER NKECHI NKIRUKA
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E. Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Ojo of Graceland Solicitors


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-tier  Tribunal.  We  find  that  no
particular issues arise on the facts of this case  that  give  rise  to  the
need for a direction. For this reason no anonymity direction is made.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.    The Secretary of State was granted permission to  appeal  against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Clapham allowing the respondent's
    appeal in a decision that was  promulgated  on  21  January  2015.  The
    appeal was determined without a hearing on the papers that were  before
    the Tribunal. For the sake of convenience this decision will  refer  to
    the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal albeit that the
    respondent is technically the appellant in this particular appeal.

2.    The first appellant is a citizen of Nigeria whose date of birth is  24
    August 1964. The second appellant is the  first  appellant's  daughter.
    She is also a citizen of Nigeria, and her date of  birth  is  30  April
    1995. They appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the respondent's
    decision to refuse to issue residence cards recognising their right  of
    residence as family members of an EEA national.  The  only  reason  for
    refusal was that the respondent was not satisfied  that  the  appellant
    had produced sufficient evidence  to  show  that  her  husband  was  in
    employment and therefore exercising his rights of free movement  within
    the meaning of regulation 6 of The Immigration (European Economic Area)
    Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regulations 2006").

3.    The judge accepted that there  was  evidence  to  show  that  the  EEA
    sponsor ceased to work for Dockside  Personnel  in  November  2013  but
    there was also evidence to show that he continued to work for a  second
    employer, Alpha Consult UAE Ltd, until at least the  middle  of  August
    2014. The judge noted  that  the  situation  had  moved  on  since  the
    respondent made the original decision but concluded  that  if  the  EEA
    sponsor was actively seeking work after his second job at Alpha Consult
    UAE Ltd came to an end that "would not  necessarily  be  fatal  to  the
    position of the appellants" [10].

4.    Permission to appeal was granted on the basis  that  it  was  arguable
    that the First-tier judge had erred in law  because  he  did  not  have
    evidence before him to show that the EEA sponsor was a jobseeker at the
    date the appeal was decided. The grounds argued that it was  not  clear
    on what basis the judge considered he had power to allow the appeal and
    "remit" the case back to the respondent for further consideration.

5.    The  matter  came  before  us  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in law.

Submissions

6.    At the hearing we asked Mr Ojo what  evidence  there  was  before  the
    judge that might indicate that he was a jobseeker. Mr Ojo was  able  to
    point to a number of emails in the appellant's bundle before the First-
    tier Tribunal, which showed that the EEA sponsor made  enquiries  about
    jobs during November and December 2014. Mr Tufan accepted that  on  the
    face of the evidence it appeared to  show  that  the  EEA  sponsor  was
    looking for work during that time.

Conclusions

7.    In light of the evidence that  was  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    which showed on the balance of probabilities that the EEA  sponsor  was
    likely to have been actively seeking employment in the  period  shortly
    before the determination of the appeal, we  find  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge was entitled to come to  the  conclusion  that  the  EEA
    sponsor was a jobseeker and therefore  fulfilled  the  requirements  of
    regulation 6(1)(a) of the EEA Regulations 2006 at the date  the  appeal
    was decided. For this reason the decision discloses no  material  error
    of law.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand



Signed  [pic]    Date 27th May 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

