

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/38435/2010


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |                    Decision & Reasons   |
|On 22nd September 2015                |Promulgated                              |
|                                      |On 14th October 2015                     |
|                                      |                                         |
|                                      |                                         |


                                   Before

                THE PRESIDENT, THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between

                       MISS BIBI NABEELAH FARAH JUMAN
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Harris, Counsel instructed by Raj Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Mauritius born on  23rd  August  1985.
       She arrived in the  United  Kingdom  on  24th  December  2004  as  a
       visitor. She made attempts to vary her leave to remain as a  student
       to attend three  different  colleges  which  were  unsuccessful  and
       overstayed following refusal of the application to remain  with  the
       second college. She then made an application on the  basis  that  to
       remove her would be a breach of her Article 8 ECHR rights,  on  24th
       August 2010. On 7th October 2010 this application was refused with a
       right of appeal which she exercised.

    2. Her appeal was dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal K  S  H
       Miller  in  a  determination  promulgated  on  28th  February  2011.
       Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley on
       grounds limited to  challenging  the  decision  in  respect  of  her
       private life. Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins found an error of law  by
       the First-tier Tribunal but re-made the appeal  dismissing  it  once
       again in a decision promulgated on 25th October 2011.

    3. Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal was refused by the Upper
       Tribunal but granted at an oral renewal  hearing  on  26th  November
       2012 by the Court of Appeal by Lord Justice Ward on the  basis  that
       as although he thought that "this still looks pretty hopeless to me"
       he was "troubled that there may have been serious  maladministration
       by the Secretary of State that it would be wrong to have such weight
       placed on the applicant's failure since 2008 to do  much  about  her
       position and to weigh that against the serious  delay  on  the  Home
       Secretary's part." The parties then agreed to an order by consent on
       14th January 2013 that the appeal be allowed to the extent that  the
       re-making decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins  be  quashed  and
       the matter remitted to the Upper Tribunal limited  to  consideration
       of the appellant's claim to remain in the UK on  the  basis  of  her
       private life pursuant to Article 8 ECHR.

    4. The matter therefore comes before us  to  remake  the  appeal  under
       Article 8 ECHR, limited to the matter  of  the  appellant's  private
       life, in accordance with the grant of permission by  Upper  Tribunal
       Judge Chalkley and the finding of an error of law by Upper  Tribunal
       Judge Perkins.

Evidence & Submissions

    5. Most of what we recite in the following section of our  decision  is
       uncontentious.  In  evidence,  the  appellant  adopted  her  witness
       statement and confirmed it was true and correct.  In  her  statement
       and in her oral evidence, and also relying on  the  history  in  the
       chronology provided by her solicitors her history is as follows.

    6. The appellant had come to the UK aged 19 years in December 2004 with
       the intention of studying travel and tourism at  Best  Care  College
       with a visit visa valid for six months.  She  applied  to  vary  her
       leave to remain to study at this college on 22nd April 2005. However
       the college had misled her and the course she chose was not a degree
       course and  so  did  not  meet  Home  Office  requirements  and  her
       application was rejected.

    7. The appellant then made a second, in time, application to remain  to
       study for a degree in travel tourism and hospitality at LUMT college
       on 8th June 2005. Her leave as a visitor expired on 23rd June  2005.
       This application was refused by the respondent on 13th July 2005  on
       the basis that she could not switch from visitor to student  due  to
       her nationality and she was given no right of  appeal.  This  was  a
       decision which the appellants says was wrong as she was not  a  visa
       national, and so could switch, however having  sought  legal  advice
       from the Immigration Advisory  Service  (IAS)  she  decided  not  to
       appeal as in fact LUMT did not have a certificate  to  show  it  had
       degree awarding powers so the appellant would have  been  unable  to
       win her appeal under the Immigration Rules on that  basis  even  had
       she been properly granted one.

    8. Instead the appellant made a new application to remain with  William
       Shakespeare College to study for a degree  in  travel,  tourism  and
       hospitality. She enrolled with them on 20th July 2005  and  made  an
       application  to  the  respondent  via  IAS  on   26th   July   2005.
       Unfortunately this college was unsatisfactory  from  an  educational
       perspective; and in any case the appellant was refused permission to
       remain to study on the basis of this third application by  the  Home
       Office. However the Home Office did not inform either the  appellant
       or her representatives of the refusal (despite efforts  by  both  to
       discover the fate of the application) but instead sent  the  refusal
       letter to her previous college LUMT. When the decision and what  had
       happened to the refusal was eventually communicated to IAS in August
       2008 the appellant tried to obtain her documents and discovered that
       LUMT had in fact been closed down.

    9. Around the same time, August 2008, the appellant  ceased  to  attend
       William Shakespeare College, whose licence was suspended  after  she
       left by the respondent. The appellant then found  it  impossible  to
       register with any further colleges as she had no leave to remain and
       has not studied in the UK since this time as a result.

   10. The appellant had understood that she was lawfully in the UK  during
       the process described above; she had honestly attempted  to  resolve
       her status as a student, and  felt  her  family  had  made  a  great
       sacrifice in terms of school fees and  assisting  her  to  sort  out
       leave to remain in the UK on this basis. She estimated that they had
       spent about �6000 on her travel costs, school fees  and  application
       fees to the Home Office and all for nothing. She did not see why  in
       these circumstances she should  return  to  Mauritius  to  apply  to
       remain as a student in the UK. She has reported to the  Home  Office
       regularly every month since 2010 from which time it was clear to her
       she was seen as an overstayer in the UK.  She  felt  that  the  Home
       Office had subjected her to long delays.

   11. Although the appellant had not managed to study whilst in the UK she
       had dedicated her time to helping her sister and brother-in-law with
       their three children who were three, four and eleven years old  when
       she arrived, and who are now 14, 16 and 22 years old. She has always
       shared their bedroom and has become very  close  to  them.  She  has
       taken them to school, helped  with  homework,  shared  holidays  and
       taken them out. She has also  helped  with  housework.  Her  closest
       family member is her sister: they grew up together  and  have  spent
       the past 11 years living together. She has never worked  in  the  UK
       and is financially dependent on her sister  and  brother-in-law.  If
       she had work permission she is certain she could  obtain  employment
       as a carer with her  brother-in-law's  employer.  She  believes  she
       would be an asset to the UK if she were allowed to remain.

   12. In Mauritius the appellant's only relatives are her mother who lives
       in her own home and two sisters who are married  and  have  separate
       lives, but who are there to care for her mother.

   13. Mr Harris submitted  that  there  had  been  what  might  be  termed
       maladministration by the respondent. Wrong decisions had been  made,
       such as refusing the second student application without a  right  of
       appeal on the basis the appellant was a visa  national  and  sending
       the third refusal to the second college that had been  closed  down.
       In addition the respondent had failed to communicate the  third  and
       final student refusal effectively  until  August  2008,  some  three
       years after the application was made. He further contended  that  it
       is arguable that there never was good service of this decision.  The
       appellant had shown persistence in her attempts to study in  the  UK
       and he argued, had  been  encouraged  in  her  applications  by  the
       respondent. She had remained in the UK because she had  invested  in
       these attempts and formed progressively stronger bonds with  her  UK
       based family.

   14. Mr Harris submitted that  s.117B(4)  and  (5)  of  the  Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (henceforth the 2002  Act)  did  not
       mean that mean that it was not possible to have  regard  to  matters
       such as delay in accordance with EB(Kosovo) v SSHD  [2008]  UKHL  41
       and the Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40 principle and that  this  is
       consistent with what is said in Deelah and others  (section  117B  -
       ambit) [2015] UKUT 00515 (IAC) at paragraph 20 where it is said that
       these provisions are drawing on  existing  Strasbourg  and  domestic
       jurisprudence.

   15. Mr Melvin submitted that the appellant could not succeed  under  the
       Immigration Rules relating to Article 8  ECHR  at  paragraph  276ADE
       because she  had  not  completed  20  years  leave  to  remain  and,
       alternatively,  she  had  not  shown  that  there  would   be   very
       significant obstacles to her integration in Mauritius.

   16. Mr Melvin submitted that  there  were  no  compelling  circumstances
       which needed consideration outside of the Immigration Rules  however
       even if an examination was undertaken she could not succeed in  this
       way.  The appellant had remained in the  UK  unlawfully  since  June
       2005 when her leave to remain as a  visitor  expired.  He  submitted
       that little weight should be given  to  any  private  life  she  had
       established whilst her leave was precarious  or  she  was  remaining
       unlawfully in accordance with s.117B(4) & (5) the 2002 Act, and  the
       Tribunal must also be guided by the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal
       in AM (s.117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 in  this  respect.  There  was
       also insufficient evidence before the Tribunal  that  the  appellant
       could succeed if regard was had to the other matters under s.117B of
       the 2002 Act such as her ability in  English,  integration  into  UK
       society and self-sufficiency.

   17. Mr Melvin argued  that  it  was  doubtful  that  delay  could  be  a
       significant factor given  what  was  said  in  Dube  (s.117A-s.117D)
       [2015] UKUT 90 in the context of the new legislative  framework  set
       out in s.117B of the 2002 Act. Mr Melvin stated that  the  Secretary
       of State did not accept that there was evidence of maladministration
       in this case. If colleges had let the  appellant  down  that  was  a
       matter between her  and  those  colleges  and  not  something  which
       obliged the Secretary of State to  compensate  for:  see  EK  (Ivory
       Coast) v SSHD [2014] EWCA 1517.

   18. In conclusion Mr Melvin submitted that the appellant is  a  healthy,
       30 year old citizen of Mauritius who could return  to  other  family
       members in her country of nationality and if necessary be  supported
       by her sister and brother-in-law in the UK. She had  not  undertaken
       any studies in the UK and has remained here unlawfully.  It is clear
       that the  public  interest  in  immigration  control  outweighs  the
       private life of this appellant.

Conclusions

   19. The appellant cannot succeed under the only sub-paragraph 276ADE  of
       the Immigration Rules which might apply to her, 276ADE(vi), and thus
       does not satisfy the private life provisions within the Rules.  This
       is because although she has been in the UK for  11  years  and  nine
       months she has not  shown  that  there  would  be  very  significant
       obstacles to her integration in Mauritius. Indeed she has  indicated
       that her mother and two married sisters still live in  that  country
       and given no reasons why she would not be able to  study  or  obtain
       work or re-establish her private life in that country.

   20. Given the history of this matter we consider that it is  appropriate
       to consider whether the appellant might succeed if Article 8 ECHR is
       examined outside of the Immigration Rules while having regard to all
       the matters set out in s.117B of the 2002 Act. We are satisfied that
       the appellant has private life in the UK having lived here  for  the
       past 11 years and having formed close bonds with her sister, brother-
       in-law and their three children. We are also satisfied that  if  she
       were to leave the UK this would interfere with that private life. As
       the appellant cannot meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules
       that interference would, of course, be in accordance with the law.

   21. It remains to consider whether the inference would be proportionate.
       In this context and at this stage  it  is  appropriate  to  consider
       whether the appellant has been treated unfairly by the respondent in
       any way. It is clear that the conduct of the colleges in having made
       misrepresentations about their  degree-giving  abilities  or  having
       been of a poor educational standard are not matters  for  which  the
       Secretary of State can be held responsible: as was said by the Court
       of Appeal in EK (Ivory Coast) if the colleges failed  the  appellant
       then her remedy is against them.

   22. In terms of the error made by the Secretary of State in  not  giving
       the  appellant  a  right  of  appeal  against  her  second   student
       application she clearly acknowledges that that appeal would not have
       succeeded as her own advisers (the reputable IAS) had  told  her  as
       much. It is therefore clear that the appellant overstays  her  leave
       and makes a third out-of-time student application due to no fault of
       the respondent.

   23. It is argued that the third, out-of-time, application to remain as a
       student was pending for a very long period (three years) as  far  as
       the appellant was concerned, as the refusal was wrongly sent to  the
       second college. It is argued that this represents unreasonable delay
       by the Secretary of  State  and  an  element  of  maladministration.
       Ultimately even if the respondent had failed in the way  argued  for
       we find it had no real effect on the appellant with respect  to  her
       studies as she did not wish to  continue  to  study  at  this  third
       college due to their poor educational standards and was  already  an
       overstayer due to issues with her first two colleges.  Even  if  the
       Secretary  of  State  had  dealt  with  the  matter   promptly   and
       communicated the  refusal  effectively  to  the  appellant  and  her
       representatives she would have still found herself an overstayer  in
       the UK who was unable to enrol with another educational  institution
       due to her lack of leave to remain.

   24. It is notable that the appellant has not  shown  that  she  has  any
       intention to resume her studies, in that  she  did  not  present  an
       intention to continue a course of study if allowed to remain in  the
       UK but instead suggests that she would work as a carer. Clearly  her
       life has moved on in this respect. In these circumstances we are not
       persuaded that Chikwamba has any bearing on the situation.  This  is
       not a case where the appellant attended the Tribunal  able  to  show
       that she would meet the  Immigration  Rules  as  a  student  with  a
       freshly prepared application and was being forced  to  return  on  a
       pointless trip to Mauritius to obtain entry clearance as  a  Tier  4
       (student) migrant which would inevitably be granted.

   25. In relation to delay it is arguable  that  in  accordance  with  the
       principles in EB (Kosovo) less weight should be given to immigration
       control in this case due to the respondent's  dilatory  approach  to
       communicating the third refusal to the appellant  and  because  this
       delay made the appellant feel that her  situation  was  more  stable
       than her  status  would  otherwise  have  indicated.  However,  even
       assuming that these are factors that remain material,  it  is  clear
       from Dube that consideration must be given to s.117B of the 2002 Act
       in full.

   26. We therefore turn to s.117B of the 2002 Act as  the  starting  point
       for the consideration of the proportionality  discussion.  We  start
       from the proposition that effective immigration control  is  in  the
       public  interest  and  note  that  the  appellant  cannot  meet  the
       requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  It  is  clear  that  the
       appellant is able to speak excellent English, is  not  a  burden  on
       taxpayers and although not currently financially  independent  would
       be supported by her family and if allowed to remain would be  likely
       to  obtain  employment.  These  are  the  positive  factors  on  the
       Appellant's side of the scales. However, on the other  hand,  it  is
       unarguable that the entire of the appellant's time  in  the  UK  has
       been with precarious leave (her initial visitor leave  was  for  six
       months) or unlawful status (since the refusal of the second  student
       application). As such in accordance with s.117B(4)(a) and (5) little
       weight should be given to her private life established in the UK. As
       set out at paragraph 21 of Deelah these are not  simply  matters  to
       which  this  Tribunal  must  have  regard  but  are  factors   which
       unanimously qualify for the allocation of little weight.

   27. Whilst giving consideration to the strong  private  life  bonds  the
       appellant has to her UK based family having lived with them for  the
       past 11 years; and whilst giving some weight to the  fact  that  she
       may for a period of time between 2005 and 2008 have been  given  the
       impression that her status was less impermanent than  it  truly  was
       due to the Respondent's inaction and the  mistaken  service  of  the
       third student refusal on her  previous  college  the  conclusion  we
       reach is that the interference with the appellant's private life  by
       requiring her now to leave the UK is proportionate.  In  short,  the
       public interest in play prevails by some measure.


   Decision:

    1.      The First-tier Tribunal erred in law.
    2.      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.
    3.      We re-make the decision in the appeal by  dismissing  it  under
       the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds outside  of  these
       Rules.



[pic]

Signed:                                            Date:  6th October 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley







