
[pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/38564/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 September 2015                  |On 16 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                              fouad abbas raza
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P R Collins, Counsel instructed by Gross & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, a Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant had leave to remain in this country as  a  student  until
    14 July 2014.  He applied for leave to remain on 10 July 2014 but  this
    application was refused on 11 September 2014.  The  respondent  records
    that  the  application  for  leave  to  remain  made  in  July  was  an
    application outside the Rules.  The respondent noted that the applicant
    had raised mental health issues in support of his case under Article 8.
     The respondent considered there were both in-patient  and  out-patient
    facilities in Pakistan and that his condition was not life threatening.
     Treatment for his condition was available.   Although  the  healthcare
    systems in the United Kingdom and  in  Pakistan  were  unlikely  to  be
    equivalent this did not mean that the appellant's case was  exceptional
    and did  not  entitle  him  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    respondent noted that  there  was  no  evidence  to  suggest  that  the
    appellant would be denied medical treatment or that he would be  unable
    to travel to obtain such treatment.   The  respondent  also  took  into
    account that the appellant's parents were not settled in the UK and had
    only limited leave to remain, expiring on 23 May 2015.   There  was  no
    reason to suggest that they could not adequately support and assist the
    appellant on his return.  A grant of leave to remain outside the  Rules
    was not appropriate in this case.

2.   The appellant appealed against the decision and his appeal came  before
    a First-tier Judge on 19 December 2014.  The judge had statements  from
    the appellant and his mother and medical evidence before him.   Counsel
    told me that he heard oral evidence from the appellant and his parents.
     The judge summarised his conclusions as follows:

         "28. The maintenance of good mental health is  a  crucial  part  of
             private life associated with the aspect of  a  person's  moral
             and physical integrity.  The preservation of mental  stability
             is in that context an indispensable precondition to  effective
             enjoyment of the right to respect for private life.   However,
             the question that arises is whether  or  not  the  appellant's
             moral integrity would be substantially affected  to  a  degree
             falling within  the  scope  of  article  8.   The  appellant's
             removal therefore from the United Kingdom in the circumstances
             where  he  is  suffering  from  and  receiving  treatment  for
             depression and psychosis is an interference with  his  private
             life that requires justification.

         29.   The  appellant's  mental  health  has  stabilised  with   the
             treatment that  he  is  receiving.   This  same  treatment  is
             available in Pakistan albeit it may be more readily  available
             to those who can pay for it privately.  This is not  an  issue
             for the appellant as his  parents  have  the  means  and  have
             expressed a willingness to pay for it.  In his  psychiatrist's
             view, the appellant's removal may have an  adverse  effect  on
             his mental health  if  he  returns  to  Pakistan  without  his
             family.  It was the expiry of his visa  and  the  prospect  of
             leaving his family that had caused his mental health problems.
              However, the appellant's mother will go back to Pakistan with
             him if she has to.  Both the appellant and his mother will not
             be alone in Pakistan.  The appellant's mother's brother-in-law
             (the  appellant's  uncle),  his  children   (the   appellant's
             cousins)  and  the  appellant's  mother's  mother-in-law  (the
             appellant's grandmother) all live  there.   In  addition,  the
             appellant's mother's other brother-in-law visits  Pakistan  at
             least four times a year.  It is therefore  clear  that  whilst
             the appellant's family ties in Pakistan are not the same as in
             England, they are the same as or only slightly less  than  the
             family ties he has in England.  I base this on the  fact  that
             he will have one parent with him, just like  his  siblings  in
             England, as well as members of his extended family  with  whom
             he and his family spent the formative years of their lives.

         30.  Whilst he may be leaving behind his father  and  siblings,  he
             nevertheless will  be  returning  to  friends  and  family  in
             Pakistan with his mother.

         31.  The treatment that the appellant requires is available both in
             Karachi where he is from, and Islamabad.  Whilst the appellant
             has raised the issue of attacks on the Shia  Muslim  minority,
             there is no specific threat to him or his family.  The  threat
             is a general threat to Shia Muslims in Pakistan.  It  is  also
             worth noting that the threat level is not perceived to  be  so
             high that it merits an application for asylum in this case.  I
             have also taken into account the  fact  that  the  appellant's
             extended family lives in Pakistan and that  his  uncle  visits
             the country at least four times a year.  He would not visit as
             frequently if the threat level presented a risk to his safety.
              In light of this I do not consider that the threat  level  to
             Shia Muslims in Pakistan is at  a  level  that  would  prevent
             travel within the country by Shia Muslims.

         32.  In assessing whether or not interference with the  appellant's
             private life is justified, I  take  into  account  the  public
             interest in the maintenance of effective immigration controls.
              I have taken into account the harm to the appellant's  mental
             health caused by his removal and or  a  deterioration  in  his
             mental health.  I note that his present treatment, which  will
             continue in Pakistan, has stabilised his condition  and  there
             are good prospects that it  will  remain  stable  because  his
             mother will return with him.  I also note that he has  friends
             and family in Pakistan who would help him to settle.

         33.  Taking into account the above,  I  consider  that  the  public
             interest  in  maintaining   effective   immigration   controls
             outweighs the interference with his right to a private life.

         34.  It is also undoubtedly the  case  that  the  appellant  has  a
             family life in the United Kingdom as his parents and  siblings
             live here.  They do not have indefinite leave to remain.   The
             family has lived most of their lives in  Pakistan  where  they
             still have family ties and can return there.  The  appellant's
             father has previously done his work for the same company  from
             both Pakistan and Dubai and there is no reason why, if he  had
             to, he could not do it again from either of  those  countries.
             Mention was made of a security threat to Shia Muslims but  the
             threat was not  considered  sufficient  to  give  rise  to  an
             application for asylum.

         35.  The family are therefore used to moving  about  in  connection
             with his father's employment and  if  necessary  could,  as  a
             whole relocate to either Pakistan or  Dubai  to  be  with  the
             appellant.  It cannot be said that the life of the appellant's
             family cannot reasonably be expected to be enjoyed elsewhere.

         36.  I also note that the appellant only had a visa to  enable  him
             to study and that upon its expiry, without more, he would have
             had to leave his family.  This application in itself is for an
             extension of  only  6  months  indicating  that  there  is  an
             expectation by the appellant that he will have  to  leave  his
             family.

         37.  In considering whether any interference with  the  appellant's
             family life is proportionate, I bear in  mind  the  threat  of
             harm to his mental  health  and  any  adverse  effect  on  the
             appellant.  In  light  of  the  available  treatment  and  the
             presence of his family in Pakistan, I do not consider that the
             interference  with  his  family  life  outweighs  the   public
             interest in the maintenance of effective immigration  controls
             and he therefore cannot meet the Immigration Rules approved by
             Parliament."

3.   The appellant appealed and permission to  appeal  was  refused  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  However permission to appeal  was  granted  on  4
    June 2015 by Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  Archer  who  summarised  the
    grounds as follows:

          "The grounds assert that the judge failed to  adequately  set  out
         the  legal  framework  for  Article  8  consideration  outside  the
         Immigration Rules and therefore failed to apply  the  correct  law.
         The judge also erred in law  by  concluding  that  the  appellant's
         treatment has stabilised his condition; the judge failed to clarify
         that the appellant's mother was only able  to  travel  to  Pakistan
         with the appellant for a short visit.  The judge failed to consider
         Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

         I  find  that  the  judge  has  failed  to  address  Section   117B
         considerations at all and that is an  arguable  material  error  of
         law.  The appellant appears  to  be  financially  independent.   In
         addition, paragraph 37 of the decision refers  to  the  Immigration
         Rules in the context of an Article 8 claim outside the  Rules.   It
         is arguable that the judge has not applied the correct  tests  when
         considering Article 8.  Permission to appeal is  therefore  granted
         on all grounds."

4.   At the hearing Counsel said he  had  settled  the  initial  grounds  of
    appeal.  However Ms Brocklesby-Weller said she  only  had  the  renewed
    grounds.  Counsel only had his original grounds.  It  was  agreed  that
    the grounds were similar apart from an additional point  taken  in  the
    renewed grounds in paragraph  12  which  raised  the  point  about  the
    appellant's mother being only able to travel to Pakistan  for  a  short
    visit.

5.   Mr Collins acknowledged that many of  the  cases  referred  to  in  the
    grounds had been superseded by SS (Congo)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387.   He
    submitted that the First-tier Judge had not properly approached matters
    and had jumped straight into Article 8 and he  had  inadequately  dealt
    with the legal framework in paragraph 16 and 17  of  the  determination
    which read as follows:

         "16. The appellant placed no reliance on article 3 and limited  his
             claim to article 8.  Specifically this related to  the  effect
             on his private and family life caused by the effect of removal
             on his mental health.

         17.  It is for the appellant to substantiate the primary facts upon
             which he relies in support of his claim.  Having done that,  I
             am required to strike a balance to determine whether the  harm
             done to the appellant is proportionate to the public  interest
             served by his expulsion."

6.   It had been argued in ground 2 that the judge had erred in  failing  to
    take into account Sections 117A and 117B.  He acknowledged however that
    in paragraph 32 the judge had made reference to the public interest  in
    the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration  controls   -   a   matter
    highlighted in 117B(1).  He acknowledged that the  arguments  based  on
    other parts of Section 117B face the obstacle  of  the  panel  decision
    chaired by the Vice President, AM (Malawi) [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC) where
    at head note (2) the Tribunal had found that an appellant could  obtain
    no positive right to a grant of leave to  remain  from  either  Section
    117B(2) or (3) whatever the degree of his fluency  in  English  or  the
    strength of his financial resources.  The judge had erred in failing to
    make any reference to well-known cases such as Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 or
    Huang [2007] UKHL 11.  The judge had not applied the  correct  test  of
    finding whether there were compelling reasons and had  not  taken  into
    account the  appellant's  mental  health  in  the  balancing  exercise.
    Further medical evidence had been provided after the judge's  decision.



7.   Ms Brocklesby-Weller acknowledged that the judge had  not  referred  to
    case law but had given consideration to all matters in  substance.   He
    had  considered  for  example  whether  there  were  very   significant
    obstacles to re-integration  in  paragraph  29  of  the  determination.
    Drugs treatment was available in Pakistan and the appellant's condition
    had stabilised.   The  appellant  had  spent  his  formative  years  in
    Pakistan.  All relevant points had been noted by the judge in substance
    and the medical treatment issue had been the only point advanced.

8.   The judge had identified that Article 8 was  engaged  in  paragraph  28
    and had found that the interference with the appellant's  private  life
    required justification.  The judge then went on to deal with the  issue
    of proportionality.  He had found that the interference  was  justified
    in  paragraph  32  and  that  the  public   interest   outweighed   the
    interference with the appellant's right to a private life in  paragraph
    33.  The judge had then turned to family life and he had  gone  through
    the Razgar steps.

9.   In relation to Section 117 she referred to Dube  [2015]     UKUT  00090
    (IAC) where it had been held that it was not an error  of  law  not  to
    refer to Sections 117A-117D and what mattered was substance, nor  form.
    It was clear that the judge had referred to part of Section  117B.   He
    had referred to immigration control and the issue of precariousness.  A
    child was not involved.  She also relied on AM (Malawi).

10.  The judge had not materially erred in failing to refer  to  Razgar  and
    other case law and he had made findings which were not challenged.   He
    was entitled to conclude that the  interference  with  the  appellant's
    private life was not disproportionate.  The family were willing to  pay
    for treatment.  He had taken into account the family  circumstances  in
    Pakistan.  There was a similarity between the circumstances in Pakistan
    and the United  Kingdom  as  he  had  noted  in  paragraph  29  of  the
    determination.

11.  In relation to the additional point in the renewed  grounds  of  appeal
    about the appellant's mother it was the choice of the family where they
    would live.  As the judge had noted the family did not have  indefinite
    leave to remain.

12.  Counsel reiterated that the judge had not given  consideration  to  the
    Razgar steps or the statute.  While under  the  statute  little  weight
    should be accorded to private life established at a time when a  person
    was in the United Kingdom unlawfully, that did not mean that no  weight
    should be accorded to such life.

13.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.  I  remind
    myself that I can only interfere with the decision on a point  of  law.
    The judge made findings of fact in paragraphs 21 to 27 of the  decision
    and none of the findings were challenged  in  the  initial  grounds  of
    appeal settled by Counsel.  Among the findings were that the  appellant
    has friends and family with whom he was  in  contact  in  Pakistan  and
    "should he return to Pakistan, his  mother  would  accompany  him.   He
    would not be alone should he be returned to Pakistan."  The judge heard
    oral evidence from the appellant's mother and his findings were open to
    him.  Quite apart from the appellant's mother there were many visits by
    other members of the family and the judge was entitled to  conclude  as
    he did on the matter in paragraph 29.  I note that Counsel did not take
    the point in the grounds that he settled and there appears to have been
    no further evidence or statement from the appellant's mother qualifying
    her evidence as recorded by the First-tier Judge.

14.  The main issue  is  the  judge's  failure  to  make  reference  to  the
    amendments made by the Immigration Act 2014 to the  2002  Act  and  the
    failure to refer to Razgar and other authorities.  It is said  that  he
    misdirected himself in paragraph 17 of the  determination  and  in  the
    concluding paragraph.

15.  This was an application for leave outside the  Rules  and  the  refusal
    dealt with the application on that basis.   The  respondent  considered
    the appellant's case based on his mental health issues.  She took  into
    account the available treatment and there  was  no  evidence  that  the
    appellant would be denied such treatment or that he would be unable  to
    travel to obtain it.  There was no reason why the  appellant's  parents
    could not adequately support and assist the  appellant  on  his  return
    given that they were not settled and only had leave to remain until  23
    May 2015.  This is a point taken up by the judge in paragraph 35 and he
    also notes that the appellant only had a study visa and upon its expiry
    would have had to leave his family.

16.  It is unsurprising that the judge focused  on  the  appellant's  mental
    health which was the point relied upon.  In my view it is  quite  clear
    from a careful reading of the determination that the judge went through
    the Razgar steps.  Counsel acknowledges that there is  a  reference  to
    the maintenance of effective immigration controls.  In respect  of  the
    other matters in Section 117B Counsel acknowledges that the case law is
    against him.  I note the judge did have  in  mind  the  fact  that  the
    family as a whole were as he put it financially  capable.   Looking  at
    the substance rather than the  form  of  the  determination  I  am  not
    satisfied that it was flawed in law, still less  materially  flawed  in
    law.  As it was put in the respondent's response of 11 June 2015 it  is
    hard to understand how  any  judge  would  have  come  to  a  different
    conclusion.

Notice of Decision

17.  Appeal dismissed.

18.  The First-tier Judge made no anonymity direction and I make none.

FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.


Signed        Date 14 September 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Warr
