
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38459/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 March 2016                               |On 7 June 2016                |
|Extempore                                     |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         oluwatobi danilare oneneye
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    no appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with  permission  against  the  decision
    public funds  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Shamash  promulgated  on  10
    September 2015 in which she allowed the appeal of Mr Oluwatobi Danilare
    Oneneye (to whom I refer as the claimant) against the decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to refuse him leave to remain in the United Kingdom.



 2. I am satisfied from the court file that, Mr Oluwatobi Oneneye, has been
     given proper notice of the time, date and venue  of  the  hearing  for
    that was also served on his representatives,  Galaxy  Law  Office,  who
    have not, it appears from the file, said that they are no longer acting
    for the appellant.  No explanation has been given by  the  claimant  to
    explain his failure to attend the hearing today and I am satisfied that
    in all the circumstances of this case I should proceed to determine the
    appeal and in doing so I note that the claimant has  not,  although  he
    was entitled to do so, served a notice  pursuant  to  Rule  24  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

 3. The Secretary of State's case is that, at the hearing,  the  judge  had
    said that the refusal letter was deficient in that it did  not  address
    Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention; that the  appropriate  course
    of action was to remit the matter  to  the  Secretary  of  State;  and,
    accordingly with the agreement of the  Presenting  Officer,  she  would
    allow the appeal to that limited extent.

 4. The challenge is that contrary to that, the judge went on  to  consider
    the merits of the appeal and that accordingly a  procedural  unfairness
    arose whereby  the  Secretary  of  State  was  unable  to  make  proper
    representations to the judge  against  the  appellant's  case  that  he
    should be granted leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

 5. The grounds were supplemented by  a  brief  note  from  the  Presenting
    Officer, Miss Deshraj, who  had  appeared  before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Shamash.

 6. On 12 January 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge P J M Hollingworth granted
    permission.

 7. As noted earlier, there  is  no  appearance  by  the  claimant  and  no
    response to the grant of permission.  Mr Duffy submitted  that  it  was
    clear on the  basis  of  the  report  that  the  judge  had  apparently
    misunderstood what had been  agreed  and  had,  contrary  to  what  the
    Secretary of State understood to be the case, considered the appeal  in
    detail.

 8. There is, as Mr Duffy submitted, no evidence contrary to Miss Deshraj's
    brief report.  It is unclear from the judge's notes of evidence  as  to
    what occurred and I do note that case it was a floating case  heard  on
    15 July 2015, that the decision was prepared on 10 August and  was  not
    promulgated  until  four  months  later.  It  would   appear   in   the
    circumstances that the judge may have forgotten what was  said  at  the
    hearing and that accordingly  she  went  on  to  determine  the  appeal
    substantively, contrary to what she had said in court.

 9. It follows from this that the Secretary of State was not given a proper
    opportunity to put her case on the substantive merits of the appeal and
    that accordingly a procedural error capable of giving rise to an  error
    of law occurred.  For these reasons I am satisfied that the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of an error of law and I
    set it aside.

10. I consider that in the circumstances the appropriate course  of  action
    where there has been a procedural failure whereby there  was  therefore
    no fair hearing that the matter should be remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh determination on all issues.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS


 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.



 2. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  decision
    on all issues; none of the findings made previously are preserved.



 3. No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                  Date:  16 March 2016

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
