

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38695/2013
      IA/38689/2013
                                                               IA/38720/2013
                                                               IA/38709/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14 July 2014                               |On 29 September 2014         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ROBERTSON

                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                            MR LENORD LUPIYA (A1)
                        MRS MAILES MBEWE LUPIYA (A2)
                     MASTER SHAMMAH LEONARD LUPIYA (A3)
                          MISS TEHILLAH LUPIYA (A4)
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr K Thathall, Counsel, instructed by UK Immigration
                    Law Chambers

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant in this appeal  was  the  Respondent  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing.  However, for ease of reference, the  Appellants  and
    Respondent are hereafter referred to as they were before the First-tier
    Tribunal; Mr and Mrs Lupiya and their two children are referred  to  as
    the Appellants and the  Secretary  of  State  is  referred  to  as  the
    Respondent.


 2. A1 applied for indefinite leave to remain after a period of five  years
    with leave as a Tier 1 Minister of religion. The  applications  of  his
    wife  (A2)  and  his  children  (A3  and  A4)  are  dependent  on   his
    application. For the purposes of my determination I will refer to A1 as
    the Appellant unless the context otherwise admits or requires.

 3. The Appellants' appeals were allowed under  the  Immigration  Rules  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge A J Parker (the Judge) against the refusal by
    the Respondent to grant indefinite leave to remain under the provisions
    of paragraph 245HF(c) and 245AAA of HC 395,  amended  (the  Immigration
    Rules). However, the Judge then decided their appeals under  Article  8
    in the event that they did not meet the requirements of the Immigration
    Rules  and  dismissed  their  appeals  under  Article  8.   Under   the
    Immigration Rules, the matter in dispute before the  Judge  was  simply
    whether the Appellant had been able to demonstrate a continuous  period
    of five years lawful residence which fell to be determined pursuant  to
    the provisions of paragraph 245AAA. A1 had been absent from the UK  for
    a period of 223 days during the period 2009/2010; 191 days absence  was
    work related and 32 days absence was to visit his mother-in-law who had
    cancer and subsequently passed away. The Judge found that the Appellant
    had spent a continuous period of five years lawfully in the UK.


 4.  The  grounds  of  application  are  that  the  Judge  had   materially
    misdirected himself as to the interpretation  of  paragraph  245AAA.The
    grounds of application are clear and I will not seek to summarise  them
    but will state them in full, as there was little  that  Mr  Mills,  who
    drafted the grounds, needed to amplify during the hearing:


         "Rule 245AAA, so far as  is  relevant  to  the  appellant's  case,
    states as follows:

             a) "continuous period of 5 years lawfully in  the  UK"  means,
                subject to paragraphs 245CD, 245GF and 245HF, residence  in
                the United Kingdom for an unbroken period with valid leave,
                and for these purposes a period shall be considered  to  be
                broken where:


             (i) the applicant has been absent from the UK for a period  of
             180 days or less in any  of  the  five  consecutive  12  month
             periods preceding the date of application for leave to remain;
             (ii)...
             (iii)


             (b)...


             (c) Except for periods where the applicant had leave as a Tier
             1 (Investor) Migrant, a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant, a  Tier
             1 (Exceptional Talent) Migrant or a  highly  skilled  migrant,
             any absences from the UK during the five year period must have
             been for a purpose that is  consistent  with  the  applicant's
             basis of stay  here,  including  paid  annual  leave,  or  for
             serious or compelling reasons.'


         "The appellant accepted that in one of the five  year  periods,  he
         had been absent from the UK for 223 days. He  argued  that  because
         this period was made up of  work  related  absences  combined  with
         'compelling reasons' absences (the illness of a relative),  it  was
         covered by 245AAA(a) and did not break his 'continuous residence.


         "The Judge  placed  reliance  on  BD  (work  permit  -  "continuous
         period") Nigeria [2010] UKUT 418 and Vellore R (otao) v SSHD [2013]
         EWHC 724 (Admin)  to  establish  the  principles  that  "continuous
         period must be construed sensibly" and "where the absence has  been
         required by the employer in the course of his employment,  it  need
         not impair the strength of his connection to the UK" (para 20).

         "As the Presenting Officer very clearly pointed out (paragraph  20)
         these cases related to the previous rule (134) in which  there  was
         no definition of 'continuous residence'.  The  rules  do  now  very
         clearly define 'continuous residence', at 245AAA. Indeed, the  rule
         can be seen to have incorporated the principles of BD and  Vellore.
         There is no need to apply any 'sensible' interpretation to  245AAA,
         as its terms are perfectly clear.

         "The Judge has found that paragraph 245AAA (c) is an  exception  to
         245AAA (a). He considers that if the absence  is  work  related  or
         compelling reasons, then the 180 day  limit  does  not  apply.  The
         Judge goes on to say at paragraph 22 that if the rules intended  to
         impose a 180 day limit on all absences,  then  they  would  say  so
         clearly.

         "With due respect to the Judge, the rules do say so  very  clearly,
         at 245AAA (a)(i). There is no exception to this requirement, 245AAA
         (c) being an additional criterion, not an alternative one.


         "On the facts of the case, had the Judge properly directed  himself
         as to the meaning of the rules, he could only  have  dismissed  the
         appeal under the Rules, as he correctly did under Article 8".


 5. Permission was granted because the grounds were arguable.


 6. As to oral submissions, Mr Mills stated that it was accepted  that  the
    Appellant had been absent from the UK for 223 days and that this was as
    a result of work related absence and family reasons. He submitted  that
    the Judge was 'misled' by the interpretation forwarded on behalf of the
    Appellant and there was nothing within paragraph 245AAA which suggested
    that paragraph 245AAA (c) was an  alternative  provision  to  paragraph
    245AAA (a). There was no application on Article 8 grounds but the Judge
    was correct to dismiss it under Article 8.


 7. Mr Thathall stated that he had provided a Rule 24 response  on  29  May
    2014, but neither I nor Mr Mills appeared to have received it. The Rule
    24 response was copied and supplied to me and  to  Mr  Mills,  who  was
    given an opportunity to read it.


 8. In reply to the Response, Mr Mills submitted that:


        a. Yes, the Respondent was trying to re-argue  the  merits  of  the
           case  because  the  Judge  had  misdirected  himself  over   the
           provisions of rule 245AAA (c) which had resulted in  a  material
           error of law.


        b. The Appellant was prevented from cross-appealing  by  submission
           of a Rule 24 response  pursuant  to  EG  and  NG  (UT  rule  17:
           withdrawal; rule 24: scope)  Ethiopia  [2013]  UKUT  00143(IAC),
           which provided that a party must first seek permission to appeal
           from  the  First-tier  tribunal  before   an   application   for
           permission to appeal could be made to  the  Upper  Tribunal.  Mr
           Thathall submitted that as far as the Appellant  was  concerned,
           there was no need to appeal the decision  because  he  had  been
           successful under the Immigration Rules. It  was  only  when  the
           Respondent sought permission to appeal that they  had  cause  to
           appeal. Mr Mills responded that the Appellant had notice of  the
           application by the Respondent and it was open to him to apply to
           the First-tier Tribunal for permission to appeal, asking for  an
           extension of time if it seemed appropriate.


        c. Apart from submitting that the Respondent was simply  trying  to
           re-argue the merits of the case, Mr Thathall submitted,  in  his
           Rule 24 response, that the Respondent's assertion that paragraph
           245AAA  (c)  was  an  additional  criterion  was  erroneous  and
           misconceived and that the Judge had considered the arguments and
           given reasons for the finding that there was no overall limit of
           180 days of absences in each year. He also  submitted  that  the
           Respondent had stated that the principles of BD and Vellore  had
           been incorporated into paragraph 245AAA without stating how this
           had been achieved.


 9. In the alternative, in his cross-appeal Mr Thathall submitted that:


        a. The Judge erred in failing to  consider  the  exception  to  the
           definition of 'continuous residence' in paragraph 245AAA (a)  of
           paragraph 245HF, which incorporates periods of leave  under  the
           (now deleted) paragraphs 170 - 176  of  the  Immigration  Rules,
           which do not define any periods of absence. As the new paragraph
           245AAA was not introduced until after the absence in  2009/2010,
           it fell to be considered under the pre-existing law  in  BD  and
           Vellore. He stated that the Respondent was estopped from denying
           leave.


        b. The decision was not in accordance  with  the  law  because  the
           Respondent had failed to consider her own policy guidance headed
           'Indefinite Leave to Remain', version 110 at pp 28/31  dated  23
           January 2014 which recognised 'exceptional  cases/circumstances'
           to grant indefinite leave to  remain.  In  oral  submissions  he
           referred to pages 20, 23, 28 and 31 of the guidance, and  stated
           that there was discretion within the  policy  where  there  were
           compelling reasons and it  was  accepted  that  the  Appellant's
           mother-in-law was ill.  It  was  not  determined  how  long  the
           illness was but his mother-in-law  lived  in  Zambia  which  was
           where he was stationed for work.


        c. The Judge erred in failing to  consider  aspects  of  legitimate
           expectation, retrospective application of  the  Rule,  estoppel,
           common law fairness and or the welfare/ best  interests  of  the
           child and/or failed to give reasons.


        d. The Judge erred in failing to apply a structured approach to the
           Article 8 assessment; failing to  identify  the  legitimate  aim
           under Article 8(2), failing to consider all the circumstances of
           the  case,  and  arriving  at   an   erroneous   assessment   of
           proportionality as provided in Shahzad (Art 8:  legitimate  aim)
           [2014] UKUT 00085 (IAC) at paragraph 107 by failing to take into
           account  the  positive  features  of  the  Appellant's  case  in
           determining proportionality. He also submitted  that  the  Judge
           failed to have regard to the Chikwamba principle as  applied  in
           Zhang v SSHD [2013] EWHC 891 (Admin).  In  oral  submissions  he
           stated that  Shahzad  at  paragraph  8  assisted  the  Appellant
           because the Respondent should have in mind  that  the  Appellant
           was a lawful permit holder with a wife and children.


10. In reply, Mr Mills submitted that nowhere in the submissions made by Mr
    Thathall had be put forward a reason as to why paragraph 245AAA (c) was
    an exception to 245AAA (a); it is not stated that an applicant  can  be
    out of the UK for 180 days 'unless' it is for work related absences  or
    due to compelling reasons. Mr Thathall had relied  on  the  word  'any'
    with  rule  245AAA  (c)  to  justify  a  conclusion  that  it  was   an
    alternative. No argument had been put forward to establish that it  was
    an alternative to 245AAA (a). The Judge erred in his reasoning at  [21]
    and [22] because the rules were clear.


11. As to the policy guidance, Mr Mills submitted that the  pages  referred
    to by Mr Thathall in fact undermined his arguments.

12. As to any arguments based on legitimate expectation, Mr Mills submitted
    that the Immigration Rules were generous. Where it was provided  within
    the Rules that someone could be absent from the  UK  for  reasons  that
    were consistent with the terms of their  leave,  it  was  difficult  to
    argue that more leave should be  granted  than  was  envisaged  by  the
    Rules.


13. As to Article 8, the  Respondent  had  considered  the  application  of
    Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of the Rules and then  considered  the
    exercise of  discretion.  The  Appellant  could  not  cross-appeal  the
    Article 8 decision.


14. Following submissions, I reserved my decision.



Decision and reasons


15. The terms  of  paragraph  245  AAA  are  set  out  in  the  grounds  of
    application. As to the guidance referred to by Mr Thathall,  the  terms
    of it are:


             "No more than 180 whole day absence are all allowed in any  of
             the five, four, three or two  consecutive  12  month  periods,
             depending on the category, preceding the date of application".

             "Absences must be for a reason consistent  with  the  original
             purpose of entry to the UK or  for  a  serious  or  compelling
             compassionate reason" (p 19)


             "Absences must be connected to the  applicant's  sponsored  or
             permitted employment, or the permitted economic activity being
             carried out in the UK, for example, business  trips  or  short
             secondments. This also includes any paid or annual leave which
             must be assessed on a case by case basis and must be  in  line
             with the UK statutory annual leave entitlement" (p20)


              "For Tier  1  (investor),  Tier  (1  (Entrepreneur),  Tier  1
             (Exceptional talent)  and  highly  skilled  migrant  (applying
             under  Appendix  S  of  the  rules)  categories  there  is  no
             requirement to give reason for absences if they do not  exceed
             180 days in any of the five, four, three or two consecutive 12
             month periods of  the  continuous  period,  depending  on  the
             category, counted backwards  from  the  date  of  application"
             (page 21).


         "Absences of more than 180 day in each consecutive 12 month  period
             before the date of application (in all categories)  will  mean
             the period of continuous leave has been broken.  However,  you
             may consider the grant of indefinite  leave  to  remain  (ILR)
             outside the rules if the applicant provides evidence  to  show
             the  excessive  absence  was  due  to  serious  or  compelling
             compassionate reasons"

             "The applicant must provide evidence in the form of  a  letter
             which sets out full details of the compelling reason  for  the
             absence and supporting documents. Absences of 180 days in  any
             12 month period for employment or  economic  activity  reasons
             are not considered exceptional" (page 28).

16. It is clear from the head note to BD that the Upper Tribunal considered
    this case under paragraph 134 of the old rules for work permit holders.
    At that time, there was no  provision  in  the  Immigration  Rules  for
    deciding what constituted  a  'continuous  period  of  5  years  lawful
    residence'. Vellore, which was decided before BD, also dealt  with  the
    old paragraph 134 and  therefore  the  lack  of  guidance  as  to  what
    constituted a 'continuous period  of  5  years  lawful  residence'  was
    decided using a 'common sense approach', adopted  by  the  Tribunal  in
    both cases. However, I accept, as  submitted  by  Mr  Mills,  that  the
    inclusion in the Rules of paragraph 245AAA deals  with  the  manner  in
    which the continuous period of  5  years  lawful  residence  is  to  be
    calculated. The plain meaning of Rule 245AAA is that 180  days  is  the
    maximum period of absence in any one of the five consecutive  years  of
    residence with valid leave and, as provided by  paragraph  245AAA  (c),
    the absences which are to be counted towards the 180 day limit must  be
    'consistent with the applicant's basis of  stay  here,  including  paid
    annual leave, or for serious or compelling reasons'.


17. It is clear that the Judge had regard to BD and Vellore in reaching the
    conclusion that a 'common sense approach',  which  was  necessary  when
    there was no express provision within the Rules, can be substituted for
    the clear terms of the Rules. He thereby misdirected himself as to  the
    provisions of paragraph 245AAA and materially erred in law. There is no
    merit to the submission that the Respondent is simply trying to reargue
    the merits of the case; a material misdirection in law  cannot  be  put
    right because a judge has given reasons for his decision.


18. The submissions made by Mr Thathall under the policy, the provisions of
    which are set out at paragraph 18 and 19  above,  do  not  support  his
    submission that there is no overall 180 day  limit.  To  the  contrary,
    they undermine his argument that there is no overall 180 day limit.


19. This takes me to the cross-appeal. I have considered  the  contents  of
    the Rule 24 response in the context of whether the submissions  are  in
    fact a cross-appeal or  a  response  to  the  Respondent's  grounds  of
    application. In general terms, pursuant to EG and NG (Ethiopia), in the
    Upper Tribunal a respondent to an appeal is limited,  in  the  Rule  24
    response, to  responding  to  the  issues  raised  in  the  grounds  of
    application. However, EG and NG (Ethiopia) also provides that the party
    whose appeal was allowed by the First-tier Tribunal  may  not  wish  to
    appeal a decision if he has succeeded on one ground raised  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal but, where permission is sought by the other party,
    he may wish to rely on  other  grounds  raised  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal which were unsuccessful. The Upper Tribunal gives the example,
    at paragraph 46, of an entry clearance case where entry  clearance  was
    refused due to failure by the applicant to  meet  the  maintenance  and
    accommodation requirements and the judge hearing the appeal  wrongfully
    decides that  the  accommodation  requirement  is  met,  but  that  the
    maintenance requirement is not. As the appeal has been  dismissed,  the
    ECO may not wish to appeal it but if the applicant seeks permission  on
    the ground on which  he  was  not  successful,  the  ECO  may  wish  to
    challenge the wrongful conclusion  in  relation  to  the  accommodation
    requirement. The ground which is relied on by  the  appellant  in  that
    case is the 'not in accordance with the immigration rules' ground,  and
    the only challenge by the respondent ECO is in relation to that ground.
    I will bear this guidance in mind in my determination.


20. I also bear in mind that the Judge stated at [17] that the "appellant's
    representative's submissions is adequately dealt with in  the  skeleton
    argument and need not be repeated by me", which, in the absence of  any
    evidence to the  contrary,  I  will  take  to  be  the  extent  of  the
    submissions forwarded on behalf of the Appellant. I will therefore  use
    the skeleton argument before the Judge to identify if  the  submissions
    which are now advanced for the Appellant were in fact ever put  to  the
    Judge; if they were not, it is  not  an  error  for  him  not  to  have
    considered them. I will take each of Mr Thathall's submissions in turn:


21. His first submission (which he characterised as a   'cross-appeal',  at
    paragraph 7(i) of his Rule 24 response) is that the Judge


             "failed to consider the definition of  'continuous  residence'
             in Para 245AAA(a) of para 245HF, which incorporates periods of
             leave under the (now deleted) Para 170-176 of the  immigration
             rules, which did not define any periods of absences, hence the
             reliance on BD (work  permit  -  "continuous  period"  Nigeria
             [2010] UKUT 418  (IAC),  at  para  11  of  the  determination,
             approved in R (Vellore) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department, [2013]  EWHC  742.;  as  the  relevant  period  of
             absence was during 2009/10 before the introduction of the  new
             Para 245AAA".


22. This submission in fact relates  to  the  interpretation  of  paragraph
    245AAA and is not, therefore, a  cross-appeal.  However,  there  is  no
    evidence before  me  that  any  arguments  based  on  the  now  deleted
    paragraphs 170 - 176 were before the Judge, except in so  far  as  they
    were based on the failure to define 'continuous residence' as  set  out
    in BD.  Any additional submissions based on paragraphs 170  -  176  are
    not  referred  to  in  the  determination  or  contained   within   the
    Appellant's skeleton argument before the Judge. Unless submissions  are
    sufficiently particularised before the Judge, it is not  an  error  for
    him not to deal with them. An application for permission to  appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal that a Judge had not considered arguments  that
    had not been put to him is bound to fail.


23. Mr Thathall also submitted that the relevant period of absence  was  in
    2009/2010 and that Rule 245AAA came into  force  after  that  date.  Mr
    Thathall stated that the absence of 223 days had occurred in  2009/2010
    but the rule was not changed until after that date  and  therefore  the
    old learning in BD and Vellore must apply to that period  of  leave.  I
    considered whether I should even  at  this  stage  consider  it  as  an
    application to cross-appeal and consider it in my capacity as a  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge. However, there is no prospect that I  could  grant
    permission to appeal on this basis simply, because, in the  absence  of
    transitional provisions, the law to be applied is the  law  as  at  the
    date of decision and Mr Thathall did  not  refer  to  any  transitional
    provisions.  This  submission   therefore   fails,   whether   or   not
    characterised as a cross-appeal or as a response  to  the  Respondent's
    submissions.

24. At paragraph 7(ii) of his Rule 24 response, Mr Thathall submitted  that
    the Judge failed to consider the provisions of the  policy,  which  are
    set out at paragraphs 18 and 19 above. A full copy of  the  policy  was
    provided by the Presenting Officer at the hearing, it is clear from the
    skeleton argument submitted by Mr Thathall (at paragraphs 2 - 6,  which
    deal with paragraph 245AAA) that, despite the reference to the  failure
    by the Respondent to exercise discretion at paragraph 6 of the skeleton
    argument, no reference was made to the terms of the  policy.   However,
    as  a  rebuttal  of  the  Respondent's  position  with  regard  to  the
    interpretation of the provisions of paragraph 245AAA, the provisions of
    the policy, as set out at paragraphs 18 and 19 above, do not assist the
    Appellant; there is only provision for a consideration of the grant  of
    ILR outside the Immigration Rules if compelling  circumstances  can  be
    established.


25. As to the fourth of the submissions in the 'cross-appeal', at paragraph
    7 (iii), (that is, the Judge erred in failing to  consider  aspects  of
    legitimate  expectation,  retrospective  application   of   the   Rule,
    estoppel, common law fairness and or the welfare/ best interests of the
    child and or failed to give reasons), it is  clear  that  estoppel  and
    fairness was raised under the Immigration Rules  (paragraph  7  of  the
    skeleton argument) and that legitimate expectation and s 55 were raised
    in relation to Article 8 (paragraph 8 of the skeleton  argument  before
    the  First-tier  tribunal).  However,  estoppel  cannot  succeed;   the
    Immigration Rules which determine the application are those in force at
    the date of decision (see  paragraph  26  above).  Even  if  legitimate
    expectation was referred  to  before  the  Judge  in  relation  to  the
    Immigration Rules, there is no evidence before me that  the  legitimate
    expectation argument was sufficiently substantiated before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (as to which see paragraphs  62 - 104 of  AA  and  Others
    (Highly skilled migrants: legitimate expectation) Pakistan [2008] UKAIT
    00003).


26. Pursuant to EG and NG (Ethiopia), can I consider the Article  8  issues
    raised by the appeal? My view is that I cannot. Although the process of
    seeking permission to appeal under Article 8, having been notified that
    the Respondent has sought, and obtained permission to appeal under  the
    Immigration Rules, is cumbersome, I cannot  consider  the  cross-appeal
    because permission to appeal was not sought.


27. Even if I were to consider  it,  as  to  legitimate  expectation  under
    Article 8, Mr Thathall referred to the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal
    in Philipson (ILR - not PBS: evidence) India [2012] UKUT  00039  (IAC).
    However, firstly, as stated above, the  legitimate  expectation  ground
    was not sufficiently developed before the Judge so even if he had erred
    in failing to consider it, there is no evidence before me to  establish
    that such a failure would be material because on  the  evidence  before
    him it could not succeed. Secondly, Philipson was  decided  before  the
    changes  in  the  Immigration  Rules  governing  the  determination  of
    applications under Article 8 came into force.  These now  set  out  the
    weight  to  be  given  to  the  public  interest  in  the   Article   8
    proportionality exercise and there is no need to  consider  the  Razgar
    approach  unless  circumstances  are  identified  which  establish   an
    arguably good case for consideration of the  Appellant's  circumstances
    outside the Immigration Rules (Gulshan and Nagre); there is a  need  to
    identify  compelling   circumstances   which   would   result   in   an
    unjustifiably  harsh  outcome,  i.e.   a   finding   that   there   are
    insurmountable obstacles to the family relocating  to  the  country  of
    origin.


28. The family would be removed together, so there is no interference  with
    family life as a result  of  the  decision  [26].  The  Judge  properly
    directed himself at [24], considering the Appellants'  appeals  on  the
    basis of private life under paragraph 276ADE  at  [24]  -  [26],  which
    include reference to the family remaining together as a  unit  and  the
    children having been in the UK for less than 7 years.


29. This brings me to the final submissions in  the  'cross-appeal',  which
    relate to considerations under Article  8  (the  s  55  considerations/
    Chikwamba   [2009]   UKHL   40   /Zhang   [2013]   EWHC   891   (admin)
    considerations). The Judge dealt with s 55 issues; he  noted  that  the
    family  would  remain  together  [26]  and  in  the  absence   of   any
    contraindications, it is in the  best  interests  of  the  children  to
    remain with their parents. This is not  a  case  which  is  covered  by
    Chikwamba; a separation between the Appellants is not contemplated. The
    Appellant's case is one to which the new post July  2012  Rules  apply;
    Zhang was decided on the basis of the old Rules, as was Philipson.  The
    Judge properly finds that the Appellants cannot succeed under  Appendix
    FM and paragraph 276ADE and, because all that is required is that  they
    make an out of country application which can be turned around in  under
    five days, no compelling or compassionate factors have been established
    for  a  consideration  of  the  application  outside  the  Rules.  This
    reasoning is entirely in keeping with Nagre [2012]  EWHC  720  (Admin),
    Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach)  [2013]  UKUT  00640
    (IAC) and Shahzad (Article 8: legitimate aim) [2014] UKUT 85 (IAC). The
    need to identify the legitimate public  aim  is  only  necessary  where
    compelling circumstances have been established. The  Judge  found  that
    there were no arguably good grounds  for  granting  leave  outside  the
    Immigration Rules at [25] and that decision was  open  to  him  on  the
    evidence before him. No arguable errors of law are disclosed



Decision

30. The Judge  materially  misdirected  himself  as  to  the  provisions  of
   paragraph 245AAA.  I  set  aside  his  decision.  On  the  basis  of  the
   submissions and the evidence before the Judge, I remake the  decision  to
   dismiss the appeal under the Immigration Rules.


31. There is no error of law in the Judge's decision under Article  8  ECHR
    and this decision therefore stands.


32. The Respondent's appeal is allowed.


33. The FtT did not make an order as to anonymity pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.



Signed                                  Date


M Robertson
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

In light of my decision, as the First-tier Tribunal decision is set aside
and the Respondent's appeal is allowed, I make no fee order.

Signed                     Dated


M Robertson
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge.


