
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA389332014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 June 2016                                |On 14 June 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

                          miss immachulate kabugho
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Murphy (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller (Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer)


                    DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW


1.   The appellant's appeal against a decision to refuse to issue  her  with
    a residence card, as a  person  falling  within  Regulation  8  of  the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  ("the  2002
    Regulations") was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Carroll  ("the
    judge") in a decision promulgated on 22 September 2015.

2.   The appeal was listed for hearing on 21  August  2015.   The  appellant
    and a witness (her sister) appeared,  together  with  a  representative
    from the acting firm of solicitors.  Counsel was expected but  was  not
    present when the case came before the  judge  at  2:30pm,  having  been
    assigned to the float list at Taylor House.   The  judge  was  informed
    that Counsel was in Wandsworth County Court and unable to reach  Taylor
    House before 3:00 or 3:30pm.  An  adjournment  was  sought,  which  the
    judge refused on the basis that the appellant's  representative  should
    have been ready to present the case at any time  from  10:00am  on  the
    hearing day.  Counsel should not have  been  double-booked  in  another
    court at a considerable distance from Taylor  House.   The  appellant's
    representative then said that he was unable  to  present  the  case  on
    behalf of the appellant.  The judge told those present that  she  would
    decide the appeal on the basis of the documentary evidence before  her,
    in accordance with the 2014 Tribunal Procedure Rules.  This summary  of
    events I have taken from paragraph 3 of the decision.

3.   An application for permission to appeal was  made  on  the  appellant's
    behalf, it being contended first, that the judge erred in  refusing  to
    grant an adjournment and secondly, that the judge  failed  to  consider
    relevant evidence before her in consequence of deciding the matter  "on
    the papers".  Permission was refused by a First-tier Tribunal Judge and
    the application renewed.  Permission  was  then  granted  by  an  Upper
    Tribunal Judge on 18 April 2016.  The judge granting permission  stated
    that if procedural unfairness were found, such as to amount to an error
    of law material to the outcome, the Upper Tribunal would be  likely  to
    proceed to hear any evidence and to remake the decision.

4.   In a Rule 24 response from the Secretary of State  dated  3  May  2016,
    the appeal was opposed.  As the case appeared  on  the  float  list  at
    Taylor House, it may not have been possible to put  it  back  to  await
    Counsel's  arrival.   In  any  event,  there  was  no  reason  why  the
    representative present could not have called  evidence  and  then  made
    submissions.   There  was  a  paucity  of  evidence  showing  that  the
    appellant was dependent upon her EEA national sponsor while she was  in
    Uganda and the judge had correctly pointed out that no further evidence
    had been  adduced  since  dismissal  of  an  earlier  appeal  in  2012.
    Overall, the evidence fell far short of demonstrating dependency and so
    the appeal was properly dismissed.

Submissions on Error of Law

5.   Mr Murphy said that the case had a chequered history.   The  judge  had
    referred to an earlier decision, in 2012.  The appellant's instructions
    were that she was unaware of this decision.  She arrived in the  United
    Kingdom in 2011 and an application for further  leave  was  refused  in
    March 2012.  The appellant sought legal advice in  2014.   The  hearing
    was listed following fresh proceedings, in March 2015.   The  appellant
    appeared on that occasion with solicitor and Counsel but the  case  was
    adjourned  as  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  letter  was   not
    available.  The appeal was re-listed for hearing at Taylor House on  21
    August that year and this was the first time the appellant  would  have
    been in a position to give oral evidence.  The 2012 decision  was  also
    made "on the papers".

6.   As was apparent from Nwaigwe [2014] UKUT (IAC) 418, the key  issue  was
    fairness.  Counsel due to appear in August 2015 might  very  well  have
    been at fault by failing to appear and  indicating  that  he  would  be
    unable to do so until so late in the afternoon but the key question was
    whether the appellant received a fair hearing.  Even if the  judge,  on
    analysis, acted reasonably, the test remained one of fairness.  As  the
    representative present at the hearing was unable to  continue  to  act,
    the appellant was in fact unrepresented and the  judge  ought  to  have
    adjourned the case.  Any failure  by  the  appellant's  representatives
    (and Mr Murphy said that the appellant was  pursuing  matters  in  this
    regard) was not her fault.

7.   The judge's  error  in  failing  to  adjourn  and  so  giving  rise  to
    unfairness was material.  The appellant was entitled to give a response
    to the case against her.  She could have given oral evidence  regarding
    the Western Union receipts.  Giving her decision  on  the  papers,  the
    judge had referred to the earlier decision, also on the papers but  the
    appellant  had  an  account  to  give  about  the  limited  documentary
    evidence.  If she had given evidence, it would then have been up to the
    judge to accept or  reject  that  evidence.   In  paragraph  8  of  the
    decision, the judge  referred  to  the  Devaseelan  guidelines  but  in
    deciding the appeal as she did, on the papers,  the  appellant  had  no
    opportunity to give  oral  evidence.   The  adverse  findings  made  at
    paragraphs 10 to 14 of the decision could all  have  been  put  to  the
    appellant, if she had been given an opportunity to  explain  her  case.
    In finding at paragraph 13 that there  was  no  supporting  documentary
    evidence, the judge  failed  to  note  that  DNA  evidence  showed  the
    biological relationship  between  the  appellant  and  her  sister  and
    witness statements  and  evidence  from  the  appellant's  husband  and
    children could also have been made available.

8.   Finally, Article 8 was available as  a  ground  as  the  appellant  had
    looked after nephews and nieces while present in this country.

9.   Ms Brocklesby-Weller said that it was not clear whether  the  appellant
    volunteered to give evidence, and if she had she might have  been  able
    to respond to the Secretary of State's case at  the  hearing.   In  any
    event, she was represented and she and her sister had made  statements.
    The witness statements were extensive and the appellant's  rebuttal  of
    the Secretary of State's case was contained  in  them.   Oral  evidence
    might have confirmed that she and her sister wished to rely upon  their
    witness statements but matters would not have been taken much  further.
    There was no breakdown of the assets of the family and little to assist
    with the key question of whether the appellant's essential  needs  were
    met by her sponsor.  The judge was entitled to draw  attention  to  the
    very small number of Western  Union  receipts.   Paragraph  10  of  the
    decision contained the crux of the judge's reasoning regarding historic
    dependency.

10.  Overall,  there  was  insufficient  to  show  that  the  appellant  had
    discharged the burden of proof and so no  material  error.   The  judge
    directed herself in  relation  to  the  documentary  evidence  and  the
    paucity of evidence regarding past dependency and there was nothing  to
    show that she had missed anything out.  Lack of representation and  the
    lack of a hearing did not reveal a material error of law.

11.  In a brief response, Mr Murphy said that the appellant was clearly  not
    at fault in finding herself without a  representative  and  having,  in
    effect, been deprived of a hearing.

Findings and Conclusions

12.  As  Mr  Murphy  submitted,  the  key  question  is  whether  procedural
    unfairness resulted from the  decision  of  the  judge  to  decline  to
    adjourn the case and to decide it on the papers.  The guidance from the
    Upper Tribunal in Nwaigwe shows  that  the  critical  question  is  not
    whether the judge acted reasonably but whether the appellant received a
    fair hearing.

13.  The procedural history is important.  Dismissal of  an  earlier  appeal
    in 2012 was also on the basis of documentary evidence, there  being  no
    hearing.  This may have been the appellant's choice but the position is
    not clear and Mr Murphy  said  that  his  instructions  were  that  the
    appellant was totally unaware of the 2012  decision.   In  the  present
    proceedings, the appellant appeared, ready to give evidence,  in  April
    2015 but the case was then adjourned, apparently because the  Secretary
    of State's decision letter was not available on the day.

14.  There is no doubt that the appellant and her sister were ready to  give
    oral  evidence  in  August  2015,  probably  to  adopt  their   witness
    statements and respond to the Secretary of State's case.  I  accept  Mr
    Murphy's submission that the appellant cannot be blamed for the absence
    of Counsel,  who  certainly  should  not  have  been  double-booked  at
    Wandsworth County Court on  the  day,  or  for  the  rather  surprising
    indication from her  representative  that  he  was  unable  to  act  in
    Counsel's absence.

15.  There were two case management decisions made  by  the  judge.   First,
    she refused to adjourn the case and  then,  secondly,  she  decided  to
    dispense with the hearing and to determine the appeal on the  basis  of
    the documentary evidence before her.  Each of these steps may  properly
    be taken, of course, in accordance with the 2014 Procedure Rules.   The
    second step, however, is perhaps the more important one to consider  in
    relation to fairness.  Irrespective of the merits  of  the  adjournment
    application, the judge's decision to dispense with  a  hearing  removed
    from the appellant any possibility that she and her sister  might  give
    oral evidence or respond further to the Secretary of State's case.  The
    judge's adverse findings at paragraphs 10 to 14 of the  decision  might
    very well have been put to the appellant so that she could  comment  on
    them.  Although there was considerable detail in the witness statements
    before the judge, they were not comprehensive.

16.  There is nothing  in  the  decision  (or  the  Record  of  Proceedings)
    showing that the judge canvassed with  the  appellant  the  possibility
    that even though her representative was unable to assist,  the  hearing
    might nonetheless proceed, with the appellant  and  her  sister  giving
    evidence.  There is also nothing in the decision which expressly refers
    to rule 25 of the 2014 Procedure Rules  and  identifies  which  of  the
    circumstances set out in rule 25 (1) applied in the case.  If the judge
    considered that it was just to determine the appeal without a  hearing,
    rule 25 (2) required an opportunity to be given to the parties to  make
    written representations as to whether there should have been a hearing

17.  Turning to the dismissal of the adjournment  application,  the  judge's
    proper concerns about the conduct of the solicitors and  Counsel  could
    have  been  addressed  differently,  by  referring  their  conduct   to
    professional or regulatory bodies.  I readily appreciate the  practical
    difficulty the judge found herself in, dealing with a float  list  case
    relatively late  in  the  day.   Keeping  the  focus  on  fairness,  in
    accordance  with  Nwaigwe,  I  conclude,   however,   that   procedural
    unfairness was the result of the two case management steps  which  were
    taken.  There might have been no unfairness at all if,  having  refused
    the adjournment, she had proceeded with the  hearing  and  allowed  the
    appellant and her sister to give evidence,  putting  the  Secretary  of
    State's case to the witnesses as necessary.  As it was, moving from the
    refusal of the adjournment to deciding the  appeal  without  a  hearing
    caused the appellant to lose an opportunity to  explain  her  case  and
    provide further detail which might have assisted the judge in assessing
    the evidence overall.  I conclude that the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal must  be  set  aside,  as  a  consequence  of  the  procedural
    unfairness, and re-made.

18.  The representatives were agreed that  the  appropriate  venue  for  re-
    making the decision is the First-tier Tribunal.  I was initially minded
    to remake the decision, in accordance with the suggestion made  by  the
    Upper Tribunal Judge who granted permission to appeal.  However, taking
    into account the state of the list on 2 June 2015 (and the cases  still
    to be heard on that day), and reflecting on the obvious fact  that  the
    appellant now has the opportunity to put her case fully,  and  to  give
    oral evidence, I conclude that the  appropriate  venue  is  indeed  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  I have taken into account section 12 of the  2007
    Act and the Senior President's Practice Direction.

Notice of Decision

19.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside, as  containing  a
    legal error, and shall be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal at  Taylor
    House, before a judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Carroll.




20.  There has been no application for  anonymity  at  any  stage  in  these
    proceedings and I make no direction on this occasion.





Signed                                  Date 14 June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell
