
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38669/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 12th May 2016                     |On 29th July 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                           mr percy steve massala
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No legal representation
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge T G Bradshaw, promulgated on 3rd March 2015, following a  hearing
    "on  the  papers"  at  Belfast  on  17th   February   2015.    In   the
    determination, the judge dismissed the appeal of  the  Appellant.   The
    Appellant applied for,  and  was  subsequently  granted  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, thus the matter comes before me.

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of the Democratic Republic of Congo,
    and was born on 17th September 1974.  He made  his  application  for  a
    residence card as confirmation of his right to  reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom [in] July 2014, and by a decision dated  16th  September  2014,
    the application was rejected.  Reasons given were that  the  failed  to
    provide evidence of his dependency on his EEA national Sponsor, who was
    his brother, at the time either in the Congo, or in the United Kingdom,
    and the Appellant had not provided any evidence that he  was  dependent
    on his EEA national Sponsor immediately prior to  entering  the  United
    Kingdom.

 3. It is a feature of his case, that although the Appellant  claimed  that
    he had been dependent upon his brother,  both  in  the  Congo,  and  in
    France, before coming to the UK, the judge nowhere makes  reference  to
    his claimed dependency on his brother in France, and  only  deals  with
    his claimed dependency in the United Kingdom.  The judge had regard  to
    the fact that the Appellant's  brother,  Tristan  Jocelyn  Massala  was
    specified as being French (see paragraph 9).  There was a  letter  from
    the landlady of the Appellant, Zanab Bibi, dated 3rd  July  2014  which
    said that Tristan Jocelyn Massala  is  a  tenant  and  resides  at  the
    address with his brother, the Appellant.

 4. The judge held that there "was no further information contained  within
    this letter" (paragraph 10).  The judge also observed that  that  there
    was a letter dated 4th July 2014 "from the Appellant  stating  that  he
    married Lisa J Walker in January 2010, but the  relationship  ended  in
    2013", and that the  Appellant  was  currently  "out  of  work  and  he
    depended on his brother to support him financially" (paragraph 13).

 5. He then went on to conclude that the  concerns  of  the  Respondent  in
    terms of the reasons for refusal letter  of  16th  September  2014,  in
    respect of the issue of evidence of the Appellant's dependency "on  his
    EU national either in Congo or the UK are valid"  (paragraph  15).   He
    further stated that looking at all the evidence in the round, "it  does
    not seem to me that the  Appellant  in  his  appeal  documentation  has
    satisfactorily addressed the valid concerns of the Respondent in  terms
    of the issue of dependency" (paragraph 16).  The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state the judge had failed to heed  properly
    Regulation 8 of the  2006  Regulations  which  covers  extended  family
    members.  The Appellant had been out of work when he  applied.   He  is
    dependent on his brother for the payment of the rent  of  the  premises
    where he lived, with his brother.   The  grounds  further  state  that,
    "Also, I lived with my brother France, and more importantly in  the  UK
    at the time applied in July 2014.  The payslip show the address we both
    lived in had been ignored by the Home Office and the judge".

 7. On 24th April 2014, permission to appeal was granted by the Tribunal on
    the basis that there was clear  evidence  before  the  judge  that  the
    Appellant was  residing  in  his  brother's  household  in  the  United
    Kingdom, namely, a letter  from  the  landlord,  Zanab  Bibi,  and  two
    payslips.  However, there appears to be no mention of the fact that the
    Appellant was a member of  his  brother's  household  in  France.   The
    Grounds of Appeal go on to say that,
         "The applicant came to the UK in 2004 - prior to coming to  the  UK
         he resided with his brother in  France  where  he  was  financially
         dependent on his brother.  The applicant resided five to six months
         and claimed asylum - reference number 2003-03-03012-AFMIMR2".

    In granting permission, the judge also  held  that  the  Appellant  had
    clearly stated in his additional grounds that he has a child in the  UK
    who is a British national.  The grant ends by stating that it would  be
    appropriate for any further hearing to be an oral hearing  and  not  on
    the papers.

 8. At the hearing before me on 12th May 2016, the  Appellant  stated  that
    the judge had erred in assessing his dependency because  he  had  lived
    with his brother in France.  The Appellant was  assisted  by  a  French
    interpreter, Ms Ebin, but it quickly transpired that he  was  extremely
    fluent in the English language, and occasionally  broke  into  speaking
    English fluently.  He stated  that  he  also  was  dependent  upon  his
    brother.  There were payslips that he had submitted which had not  been
    considered by either the Home Office or the judge.  He showed  that  he
    and his brother lived at the same address.  In this context,  what  the
    landlady Zanab Bibi said,  acquired  a  different  complexion  and  her
    letter of support should have  carried  greater  weight  than  it  did,
    because it should not  have  been  considered  as  a  single  piece  of
    documentary evidence standing alone.  He said that he had also produced
    bank statements which showed that he and his brother lived in the  same
    apartment.  In 2003 he and his brother  lived  in  the  same  house  in
    France.  This was part of the documentary evidence that was before  the
    judge to consider in an appeal court "on the papers" and  it  had  been
    overlooked.

 9. For the Respondent, Mr Mills submitted that the Appellant had  provided
    little documentation.  He had asked for a "paper hearing".  He had  not
    attended the hearing and  the  judge  decided  as  best  as  he  could.
    Whereas it was true that the position of dependency in France  had  not
    been considered, it had been considered in relation to the  Appellant's
    situation in the  United  Kingdom,  and  the  Appellant  had  satisfied
    dependency both in France and in the United Kingdom.   Given  that  the
    judge had properly found that he could not satisfy  dependency  in  the
    UK, it mattered not that the  judge  had  overlooked  the  evidence  in
    relation to dependency in France, because it  would  not  have  made  a
    material difference to the outcome of the appeal.  Finally,  the  judge
    granting permission had gone  further  than  she  should  have  because
    reference is made  to  the  Appellant  having  a  child.   Indeed,  the
    Appellant has been granted leave to remain in the UK precisely  on  the
    basis of his British citizen child, and there are no removal directions
    in place, so the only issue was his EEA residence card, and it is  open
    to him to make another  application,  where  he  can  attend  and  give
    evidence orally with his brother (who was not in attendance at  today's
    hearing) with  a  view  to  satisfying  the  relevant  requirements  of
    Regulation 8.

10. In reply the Appellant stated  that  the  judge  did  not  mention  the
    brother's payslips and did not deal with the question  that  they  were
    living together in France.  These are material considerations  and  the
    judge failed to take them into account.  The evidence  was  before  the
    judge.



Error of Law

11. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error of law (see Section 12(1) of TCE 2007) such that
    I should set aside the decision.  My reasons are as follows.

12. First, Mr Mills is entirely right that the Appellant has to demonstrate
    dependency both in France and  the  United  Kingdom  to  succeed  under
    Regulation 8.  He is right that where the judge considered the position
    in the United Kingdom,  it  was  open  to  him  to  conclude  that  the
    Appellant (who after all had asked only for  a  "paper  hearing"),  had
    faced an uphill task in being able to discharge the  burden  of  proof.
    However, a failure to consider possible dependency in  France,  is  not
    such which as Mr. Mills maintains, could not have led  to  a  different
    result.

13. This is because even in the consideration of the position  in  the  UK,
    the judge failed to have regard to the payslips of the brother  in  the
    United Kingdom, and the bank statements, and the fact that the  brother
    paid the rent, in premises at which the Appellant himself  lived.   Had
    this been taken into account, the landlady's letter of Zanab Bibi could
    doubtless have been given greater weight.  Therefore, even the position
    in the United Kingdom was not comprehensively assessed on the  evidence
    before the judge.

14. Second, and in the light of this, a failure to consider the position in
    France, on the available documentation before the judge in  the  appeal
    papers,  was one which could have led to a favourable  decision.   This
    is because there  was  material  evidence  which  was  not  taken  into
    account, and the  position  not  fully  assessed  in  relation  to  the
    application of Regulation 8.

15. It is unfortunate that the Appellant's brother was  not  in  attendance
    today, but the Appellant himself was not legally represented,  and  did
    not expect a final decision to be made, and in the circumstances,  this
    matter is remitted back to a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than Judge
    T J Bradshaw, for what is to be an "oral hearing", with evidence  given
    both by the Appellant and his brother so that a proper  assessment  can
    be made of the entire picture which the  Appellant  wishes  to  present
    before the Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    remitted back to a judge other than Judge  Bradshaw  to  be  determined
    again on the basis of Practice Statement 7.2(B).

17. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    29th July 2016
