
IAC-AH-SC-V2
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38089/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 20th March 2015                        |On 9th April 2015                 |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                             mr majid almekdady
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Buncock, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of the Netherlands  born  on  11th  February
    1961.  On 7th  May  2013  the  Appellant's  solicitors  applied  for  a
    document certifying his permanent  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Within  that  application  the  Appellant  stated  that  he  had   been
    permanently incapacitated from 1st August 2007 up to and including  the
    date of his application and provided documentation.  On  4th  September
    2013 the Secretary of State refused the Appellant's application on  the
    grounds that  the  Appellant  did  not  meet  Regulation  5(3)  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  in  that  the
    Appellant had it was submitted failed to provide sufficient evidence to
    show that he had exercised treaty rights as a permanently incapacitated
    person.  It was contended that the Appellant had not provided  evidence
    that he had resided in the United Kingdom continuously  for  more  than
    two years prior to the termination or that the incapacity is the result
    of an accident at work or an occupational disease that entitled him  to
    a pension payable in full or in part by an institution  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  It was consequently decided to refuse the  confirmation  that
    the Appellant sought with reference to Regulations 15(1)(c) and 5(3) of
    the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Clapham at Taylor House  on  5th  November  2014.   In  a
    determination promulgated on 4th December 2014 the  Appellant's  appeal
    was allowed under the 2006 Regulations.

 3. On 11th December 2014 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds  of  Appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal.  The basis of those Grounds of Appeal were  that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge had failed to give adequate  reasons  for
    finding that the Appellant was unable to work due to his incapacity for
    the period September 2007 to May 2008.  On 26th  June  2014  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Kelly granted permission to appeal.   On  12th  February
    2015  a  detailed  Rule  24  response  was  served  by  the  solicitors
    instructed by the Appellant.

 4. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed
    Counsel Mr Buncock.  The Secretary of State appears by her Home  Office
    Presenting Officer Mr Jarvis.

 5. Mr Jarvis takes me to the medical report to be found in the Appellant's
    bundle and whilst  contending  that  paragraph  12  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's determination which  assesses the  medical  report  is
    not as specific as it could be having looked at the medical  report  he
    acknowledges that it shows more than  the  author  of  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal contend that it did and that he has to accept that the judge was
    entitled to consider the historical period and the history  behind  the
    Appellant's incapacity.   On  such  basis  Mr  Jarvis  indicates  that,
    subject to the Tribunal being prepared  to  agree,  he  would  wish  to
    withdraw the Grounds of Appeal on behalf of the Secretary of State.

 6. Having given this matter due consideration and pursuant  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal Rules I grant permission to the Secretary of State to withdraw
    his appeal.

Notice of Decision

In such circumstances it is recorded that the appeal  of  the  Secretary  of
State is withdrawn and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal do stand.

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to  Rule  13  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
Rules 2014.  No application is made to vary that order and none is made.



Signed        Date 23rd March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed        Date 23rd March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

