
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38647/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 23rd October 2015                 |On 4th November 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                               mr Sanjay Paul
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M M Haque (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge E B Grant, following a hearing at Hatton Cross  on  13th  October
    2014.  In the determination, the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal  of  Mr
    Sanjay Paul.  The Appellant subsequently applied for, and was  granted,
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the  matter  comes
    before me



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Bangladesh, who was born on  15th
    January 1981.  He appealed  against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State rejecting his application for leave to remain  as  a
    Tier 4 (General) Student in a decision dated 3rd September 2013.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that the allegation against  him  is  that  he
    undertook a course in Aston College, while  he  was  not  sponsored  by
    Aston College, but he maintains he was not required to be sponsored  by
    Aston College as this was simply a supplementary  course  that  he  was
    doing alongside his main studies at the Finance and Management Business
    School (FMBS), and Aston College  was  perfectly  aware  of  this  (see
    paragraph 3 of his witness statement).

 4. He was having problems with the FMBS and so Aston College  allowed  him
    to undertake a "supplementary course", although he was unable to obtain
    a CAS from Aston College, and the Appellant referred to a letter  dated
    29th May 2014 in this regard.  The problem with FMBS was that  it  lost
    its licence.

 5. The Appellant was waiting for a 60  day  letter  from  the  Respondent.
    This never arrived.  As he did not have a CAS from FMBS, he enrolled on
    a supplementary course at Aston College in August 2011.

The Judge's Findings

 6. The judge noted the Appellant's case that,

         "He took an admission to Aston College because  FMBS  College  lost
         their licence and the Appellant was unable to continue  with  them.
         He searched for the new college and found Aston  College  who  told
         him they could not issue him a CAS letter because  to  do  so  they
         needed to see  a  '60  day  letter  from  the  Home  Office'"  (see
         paragraph 5 of the determination).

    The judge observed the Appellant's case that the Aston  College  course
    was a supplementary course to the FMBS course and subsequently  he  did
    not breach any conditions attached to his leave.  Reference was made by
    the judge to the case of Kaur  (Patel  fairness:  Respondent's  policy)
    [2013] UKUT 00344 (see paragraph 7 of the determination).

 7. The judge also observed that the Respondent's case was straightforward,
    namely, that "the Appellant did not comply with the conditions attached
    to a previous leave and did not obtain permission  to  study  at  Aston
    College from the  Respondent"  (paragraph  8).   This  meant  that  the
    Appellant failed to meet the requirements of  paragraph  322(3)  of  HC
    395.

 8. The findings of the judge were that when FMBS College lost its  licence
    the Appellant's leave to remain had more than six months before expiry.
     He did not receive a letter from the Respondent curtailing  his  leave
    to 60 days.  Although the Appellant argued that he did not receive that
    letter, and he was not  able  to  obtain  a  CAS  letter  from  another
    college, the judge rejected the Appellant's argument that,

         "No-one would issue him a CAS letter without  a  '60  day  letter'.
         There is no evidence to support his claim that a  '60  day  letter'
         was required to be issued with a CAS and there is no evidence  from
         any college that he approached, that was a requirement"  (paragraph
         9).

    Second, the judge held that, "there is  indeed  no  evidence  that  the
    Appellant met the entry requirements  of  any  subsequent  college  and
    qualified for the issuance of a CAS".

 9. Accordingly, the Appellant had  breached  his  conditions,  which  were
    attached to his leave, and there had been  no  unfairness  in  how  the
    Respondent had dealt with the application.  The Appellant had  in  fact
    benefited by the absence of any curtailment of leave.  He was  free  to
    continue his studies in the UK so long as he obtained a CAS and made  a
    proper application to vary leave.  He did not do so.

10. The judge also found as a matter of fact that the course  that  he  had
    enrolled on was not for the Appellant a supplementary course.   He  had
    finished studying at FMBS College because it had lost  its  sponsorship
    licence.  It was after that that, "over  a  month  later  he  commenced
    studying at Aston College without leave from the Respondent" (paragraph
    11).

11. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

12. The grounds of application state that the judge failed to consider  the
    special circumstances applying in the Appellant's case.  The judge also
    erred in disregarding cogent evidence from a course provider as to  the
    nature and status of the supplementary course  in  question.   She  was
    referred to the case of  Kaur  (Patel  fairness:  Respondent's  policy)
    [2013] UKUT 00344, and this was relevant to the Appellant's case.

13. It was common ground that the licence was revoked whilst the  Appellant
    was studying and that no grace period of 60 days was  extended  to  the
    Appellant.  Moreover,  nowhere  in  the  determination  did  the  judge
    consider the Appellant's Article 8 claim in respect of his private life
    in the UK.

14. On 22nd December 2014, permission to appeal was granted  on  the  basis
    that it was arguable that the Appellant had in his grounds  raised  the
    issue of Article 8 and was entitled  to  expect  a  decision  from  the
    Appellant on this issue.  The judge had  failed  entirely  to  consider
    Article 8 and this amounted to an arguable error of law.





Submissions

15. At the hearing before me on 23rd October 2014, Mr Haque,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, submitted that his FMBS College was suspended,
    and he did not receive a 60 day letter, so  he  simply  embarked  on  a
    supplementary course.  The CAS had  originally  been  accepted  and  30
    points had originally been given.   Second,  Article  8  had  not  been
    considered.  This was plainly an  error.   Mr  Haque  relied  upon  his
    skeleton argument before me.

16. For his part, Mr Mills submitted that it was accepted that the CAS  had
    been withdrawn, on the basis that the FMBS College  was  not  a  proper
    college, but the refusal was  on  the  basis  that  the  Appellant  had
    breached his conditions by studying at a college for which  he  had  no
    permission to study in the form of a CAS letter.  A letter  from  Aston
    College states that permission to do a supplementary  course  had  been
    given to him.  However, it could not be supplementary because the  main
    college had closed down.  Therefore, the  Appellant  failed  to  comply
    with paragraph 322 of HC 395.  He simply could not  succeed  under  the
    Rules.

17. Second, the licence of the sponsoring college expired as  long  ago  as
    2012 and the Appellant had ample time to find another  college  in  the
    ensuing six months but failed to do so.  The failure to send him  a  60
    day letter did not cause him any prejudice at all.   In  fact,  as  the
    judge had found, he had benefited from a period of study in the UK.

18. Third, the giving of a "60 day letter" was not mandatory under the Home
    Office's policy.  It was done where people had in previous  years  been
    studying at colleges, when  unbeknown  to  them  the  licence  of  that
    college had been withdrawn, and they were left high and dry, and it was
    in order to address the injustice to them, that the 60 day  letter  was
    introduced, to enable them  time  to  find  another  college.   In  the
    Appellant's case, there was no such  prejudice  to  him.   He  had  six
    months to find another college.  He had failed to do so.

19. Fourth, as far as Article 8 was concerned, the Appellant  simply  could
    not have succeeded.  The case of Patel makes it clear that that Article
    is not there to protect the private life of students in  the  UK.   The
    case of Nasim [2014] also makes it clear in the headnote that Article 8
    has "very limited utility".  These cases had removed the position  from
    what had been established in CDS (Brazil), and it would be wrong now to
    shift the jurisprudence back to that position, in circumstances of  the
    present case.

20. In reply, Mr Haque submitted that there was ample evidence to show that
    no college would accept the Appellant without a 60 day letter of  grace
    from the Home Office because they would not know what they were getting
    themselves into and so the suggestion that the 60 day  letter  was  not
    required was untenable.

21. Second, it remained the case that Article 8 had not been considered.



Error of Law

22. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law.  This error, however, is only
    on the basis that Article 8  was  not  addressed  by  the  judge.   The
    Appellant was entitled to  a  decision  on  Article  8.   However,  the
    Appellant cannot succeed on the basis of "unfairness" that he  was  not
    sent a 60 day letter.

23. This is because  the  judge's  findings  in  this  case  are  otherwise
    unimpeachable.   She  has  found  that  the  Appellant   breached   his
    conditions by embarking on a course of study for which he did not  have
    a CAS.  He says that he did not receive a 60 day letter.   However,  he
    had "more than six months before expiry" (see paragraph  9).   When  he
    did embark on a course of study at Aston College, he did so in a manner
    which was a month after the FMBS College lost its sponsorship  licence,
    and in these circumstances the Appellant was studying at Aston  College
    without leave from the Respondent, in a manner where it  could  not  be
    said that this was a "supplementary course".  The judge  was  right  in
    coming to these conclusions.

24. Therefore, the Appellant could not have  succeeded,  as  Mr  Mills  has
    pointed out before me today, on the basis of  paragraph  322(3)  of  HC
    395.  However, the failure to make a decision on Article 8  remained  a
    material error.

Remaking the Decision

25. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before her, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.

26. I am dismissing this appeal for the following reasons.  First, I  adopt
    the reasoning that the judge gave on the failure  to  comply  with  the
    Immigration Rules and the fact that the  Appellant  acted  contrary  to
    paragraph 322(3) of HC 395, and I have summarised the basis for this in
    the paragraph above, so that there was no basis  for  saying  that  the
    Appellant could succeed simply by virtue of the  fact  that  a  60  day
    letter had not been sent to him, where he had six months  yet  to  find
    another college.

27. Second, that leaves the question of Article 8.  However,  as  Mr  Mills
    has made clear, the established case law now is, following the decision
    of the Supreme Court in Patel, that Article 8 is not there  to  protect
    the private life rights of students who are in this country on the firm
    understanding that their leave has been granted to them  on  a  limited
    basis.  The facts of this case provide abundant evidence for  why  this
    situation applies precisely here.

28. The case of Nasim [2014] had confirmed that  in  cases  such  as  this,
    Article 8 would have a "very limited utility".  There appeared to  have
    been no particular submissions before the judge below about the  nature
    of the Appellant's Article 8 private life  rights  and  there  were  no
    submissions before me.  There is nothing in the  skeleton  argument  to
    this effect.

29. None of this suggests that the Appellant has a  particular  exceptional
    case to make in terms of Article 8 private life rights, except  to  say
    that he has been in the UK, has expended monies  through  his  parents'
    investment (see paragraph 11 of his witness statement) "in order for me
    to pursue a bright future obtaining a world  class  degree  from  a  UK
    institution" and that, "it is very catastrophic to see my  plans  being
    demolished" (see paragraphs 11 to 12).  This does not make for a  basis
    for the Article 8 jurisdiction being extended to cover facts simply  of
    this nature.  The appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original  judge.   I  remake  the  decision  as  follows.   This  appeal  is
dismissed.

No anonymity order is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    2nd November 2015

