
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38150/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |                   Determination      |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 10th December 2015                 |                   On 4th January 2016|
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                     mr Mohammod Ziaur Rahman Chowdhury
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Biggs (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes (HOPO)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Martins, promulgated on 6th May  2015,  following  a  hearing  at
    Hatton Cross on 11th February 2015.  In the  determination,  the  judge
    allowed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  Mr  Mohammod  Ziaur   Rahman
    Chowdhury, whereupon the Secretary of State subsequently  applied  for,
    and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal,  and  thus
    the matter comes before me.





The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Bangladesh, who was born  on  1st
    March 1983.  He  appealed  against  the  decision  of  the  Immigration
    Officer on 14th January 2015, to cancel his  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United  Kingdom  on  account  of  the  fact  that  he  had  made  false
    representations for the purposes of obtaining leave.  The Appellant had
    submitted a TOEIC certificate from  the  Educational  Testing  Services
    ("ETS").  The ETS has a record of the  Appellant's  speaking  test  and
    using voice verification software, ETS was able to detect when a single
    person is undertaking multiple tests.

 3. ETS undertook a check of the Appellant's  test  and  confirmed  to  the
    Secretary of State that there was  significant  evidence  to  conclude,
    that  the  Appellant's  certificate  was  fraudulently  obtained.   The
    Appellant's scores from the test taken on 17th July 2012  at  Elizabeth
    College had been cancelled by ETS.

 4. On the basis of the information provided to it by  the  ETS,  the  Home
    Office was satisfied that there was substantial evidence  to  conclude,
    that the Appellant's certificate was fraudulently obtained.

The Appellant's Claim

 5. The Appellant disagrees  with  this  on  the  grounds  that  there  was
    inadequate  evidential  basis  for  the  Respondent's  decision   under
    paragraph 320(7B).  Moreover, the Respondent had not served any adverse
    evidence upon the Appellant.

The Judge's Findings

 6. The judge held that the Appellant was a genuine student,  with  a  good
    standard of English, and had no  reason  whatsoever  to  undertake  his
    English test by a proxy tester.  He had no reason  to  risk  not  being
    able to pursue his ambition in studying at a masters level.  He had  no
    reason to risk his good name.  In fact, during his interview  with  the
    Immigration Officer at the airport, his English was of a standard  such
    that he could take the English test himself.  He did not need the  help
    of a proxy tester.  (Paragraph 70).

 7. Although there was evidence before the Tribunal in the form of  witness
    statements from Rebecca Collings and Peter  Millington  (see  paragraph
    25) attesting to the system in  place  designed  to  elicit  fraudulent
    applicants, the judge held that, "nowhere in them,  is  there  specific
    reference  to  how  the  Appellant  was  identified  as  someone  whose
    certificate was not legitimately obtained" (paragraph 67).  It was said
    that the specific documents/recordings of the Appellant's tests and the
    results having been subjected  to  voice  recognition  technology,  was
    conclusive evidence, but the judge held that, this "was not before  the
    Tribunal"  (paragraph  67).   The  judge  allowed  the  appeal  of  the
    Appellant.







Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application state that the judge failed to give adequate
    reasons for finding  that  the  Home  Office  had  not  discharged  the
    evidential burden arising from the evidence  of  impersonation  at  the
    test centres.

 9. On 1st September 2015, the Upper Tribunal  granted  permission  on  the
    basis that, insofar as the judge had held (at paragraph 67) that  there
    was no specific reference as to how the  Appellant  was  identified  as
    someone whose certificate was not legitimately  obtained,  the  witness
    statement of Michael Sartorius plainly addressed this very point.

The Hearing

10. At the hearing before me on 10th December 2015, Ms Holmes, appearing on
    behalf of the Respondent Secretary of State, relied upon the  extensive
    Grounds of Appeal.  She submitted that  the  quality  of  the  evidence
    presented before the judge was plainly good enough  for  the  judge  to
    have concluded in favour of the Respondent Secretary  of  State.   This
    evidence consisted of the statement of Rebecca Collings  (at  paragraph
    28) where she states that

         "ETS described that any test categorised as cancelled (which  later
         became known as invalid) had  the  same  voice  for  multiple  test
         takes.  On questioning they advised that they  were  certain  there
         was evidence of proxy test taking or impersonation in those cases".



    There was evidence from Mr Peter  Millington  (at  paragraph  6)  that,



         "following  comprehensive  investigations  ETS  provided  the  Home
         Office  with  lists  of  candidates   whose   test   results   show
         'substantial evidence of invalidity'.  The Home Office was provided
         with the background for the process  used  by  ETS  to  reach  that
         conclusion".

11. Peter Millington had also stated (at paragraph 46) that, "where a match
    has been identified their approach is to invalidate  the  test  result.
    As set out in the witness statement of Miss Rebecca Collings,  ETS  has
    informed the Home Office that there was evidence of invalidity in those
    cases."

12. Furthermore, a  spreadsheet  had  been  provided  to  the  Home  Office
    together with two independent voice analysts' data  confirming  that  a
    proxy had been used in this case.

13. For his part, Mr Biggs submitted  that  there  were  two  issues  here.
    First, there was a finding at paragraph 67 by the judge that there  was
    a "specific reference to how the Appellant was  identified  as  someone
    whose certificate was not legitimately obtained".  This finding had  to
    be read in the context of the determination as a whole.

14. Second, there were the general findings made by the  judge  himself  in
    relation to the issues before her and these confirmed that the  way  in
    which the decision was arrived at was one that was open to the judge so
    that there could be no error of law at all.

15. Mr Biggs carefully took both these points  in  turn.   In  relation  to
    paragraph 67, he referred to the fact that this was  a  seventeen  page
    determination which went into great detail in  the  way  in  which  the
    analysis was undertaken by the judge.  On that basis  alone,  it  could
    not be said that there were inadequate reasons given.  It was true that
    the judge does not deal  specifically  with  the  evidence  of  Michael
    Sartorius.

16. However, the judge was plainly aware of his evidence because  his  name
    is mentioned at the outset of the determination as comprising  part  of
    the evidence to which the judge had regard, when reference is  made  to
    the documents before the court (see paragraph 30(m)),  when  the  judge
    states that  there  is  "a  witness  statement  of  Michael  Sartorius,
    caseworker of the Home Office".  Furthermore, insofar as  reference  is
    made to a spreadsheet, this is  the  spreadsheet  from  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State's office.  It is not the spreadsheet from  the  ETS.
    In any event, by the time that the statements from Rebecca Collings and
    Peter Millington were before the Tribunal six months had  gone  by  and
    these statements were relatively old.

17. As far as the general tenor of the determination itself was  concerned,
    the judge's factual analysis was impeccable and  the  judge  found  the
    Appellant to be credible.  Another judge may have disagreed  with  what
    the Appellant maintained.  This judge,  having  reviewed  the  evidence
    from the Appellant, was persuaded that he was a genuine student who had
    not engaged in fraudulent activity.  In her "findings and conclusions",
    the judge begins at the outset by stating that, "I had the  opportunity
    of hearing and observing the Appellant give evidence which he did in  a
    straightforward and helpful manner.  I had no reason to disbelieve what
    he told me and I find him credible"  (paragraph  59).   These  findings
    that the judge made on credibility were highly significant  given  that
    there had been no challenge to the judge's findings of  credibility  in
    the appeal by the Secretary of State today.

18. In the same  way  the  judge's  findings  at  paragraph  61,  that  the
    Appellant had a good immigration history, had completed courses he  had
    undertaken  successfully,  gaining  a  second  class  degree  from  the
    University of Sunderland, (see paragraph 61), were findings  that  were
    open to  the  judge.   She  made  them  on  the  evidence  before  her.
    Moreover, the judge expressly had regard to the  "relevant  sources  of
    evidence including the ETS look up tool, Home Office  records  and  the
    statements of the Appellant during interview,  which  all  led  to  the
    conclusion that his English language test certificate had been obtained
    fraudulently" (paragraph 65), but the judge rejected this.

19. In a similar fashion, the judge rejected the  evidence  from  the  Home
    Office staff (at paragraph 66).  The legal burden of proof was upon the
    Secretary of State.  The evidential burden was upon the Appellant.  The
    Appellant had discharged that and the judge was satisfied.

20. Finally, insofar as it is said that Michael  Sartorius's  evidence  had
    not properly  been  considered,  it  adds  nothing  whatsoever  of  any
    significance to the case otherwise made by the Respondent Secretary  of
    State, because all it is is a simple summary of the witness  statements
    of other Home Office staff.

21. In reply, Ms Holmes submitted that no matter how admirable the  judge's
    determination may be in its extensive analysis, the judge still had  to
    show that all the  relevant  evidence  had  been  properly  taken  into
    account.  It was  not  known,  for  example,  whether  the  spreadsheet
    prepared by the Home Office had been taken into account.  There was  no
    reference to it.  It was  not  known  whether  Mr  Sartorius's  witness
    statement had been taken into account, because all  that  one  had  was
    simply a reference to  the  witness  statement  under  the  heading  of
    "documents".  Given the evidence before the judge as to how the results
    by ETS were obtained, it  behoved  the  judge  to  provide  a  detailed
    explanation for why she had concluded as she had.

22. Finally, the judge allowed the appeal on Article 8 grounds because  she
    held that

         "There are exceptional circumstances, in my view, of the  Appellant
         being caught up in  an  unfortunate  situation,  because  the  test
         centre he happened to take his English test at, had  been  involved
         in behaviour leading to invalidation  of  certificates"  (paragraph
         71).

    The Appellant had acquired some private life in the UK, and  the  judge
    held that this private life would be interfered  with,  and  that  this
    interference would be disproportionate to the legitimate aim  that  was
    sought to be achieved.

No Error of Law

23. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  It is well-known that the test for perversity is a high one.
     In R (Iran) [2005] EWCA Civ 982, Brooke LJ held  that,  "it  is  well-
    known that 'perversity' represents a very high hurdle" (paragraph  11).
    His lordship went on to explain that, "far too often practitioners  use
    the word 'irrational' or 'perverse' when these epithets are  completely
    inappropriate" (at paragraph 12).

24. It is, of course, the case that there is a system  in  place  from  the
    Respondent Secretary of State which seeks to use the ETS to find people
    who have been involved in false representations and the  use  of  proxy
    test takers.  The Grounds of Appeal  are  ample  in  demonstrating  the
    extent to which efforts have  been  made  to  ensure  that  people  are
    properly identified.

25. At the same time, however, where deception and  deceit  are  concerned,
    the onus is upon the person who alleges such conduct.   It  has  to  be
    proved to a sufficient standard.

26. In this case, it is not as if the judge  has  not  had  regard  to  the
    manner in which the  system  is  said  to  operate.   The  judge  gives
    particular attention to the witness statements of Rebecca Collings  and
    Peter Millington.  (See paragraph 25).  He does refer  to  the  witness
    statement of Michael Sartorius,  whom  he  correctly  identifies  as  a
    "caseworker of the Home Office".  However, as Mr  Biggs  has  submitted
    before him in his clear and comprehensive submissions before  me,  this
    witness statement in itself does  not  add  anything  to  what  is  not
    already before the judge in the form of witness statements  from  other
    Home Office staff.

27. As against the evidence from the Home Office, the judge then  considers
    the evidence from the Home Office  from  the  Appellant  himself.   She
    concludes that, "I had the opportunity of  hearing  and  observing  the
    Appellant give evidence" and that he had done so in a "helpful manner",
    such that she had "no reason to disbelieve what he told me"  (paragraph
    59).  She notes that he has got  a  creditable  educational  background
    with an HND in business studies and an undergraduate  degree  from  the
    University of Sunderland, together with  a  masters  degree  now.   His
    English proficiency language score  with  the  IELTS  test  certificate
    stands  at  5.   (See  paragraph  61).   He  also  had  an  "impeccable
    immigration history" (see paragraph 62).

28. After reviewing all this evidence, the judge then goes on  to  actually
    state that, "balanced against the above profile of this  Appellant,  is
    the fact that the TOEIC test certificate is submitted for an  extension
    of his leave in order to pursue his degree course, was  invalidated  by
    ETS after he submitted his application and  been  granted  leave"  (see
    paragraph 63).  The judge went on to consider the basis of this.

29. The nub of the judge's  ruling  is  that,  having  considered  all  the
    evidence that is compiled against the Appellant, that "nowhere in them,
    is there specific reference to how  the  Appellant  was  identified  as
    someone whose certificate was  not  legitimately  obtained"  (paragraph
    67).  That was a conclusion that the judge  was  entirely  entitled  to
    come to.  Another judge, hearing the evidence, in the way in  which  it
    unfolds before the other judge on a particular time and day,  may  well
    have taken a completely different view.

30. The question in this appeal turned ultimately on the findings  of  fact
    by Judge Martins in the appeal that she heard.  It did not turn on  the
    arguments advanced before Judge Martins.  This is to say nothing of the
    fact that Judge Martins did take these arguments  fully  into  account,
    but in concluding as she did, she made findings  on  the  relevant  and
    material matters that needed determining.  That was a  conclusion  that
    was open to the judge.  There is no error of law.

Decision

31. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

32. No anonymity order is made.


Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 18th December 2015
