
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38951/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25th June 2015                             |On 29th June 2015            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH


                                   Between

                                KUSHAL POUDEL
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. S. Abbas, legal representative, instructed by
                   Imperium Group   Immigration Specialists
For the Respondent:    Mr. C. Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 History of Appeal

   1. The Appellant, who was born on 1st September 1989, is  a  national  of
      Nepal. He married Gyanu Ghimive,  in  Nepal  and  entered  the  United
      Kingdom as her dependent on 11th January 2010, when she came here as a
      Tier 4 Student (General) Migrant. His leave to remain was subsequently
      extended until 31st July 2014, as her dependent but they separated  in
      2012 and on 21st  May  2013  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department informed him that his leave would be  curtailed  from  20th
      July 2013.

   2. On 19th July 2013 the Appellant applied to vary his leave on the basis
      that he had established a private life in the United Kingdom  for  the
      purposes of Article 8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights.  He
      also submitted that he would be destitute and at risk of serious  harm
      if removed to Nepal, which would give rise  to  a  further  breach  of
      Article 3 of the ECHR.

   3. The Secretary of State for the Home Department refused his application
      on 13th September 2013 on the basis that he was not entitled to  leave
      to remain under the Immigration Rules on account of his private  life.
      The Appellant appealed and his  appeal  was  dismissed  by  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Robinson in a determination promulgated on 16th October
      2014.

   4. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal against  this  decision
      on 21st  October 2014. He submitted  that  the  First-tier  Judge  had
      materially erred in law in paragraph 32 of his  determination  as  the
      Appellant relationship with Mr. and Mrs Donoghue did amount to  family
      life. He relied on the case of MT (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State  for
      the Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ 455. and submitted that dependency
      can be emotional and not merely financial. He also submitted that  the
      "circumstances" and "shared experiences" were important in determining
      if family life comes within Article 8.

   5. First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer refused the Appellant  permission  to
      appeal on 4th December 2014 on  the  basis  that  the  Respondent  was
      entitled to find that no family life existed between the Appellant and
      Mr. and Mrs Donoghue and that in relation to his private life it would
      not be disproportionate to require the Appellant to leave.

   6. The Appellant renewed his grounds  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.  He  also
      submitted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge   had   failed   to
      appropriately consider the evidence that the  Appellant  regarded  Mr.
      and Mrs Donoghue as his parents.  On  20th  March  2015  Deputy  Upper
      Tribunal Judge Zucker granted permission to appeal,  stating  that  it
      was arguable that the Judge erred in finding that there was no  family
      life deserving of respect and he had, therefore, failed to  adequately
      consider whether the Appellant's removal would be proportionate.

 Error of Law Hearing

   7. At the hearing before me the Appellant submitted a small bundle, which
      mainly  consisted  of  documents  already  before  the  Tribunal.   In
      addition, it  contained  a  supplementary  witness  statement  by  the
      Appellant and a travel alert from the UK  Government  which  addressed
      the Appellant's potential circumstances  in  Nepal  after  the  recent
      earthquake. This was not evidence which I  could  consider  during  an
      error of law hearing.

   8. At the hearing, Mr. Abbas argued that family life was engaged and that
      the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  only  considered  the  financial
      aspects and not the  emotional  aspects  of  the  life  the  Appellant
      enjoyed with Mr. and Mrs Donoghue.  In particular, he  submitted  that
      the Judge had erred in law in paragraph 33 where  he  found  that  the
      Appellant had established a close relationship but not a family  life.
      He also relied on extracts from MT (Zimbabwe) and Navaratnam  Kugathas
      v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ  31.  The
      Respondent  then  argued  that  the  grounds  were  no  more  than   a
      disagreement with the Judge's decision and the there was  no  familial
      basis for the asserted family life and noted that  the  Appellant  had
      not even known Mr and Mrs Donoghue before 2010.

   9. I have taken into account the fact that in  MT  (Zimbabwe)  the  Court
      noted that  "the  nature  of  the  relationship  [relied  upon  by  an
      Appellant]  should  be  very  much  a  matter  for  her  judgement   -
      essentially, as the adjudicator herself  said,  a  question  of  fact,
      bearing in mind that she heard live evidence, cross-examined". In  the
      current case the Judge' determination and reasons and  the  record  of
      proceedings in the file, confirm that the Appellant and  Mr.  Donoghue
      both gave oral evidence  and that Mr. Donoghue said that the Appellant
      lived with him and his wife and was now  part  of  their  lives.   The
      Appellant also said that Mr. and Mrs Donoghue were like parents to him
      as his own mother was dead and he was estranged from his father.  This
      was acknowledged by the  Judge  in  paragraphs  6(6)  and  11  of  his
      determination and reasons. He had also had the benefit of hearing live
      evidence at the hearing before him.

  10. At paragraph 32, the Judge also noted that Mr. and Mrs  Donoghue  said
      that they treated the Appellant as one of their family  and  described
      him as one of their own sons. This was evidence of the emotional  ties
      which existed between them and, therefore,  it  was  not  accurate  to
      state that the Judge merely considered  the  financial,  and  not  the
      emotional ties, which the  Appellant  had  formed  with  Mr.  and  Mrs
      Donoghue.

  11. Mr. Abbas also argued that if emotional ties had been established this
      was capable of amounting to family life even if the parties  were  not
      related to each other.  However,  I  note  that  in  paragraph  19  of
      Kugathas Lord Justice Sedley held that "neither  blood  ties  nor  the
      concern and affection that ordinarily go with them are, by  themselves
      or together, in my judgment enough to constitute family life [for  the
      purposes of Article 8 of the ECHR]". At paragraph 25 of the same  case
      Lady Arden then added that "in  my  judgment  a  family  life  is  not
      established between an adult child and his surviving parent  or  other
      siblings unless something more exists than normal emotional ties".  In
      the present case, the Appellant was not even related to  Mr.  and  Mrs
      Donoghue and relied primarily on his emotional relationship  with  Mr.
      and Mrs Donoghue. The Judge also  found  the  Appellant  was  married,
      albeit separated, was in employment and lead an independent life. This
      did not suggest that there were any  additional  factors  which  could
      have given rise to a family life for the purposes of Article 8 even if
      the Appellant had been Mr. and Mrs Donoghue's adult birth child.

  12. In contrast in MT (Zimbabwe) there were a number of factors which  did
      give rise to a family life between adult cousins. These were that  the
      ties had arisen when the Appellant was still a  child;  she  had  been
      integrated into  the  family  since  childhood;  young  female  adults
      remained  living  n  a  family  setting  and  as  adults  they  shared
      experiences in Zimbabwe. There were no such shared historical ties and
      dependency in the current case.

  13. In addition, the Appellant's representative was not able to direct  me
      to any case in domestic law or the law of the European Court of  Human
      Rights in which family life was said to have arisen for  the  purposes
      of Article 8 of the ECHR when there was no familial link  between  the
      parties of any sort.

  14. For all of these reasons I am satisfied that there  were  no  material
      errors of law in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision and findings
      and that it should not be set aside.

 Conclusions:

 1.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge's  determination  did  not  include  any
      material errors of law.

   2. The decision should not be set aside and should stand.



     Date: 25th June 2015
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch
