
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38763/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 September 2015                 |On 30 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mr DANIEL GEISLER
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Sharma, Counsel instructed by Kent Immigration
                    & Visa Advice


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a decision by First-tier Tribunal Judge Blake
     promulgated on 13th January  2015,  in  which  he  allowed  an  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State of 16th  September  2014
    to refuse an application by Mr Geisler for leave to remain in the UK on
    family and private life grounds.

 2. This is one of two appeals that was filed by Mr Geisler  and  heard  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Blake on the  same  date.  The  other  appeal
    (IA/38039/2014) was an appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of
    State of 28th August 2014, to refuse to issue a Residence  Card  to  Mr
    Geisler as confirmation of a right of residence as the family member of
    a British citizen  who  was  previously  working  or  self-employed  in
    another EEA State.

 3. The appellant in the appeal before me is the Secretary of State for the
    Home Department and the Respondent is Mr. Daniel Geisler.  However  for
    ease of reference, in the course of this determination  I  shall  adopt
    the parties' status as it was before the First-tier Tribunal.  I  shall
    in this determination, refer to Mr. Daniel Geisler as the appellant and
    the Secretary of State as the respondent.

 4.  Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
    Hollingworth on 12th May 2015.  Insofar as this appeal is concerned, he
    noted:

         "In respect of IA/38763/2014, at paragraph 61 the Judge  refers  to
         the same issues. Arguable error of law arises in the context of the
         consideration as to whether or not there would have been  a  breach
         of Article 8.

         An  arguable  error  of  law  has  arisen  in   relation   to   the
         consideration of the correct Regulations."

 5. The matter comes before me to consider whether or not the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Blake involved the making of a material error
    of law.

Background

 6. The appellant is an Australian national.  The  factual  background  was
    not in issue before the First-tier Tribunal.  It is useful to summarise
    the material chronology before I turn to the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal and the grounds of appeal before  me.   I  have  decided  both
    appeals separately, and I have set out my decision in relation to  each
    appeal separately.

 7. The appellant was born in Australia on 24th May 1989 and left Australia
    in October 2000 (aged 11) with his mother and siblings.  The family had
    obtained Residence cards in France as dependant's  of  the  appellant's
    stepfather, a British Citizen living in France  and  exercising  treaty
    rights in France.  The appellant started his  schooling  in  France  in
    January  2001  and  graduated   in   France   with   an   International
    Baccalaureate in May 2007.

 8. On 27th September 2007, the appellant arrived  in  the  UK  with  entry
    clearance as a student, valid  from  21st  September  2007  until  31st
    October 2011.  In October 2008, the appellant's mother and brother came
    to the UK and they have remained in the UK since.

The decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Blake  in  appeal  IA/38763/2014
("The Article 8 appeal")

 9. In his decision promulgated on 13th January  2015  in  respect  of  the
    respondent's decision of 16th September 2014 to refuse  the  appellants
    application for leave  to  remain  on  Article  8  grounds,  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Blake sets out at paragraphs [4] to  [19],  the  reasons
    why the application had been refused by the respondent.   At  paragraph
    [22], the Judge sets out the relevant provision of paragraph  276ADE(1)
    of the Immigration Rules that was at the heart  of  the  appeal  before
    him.  At paragraphs [37] to [58] the Judge records the submissions made
    on behalf of the appellant.  Counsel for the appellant  submitted  that
    the appellant's mother and siblings had been granted  indefinite  leave
    to remain on the basis of the appellant's stepfather's  status  whereas
    the appellant had not been considered  at  that  time  because  he  was
    already present in the UK having entered as a student.   She  submitted
    that the appellant  should  have  been  considered  for  the  grant  of
    indefinite leave to remain in the  UK  at  the  time  of  his  family's
    arrival in 2008. She submitted that their arrival should have triggered
    the status of indefinite leave to remain for the appellant.

10. The Judge's finding and conclusions are set out at paragraphs  [60]  to
    [84] of the decision.  Insofar as is material to the appeal before  me,
    the Judge found:

         "61. ... I found that  he  should  have  been  considered  for  and
         granted indefinite leave under the EEA Regulations at the same time
         as his family when they entered the UK in 2008.

         62.  I accepted the submission that at  the  time  the  appellant's
         family entered the UK in 2008, that this should have triggered  his
         status as an EEA dependent of a British citizen, and that he should
         have then been granted ILR along with the rest of his family."

    The Judge notes at paragraphs [63], to [65], the fragmented immigration
    history of the family and the impact that has had upon  the  appellant.
    The Judge goes on to state:

         "66. I took into account the fact that the appellant had not  lived
         in Australia since he had been 11 years of age. I noted that he had
         travelled with his family to France in 2000. I found  that  he  had
         lived there with his family until his departure in 2007 when he had
         travelled to the UK in order to study.

         67.  I accepted that in 2008 he had been reunited with his  family.
         I noted this was after a short period of time. In the circumstances
         I considered that the appellant had lived  with  his  family  in  a
         family unit for the whole of his life.

         ...

         70.  I accepted from all of the evidence that the appellant had  no
         contact or ties with Australia. I  found  that  he  had  left  that
         country when he was very young at the age of 11 years.

         71.  In the circumstances of the appellant's case, and taking  into
         account his medical background,  I  found  that  returning  him  to
         Australia, in his fragile state of anxiety  and  depression,  would
         obviously have a bad effect  on  his  overall  health.  I  did  not
         consider that such a course of action was necessary in the  pursuit
         of a fair and from immigration control.

         72.  I was satisfied on the basis of all of the evidence and  facts
         before me that the appellant qualified for leave  to  remain  under
         the Immigration Rule 276ADE(1)(vi). I found  at  the  time  of  the
         hearing he was over 18 and had lived continuously  in  the  UK  for
         some seven years.

         73.  I found that there  were  significant  obstacles  to  his  re-
         integration into Australian Society. I found that he had  not  been
         there since he was 11 and that he had nobody to turn  to  there.  I
         found that the whole of his adult life  had  been  spent  with  his
         family in France and in the UK. I also found that he was  suffering
         with depression and anxiety.

         74.  In the course of my consideration I took into account  section
         117 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as inserted
         by section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014.

         75.  In the light of my findings on the appellant's  background,  I
         found that he had no ties or connections with Australia that  would
         assist with his reintegration into society there.

         76.  In the circumstances I found that he did qualify for leave  to
         remain in the United Kingdom with reference to  rule  276ADE(1)(vi)
         of the Immigration Rules HC395 (as amended).

         77.  I further considered the case  exceptionally  outside  of  the
         Rules. I found that there were circumstances  that  have  not  been
         considered by a straight application of the immigration rules.

         ...

         82.  I found the  facts  concerning  the  appellant's  history  and
         background were relevant. I noted the  fact  that  the  appellant's
         family had all been granted indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  2008
         whereas he had not been  granted  leave.  I  noted  that  this  was
         because he had not been considered at the time owing to the fact he
         was in the UK as a student. I found such  background  circumstances
         were all relevant to the overall Article 8 consideration.

         ...

         84.  I found on the facts before me  that  there  were  exceptional
         circumstances such as to require a consideration of the appellant's
         application outside of  the  immigration  rules.  I  found  on  the
         evidence of the facts  in  the  appellants  case  that  there  were
         grounds for granting leave to remain in the United Kingdom  outside
         of the immigration rules and with reference to Article 8 ECHR.

         85.  In the circumstances I allow the appeal under the  immigration
         rules. I further allow the appeal under Article 8 ECHR  outside  of
         the immigration rules."

The Grounds of Appeal in appeal IA/38039/2014 ("The Article 8 appeal")

11. The respondent submits that the decision of the Judge  is  vitiated  by
    the same errors as those made in the EEA appeal  (IA/38039/2014).   The
    respondent refers particularly to  paragraphs  [61]  and  [62]  of  the
    decision where the Judge finds that  the  appellant  should  have  been
    considered for and granted "indefinite leave under the EEA  Regulations
    at the same time as his family when they entered the UK in  2008.   The
    respondent submits that the judge failed to apply the appropriate  test
    under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration  Rules.   It  is  said
    that the Judge did not take into account the fact that  depression  and
    anxiety are treatable in Australia, the appellant speaks  the  language
    of Australia, is educated and a national of Australia.  The  respondent
    submits that the Judge has instead concentrated on whether or not there
    would be ties that would assist the appellant on return.

12. Finally it is submitted on behalf of the  respondent  that  in  finding
    that the appellants Article 8 rights  would  be  breached  outside  the
    rules,  the  Judge  failed  to   identify   the   unjustifiably   harsh
    consequences that would ensue.

The hearing before me on 25th September 2015

13. At the hearing before me, Mr Walker on behalf of the respondent adopted
    the grounds of appeal and submitted that the Judge had been misdirected
    as  to  the  facts.  He  submitted  that  the  Judge  proceeds  on  the
    misunderstanding at paragraphs  [61]  and  [62]  that  the  appellant's
    family had been permitted to remain in the United Kingdom under the EEA
    Regulations and the appellant should also  have been granted ILR at the
    same  time.    He  reminds  me  that,  unlike  other  members  of   the
    appellant's family, the appellant had not made an application  in  2008
    for leave to enter or  remain  in  the  UK  as  the  dependent  of  his
    stepfather, a British Citizen.

14. In reply, Mr Sharma drew my attention to paragraph [63] of the decision
    and submitted that in reaching his decision as to the Article 8 appeal,
    the Judge has had regard to the particular  facts  of  this  case.   He
    submits that the Judge considered the depression and  anxiety  suffered
    by the appellant, the close relationship he has with his  brother,  the
    fragmented immigration status of the family and importantly,  the  fact
    that the appellant has not lived in Australia since the age of 11.   Mr
    Sharma submits that the Judge refers to the correct test  at  paragraph
    [73] and in  considering  whether  there  are  compelling  reasons  for
    allowing the appeal on Article 8 grounds  outside  of  the  immigration
    rules, was entitled to reach the conclusions that he did at  paragraphs
    [82] and [83].

Error of Law decision in appeal IA/38763/2014 ("The Article 8 appeal")

15. I acknowledge that the Judge,  at  paragraphs  [61]  and  [62]  of  his
    decision, begins his consideration  of  the  appeal  by  accepting  the
    submission made by counsel for  the  appellant,  that  the  appellant's
    family were granted ILR under the EEA Regulations.   That  was  plainly
    incorrect.

16. However, in my judgment it is clear that the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    the correct test  in  mind  and  applied  it  in  substance.  Paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) is set out at paragraph  [22]  of  the  decision  and  at
    paragraphs [72] and [73] that is clearly the test being applied.

17. In my judgment, the  extracts  from  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal set out above show that  the  Judge  had  sufficient  evidence
    before him to reach  the  conclusion  that  he  did,  that  there  were
    significant obstacles to the appellant's reintegration to Australia.

18. The Judge found that the appellant suffered from depression and anxiety
    (for which he was receiving therapy from a Dr Barker), which had arisen
    out of his being separated with his family in terms of his  immigration
    status. [63] and [69].  The Judge found that the  appellant  had  lived
    with his family in a family unit for the whole of his life, and that he
    enjoyed a very close relationship with his younger brother, Mathew, and
    a close relationship with  his  mother  and  the  rest  of  his  family
    generally. [64] and [67]  The Judge also found that the  appellant  had
    not lived in Australia since he had been in 11 years  of  age,  had  no
    contact or ties with Australia and that he had nobody to turn to there.
    [66], [67], [70], [73] and [75].  Those were  all  findings  that  were
    open to the Judge and are not challenged in the appeal before me.

19. The evidence of  the  appellant  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    unchallenged.  Reading the findings made as a whole, the decision  that
    there were significant obstacles to the appellant's reintegration  into
    Australia was one that was open to the Judge  on  the  evidence  before
    him.  At the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  the  Home  Office
    Presenting  Officer  simply  adopted  the  matters  set  out   in   the
    respondent's reasons for refusal letter dated 16th September 2014.  The
    respondent simply relied upon the fact that the appellant  had  resided
    in Australia up to the age of 11,  which  included  his  childhood  and
    formative years.  The respondent  considered  that  the  appellant  had
    retained knowledge of Australian life, language and culture  and  would
    therefore not face significant obstacles to reintegrating into life  in
    Australia.

20. In essence, the respondent's argument is that the decision  that  there
    were  significant  obstacles  to  the  appellant   reintegration   into
    Australia was not one reasonably open to a rational decision-maker.  In
    my judgment, for the reasons set out above, the decision was  one  that
    was open to the Judge.

21. Having found that the appellant succeeds under paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)
    of the Immigration Rules, the judge did not need  to  consider  whether
    the circumstances of the case are exceptional  so  as  to  warrant  the
    grant of leave to remain in the UK outside of the immigration rules  on
    conventional Article 8 grounds.

22. Had  the  appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  under  the
    immigration rules but been allowed on Article 8 grounds for the reasons
    set out at paragraph [82] I would  have  had  some  sympathy  with  the
    respondents  appeal.   The  exceptional  circumstances  identified   in
    paragraph [82] appear to be the fact that the  appellant's  family  had
    all been granted ILR in 2008.  It is right to note that  the  appellant
    made no application in 2008.  However, it is now well established  that
    judges should proceed by first considering whether an appellant is able
    to benefit under the applicable provisions  of  the  immigration  rules
    designed to address Article 8 claims.   It is only where the  appellant
    does not meet the requirements of the rules, that it is necessary to go
    on to make an assessment of Article 8 applying the criteria established
    by law.  There  is  always  the  possibility  of  particular  facts  in
    individual cases to be of especially compelling force,  such  that  the
    grant  of  leave  to  remain   is   appropriate   notwithstanding   the
    requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  are  not   met.    Paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) specifically addresses application for leave to remain on
    the grounds of private life.  Having found that the appellant succeeded
    under the rules, there was no need to make an assessment of Article  8.
    Any error in doing so was therefore in my judgment not material to  the
    outcome of the appeal.

23. In those circumstances, there is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

24. The appeal is dismissed.

25. No anonymity direction is applied for and none is made.


Signed   Date


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia



FEE AWARD

1.   The First-tier Tribunal made a fee award and that award shall stand.


Signed   Date


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

