
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38583/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                   |                Decision & Reasons   |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 3 November 2015                    |                On 18 November 2015  |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     A D
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Hussain (of Syeds Solicitors)

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer to the Appellant in this appeal to the Upper Tribunal  as
    the Secretary of State.   I  shall  refer  to  the  Respondent  as  the
    Claimant.  The Secretary of State has appealed, with permission, to the
    Upper Tribunal in respect of a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge V A Cox) promulgated on 13 January 2015, allowing the Claimant's
    appeal against a decision of 22 September 2014 refusing to  vary  leave
    to remain and deciding to remove him from the UK by way of directions.

 2. By way of background, the Claimant, who is a national of Pakistan, came
    to the UK as a student.  He entered on 26 October 2010 having  obtained
    entry clearance abroad. He subsequently obtained  further  leave  as  a
    student which was granted until 21 June 2014.  During the  currency  of
    his leave he formed a relationship with S A. She is also a national  of
    Pakistan but she is present and settled in the UK having come here  for
    the purposes of marriage though that marriage has ended and  there  had
    been a divorce in 2011.   There  is  one  child  of  that  marriage,  a
    daughter, born on 6 March 2009 and it has been said by the Claimant and
    S A that the three of them live as a family unit though  the  daughter,
    who is a British national through virtue of her  father  being  such  a
    national, is said to still see her father. The Claimant and S A married
    each other in the UK on 9th July 2013  and  he  applied  for  leave  to
    remain as a spouse within the currency  of  his  previous  leave  as  a
    student, that application having been made on 29 November 2013.

 3. On 27 September 2015 the Claimant took an English language test, or  at
    least that is what he says he did though the  Secretary  of  State  has
    contended that a third party took the test  on  his  behalf.   He  was,
    originally awarded a TOEIC certificate in recognition of  his  apparent
    success but, subsequently, the Educational Testing  Service  (ETS),  an
    organisation which administers tests and reviews test results, reported
    its view that the test result  had  been  obtained  through  deception.
    This led to the certificate, which the Claimant was  relying  upon  for
    the purposes of his application, being cancelled.  He was  notified  of
    this by the Home Office and he responded by taking and passing an  ESOL
    English language test though the cancellation of his certificate  meant
    there was no valid certificate before the Secretary  of  State  at  the
    date of application.

 4. The Secretary of State decided to refuse the application. In a "refusal
    letter" of 22 September 2014 she said that the Claimant did not satisfy
    the "Suitability" section of  the  Immigration  Rules  because  of  the
    deception surrounding the test.  As a consequence he did not  meet  the
    "Eligibility"  section  either  though  it  was   accepted   that   the
    relationship was genuine.  The Secretary of State went on  to  consider
    the possible application of  Paragraph  EX.1  of  Appendix  FM  to  the
    Immigration Rules but decided the requirements contained  therein  were
    not met either.  It was said there were  no  exceptional  circumstances
    such as to justify granting the application under article 8 of the ECHR
    in circumstances where the requirements of the Immigration  Rules  were
    not met so the application was refused.

 5. The Claimant's appeal was heard by the First-tier Tribunal on 7 January
    2015. The  Claimant  and  his  wife  gave  oral  evidence.  Documentary
    evidence concerning the test certificate was produced on behalf of  the
    Secretary of State and this consisted of two witness statements made by
    high ranking officers within the Home Office and a document referred to
    as an "ETS look up tool document".

 6. The First-tier Tribunal recorded that, whatever the position  regarding
    the "Suitability" requirements, the  "Eligibility"  requirements  could
    not be met for financial reasons.  That was agreed between the parties.
    However, the  appeal  succeeded  because  it  was  concluded  that  the
    Claimant had not fallen foul of the "Suitability" requirements and that
    he  met  the  requirements  of  paragraph  EX.1  because   there   were
    insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing outside the UK.

 7. The Secretary of State applied for and obtained permission to appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal.  Permission was granted by a  Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal in these terms:

         "2.  It is arguable that the Judge erred in law by finding that the
             statements  lodged  by  the  Respondent  in  support  of   the
             contention that the Appellant had used deception were  generic
             and that no specific evidence related to the test taken by the
             Appellant when the grounds clearly show that the ETS  look  up
             tool document which was lodged shows that the Appellant's test
             had been categorised by the ETS as invalid.

         3.   While the ground relating to the Judge's  failure  to  provide
             adequate reasons why there are insurmountable obstacles to his
             family  life  continuing  in   Pakistan   are   clearly   less
             persuasive, I am disinclined to reject it particularly if  the
             Appellant is found to have used deception."




 8. There was a hearing before the Upper Tribunal and the  initial  purpose
    of that hearing was to consider whether or not the First-tier  Tribunal
    had erred in law such that its determination ought  to  be  set  aside.
    Mrs Pettersen relied upon  her  grounds  of  appeal  but,  perhaps  not
    surprisingly in view of the terms of the grant, focused mainly upon the
    first ground. The evidence did, in part, she said, relate to the actual
    test the Claimant had claimed to have taken.  Mr Hussain contended that
    there had been no misunderstanding as to the nature  of  the  evidence.
    He suggested that the sort of evidence advanced  by  the  Secretary  of
    State in cases such as this was generally unpersuasive and referred  me
    to R v Secretary of State for the Home Department (ETS-judicial review)
    IJR [2015] UKUT 00327 (IAC).   I  indicated  to  the  parties  I  would
    reserve my decision as to the error of law  issue.   Having  considered
    matters I have concluded that the First-tier Tribunal did  not  err  in
    law and that its decision  shall,  therefore,  stand.   I  set  out  my
    reasoning below.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal gave very full and careful consideration to the
    question of whether or not the Claimant had used deception with respect
    to the test he claimed to have taken. It did so in  a  passage  of  its
    determination running from paragraph 31 to 40.  Amongst the  points  it
    made were these: The Claimant had given evidence in English  before  it
    and his level of English appeared to accord with the sort  of  standard
    which would have given him the certificate and grading he had received,
    he had subsequently been able to obtain a further certificate which had
    been awarded with distinction (the point here being there was no reason
    he would need to use deception if his English was that good), both  the
    Claimant and his wife had given what it found to be  credible  evidence
    concerning the taking of the test and that the Claimant had given  some
    specific detail regarding the events on the day of the test.

10. Further, the First-tier Tribunal noted the submission made to it by the
    representative  for  the  Secretary  of  State  to  the   effect   that
    certificates would only be cancelled where  the  administrator  of  the
    tests was "certain" there had been deception.   It  did  refer  to  the
    evidence as being "generic" but, in terms of the witness statements, it
    was not inappropriate or inaccurate to say that.  It is clear from what
    it said at paragraph  34  that  it  only  stated  the  statements  were
    generic.  The supposed significance of the document  described  as  the
    "ETS look up tool document" does not appear to have been  explained  to
    the First-tier Tribunal by the Secretary of State's representative  or,
    at least, the determination which does summarise the  submissions  made
    does not say it was.   In these circumstances I do  not  conclude  that
    the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  law  in  its  consideration  of  the
    evidence concerning the allegation of deception.

11. Accordingly, I turn to consider the second ground.

12. The second ground was not pursued before me other  than  by  way  of  a
    general indication that the written grounds were relied upon.  What  is
    said in those written grounds fails to properly  identify  an  arguable
    error and simply amounts to an attempt to re-argue matters.  The First-
    tier  Tribunal  considered  the  application  of  paragraph  EX.1  from
    paragraph 43 to 67 of its determination. It noted that the relationship
    was accepted as being genuine. It accepted that the Claimant, his  wife
    and the child were living together as a single family unit and that the
    child continued to have contact with the UK based father.   It  pointed
    out that the interests of the child were a  primary  consideration  but
    that the child's nationality could not be regarded as a  "trump  card".
    It reminded itself of the need to take  into  account  the  content  of
    section 117 of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.
    Having done all of that it concluded in favour of the Claimant.  Whilst
    it may be that a differently constituted First-tier Tribunal might have
    reached a different view on the same facts I really cannot see that the
    grounds go beyond a mere disagreement with the outcome.

13. I conclude, therefore, the First-tier Tribunal did not err  in  law  so
    that its decision shall stand.

Conclusions

The making of the decision by the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error of law.

The decision shall stand.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did make an order pursuant to Rule 45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.   I  am  not  wholly
sure that such an order was necessary but, since nothing was said  about  it
before me, I shall continue that order pursuant to Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.


Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

