
[pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38283/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th August 2015                   |On 27th August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

                                QASIM MASOOD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Saeed of Counsel, instructed by Aman Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On 13th  April  2015  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Levin  gave
    permission to the appellant to appeal against the decision of Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal I F Taylor in which  he  dismissed  the  appeal
    against the decision  of  the  respondent  to  revoke  the  appellant's
    residence card issued as the  family  member  of  an  EEA  national  in
    accordance with the provisions of paragraph 20(2)  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 2. Judge Levin granted permission because he thought it arguable that,  in
    line with the Court of Appeal's decision in NA  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  995,
    national law does not impose a requirement that an EEA national  spouse
    should have  been  exercising  treaty  rights  on  the  termination  of
    marriage.   Further,  he  thought  the  judge's  conclusion  that   the
    respondent's responsibility to request information from HMRC about  the
    former spouse's employment did not render the refusal decision unlawful
    was arguable wrong.  However, Judge Levin did not find other grounds in
    the application to have merit.

 3. At the hearing before me Ms Saeed submitted that the judge's conclusion
    in paragraph 18 assumed that the  respondent  had  done  all  necessary
    under the policy but she had not.  She explained that  the  appellant's
    residence card had been revoked after the appellant's wife had  written
    to the respondent about the breakdown  in  the  relationship.   It  was
    therefore  difficult  for  the  appellant  to  obtain  the   employment
    information about his wife without assistance from the respondent.

 4. Mr McVeety did not disagree with the contention that the  judge  should
    have  taken  into  account  the  respondent's  policy  about  obtaining
    information.  He thought it appropriate that the decision  should  have
    been remitted back to the respondent for consideration in line with the
    policy.  He also added that, if the decision was returned in that  way,
    it would also be possible for the respondent to take into consideration
    the Court of Appeal conclusion in NA and there was also the possibility
    that the reference to the Court of Justice of the European Union by the
    Court of Appeal would have resulted in a decision.

 5. After hearing submissions I announced that I  was  satisfied  that  the
    decision showed an error on a point of law and proceeded to re-make the
    decision.  My reasons and conclusions at each stage are set out, below.

Error on a Point of Law

 6. In paragraph 18 of the decision the judge reaches the conclusion  that,
    following the acrimonious termination of his  marriage,  the  appellant
    had shown that he had made every reasonable effort to provide documents
    required to show that his former wife was exercising her treaty  rights
    at  the  date  of  divorce.   The  judge  then  acknowledges  that  the
    respondent's policy in relation to  obtaining  such  information  might
    apply to the extent that employment  information  from  HMRC  might  be
    obtained.  However, the judge considers that, despite the existence  of
    the  respondent's  policy,  that  would  not  render  the  respondent's
    decision unlawful.  The judge gives no reasons for that conclusion.  My
    attention was drawn to the policy in question which is to be  found  at
    Annex A of the "European  Operational  Policy  Note  10/2011  Pragmatic
    Approach (revised)".  At paragraph 2 the policy requires caseworkers to
    take a pragmatic approach to cases where there has been a breakdown  in
    a matrimonial relationship.  In particular where:

         "The applicant's relationship has ended acrimoniously but they have
         provided evidence to show that  they  have  made  every  effort  to
         provide the required documents.   For  example,  attempts  to  make
         contact with the EEA national sponsor during divorce proceedings."

    Caseworkers are asked to look at each case on  its  individual  merits.
    And where there is a valid reason for an applicant being unable to  get
    the required evidence the caseworker must make enquiries on  behalf  of
    the applicant where possible.

 7. As the judge had decided that the appellant had made "every  reasonable
    effort" to provide the required documents  following  the  "acrimonious
    termination of his marriage" the judge should have considered that  the
    respondent had not applied the policy to which I have  referred  before
    refusing the application.  The refusal letter of  14th  September  2014
    gives no indication that any consideration was given to the policy  but
    simply states that the appellant had failed to  present  evidence  that
    his EEA sponsor was a qualified person at the time of divorce.  On  the
    basis that the respondent's decision failed to make  any  reference  to
    the policy or to implement it the judge should have considered that the
    decision was not in accordance with the law.  The decision should  then
    have been remitted back to the respondent for reconsideration  applying
    the stated policy.  For this reason the decision shows an  error  on  a
    point of law such that it should be set aside and re-made.

Re-making the Decision

 8. For the reasons I have already given I am able to allow the appeal  but
    to the limited extent that the refusal decision of 14th September  2014
    is remitted back to the respondent  for  reconsideration  applying  the
    respondent's policy in relation to cases of claimed retained rights  of
    residence where an applicant's relationship has ended acrimoniously and
    the applicant has made every effort to provide the  required  documents
    to show the qualified status of the EEA national.

 9. I also  make  the  point  that,  in  reconsidering  her  decision,  the
    respondent may be able to draw upon any  decision  from  the  Court  of
    Justice of the European Union following the referral to it by the Court
    of Appeal in NA.  That decision may clarify whether  or  not  it  is  a
    requirement, in relation to the right of retained  residence,  for  the
    third country national and ex-spouse of a Union citizen  to  show  that
    the former spouse was exercising treaty rights at the time of divorce.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows an error on  a  point  of  law
such that it should be set aside.  I re-make the decision  by  allowing  the
appeal to the limited extent  that  the  respondent's  refusal  decision  is
remitted back for reconsideration on the basis set out above.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
