
IAC-HW-MP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38921/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25th March 2015                            |On 17th April 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                          ms zainab oluwabunMi alli
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B. Hawkins of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P. Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born on  2nd  April  1970.   She
    appeals against the  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Edwards sitting at Richmond-upon-Thames  on  25th  November  2014,  who
    dismissed her appeal against decisions of  the  Respondent  dated  10th
    September 2013.  They were to remove the Appellant and  to  refuse  her
    leave to remain following her application made on the  grounds  that  a
    refusal to grant her leave  would  breach  this  country's  obligations
    under Article 8 (right to respect for private and family life)  of  the
    Human Rights Convention.

2.   The Appellant entered the United Kingdom on or about 6th  October  2003
    as a visitor with leave valid until 6th  April  2004.   She  overstayed
    thereafter.  On 12th December 2011 she  submitted  an  application  for
    leave to remain outside the Rules which was  refused  on  7th  November
    2012.   On  21st  November  2012  the   Appellant   submitted   further
    representations, the refusal of which on 10th September 2013 led to the
    present proceedings.

3.   The  Appellant's  application  was  on  the  basis  that  she  was  the
    unmarried partner of  Mr  Julius  Ajayi  Fakolade  ("the  Sponsor"),  a
    British citizen, since June  2008.   They  have  lived  together  since
    September 2009, at first with the Sponsor's son, Stephen and thereafter
    moving into their own accommodation in February 2013.

Explanation for Refusal

4.   The Respondent refused the application after  considering  whether  the
    Appellant could bring herself within Appendix  FM  to  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The Respondent did not accept  that  the  Appellant  was  in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with the Sponsor. The documentation
    submitted did not indicate that the Appellant and Sponsor  were  living
    together.  The Appellant had entered the United Kingdom in 2003 at  the
    age of 33 and had therefore spent a significant part  of  her  life  in
    Nigeria including her  formative  years.   There  were  no  age-related
    issues that would prevent her from  returning  to  Nigeria,  a  country
    where she  had  family,  cultural  and  social  connections.   She  had
    overstayed her visa and had remained here for a significant  period  of
    time before attempting to regularise her stay.

The Hearing at First Instance

5.   The  Appellant  argued  that  a  separation  caused  by  the  Appellant
    returning to Nigeria to apply for entry clearance from there was not  a
    viable option.  It would mean the Sponsor having to live alone  in  his
    current flat.  He was aged 64 years and in full-time employment but due
    to his health could not live on his own.   The  Sponsor's  son  was  no
    longer able to accommodate the Sponsor who had not lived on his own for
    at least the last 30 years.  If  the  Sponsor  were  to  accompany  the
    Appellant to Nigeria  and  stay  with  her  until  she  obtained  entry
    clearance it would mean the end of his employment.  He had lived in the
    United Kingdom for the last 38 years and had been a British citizen for
    more than twenty years.   To  force  him  to  permanently  relocate  to
    Nigeria would be unduly harsh.  There were insurmountable obstacles  to
    family life continuing outside the  United  Kingdom.   There  had  been
    delay in the Respondent's decision since the  Appellant  had  made  her
    application for leave to remain.

6.   In his determination the Judge noted that the Appellant had  two  adult
    children living in Nigeria with whom she was on good terms and that the
    Appellant had a poor immigration history.  Her application for a  visit
    visa to come to the United Kingdom was dishonest because she had  never
    intended to return at the end of the claimed visit.   The  relationship
    between the Appellant and Sponsor was genuine and subsisting but  there
    were no insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing outside  the
    United Kingdom.  The reasons the Judge gave at paragraph 25 were:

         "The Appellant has close family in Nigeria with whom she is on good
         terms.  She is in good health.  So is [the Sponsor].  He has worked
         as a teacher in Nigeria, if he so desired.  He has a job in UK  but
         is nearing the age  when  he  will  receive  his  state  retirement
         pension.   He  visits  Nigeria  frequently.   There  may  be  minor
         inconveniences but they do not amount to insurmountable obstacles."

7.   The Judge held  that  the  Appellant  could  not  meet  the  Rules  and
    dismissed the appeal under the  Rules.   He  then  turned  to  consider
    whether the Appellant was entitled to succeed under Article  8  outside
    the Rules.  At paragraph 27 he found  that  there  was  nothing  of  an
    exceptional nature that would merit a grant of leave outside the Rules.
     At paragraph 28 he said:

         "This is an ordinary  case  of  someone  faced  by  the  choice  of
         returning to Nigeria and  either  awaiting  being  joined  by  [the
         Sponsor] or of successfully  making  a  prompt  proper  and  honest
         application to join him in the UK."

    At paragraph 29 he found the decision to remove  the  Appellant  to  be
    proportionate and in compliance with Article 8.

The Onward Appeal

8.   The Appellant appealed against that decision  arguing  that  the  Judge
    had failed to address the submission that temporary separation  between
    the parties was not viable in this case.  The Judge had also failed  to
    deal with the length of time  the  Sponsor  had  lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom and that he had family members here.   There  were  no  reasons
    given why the decision to remove the Appellant  was  proportionate  and
    the Judge had failed to undertake a proper balancing exercise.

9.   The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Osborne on 28th January  2015.   In  a
    lengthy decision she granted permission to appeal.  At paragraph  7  of
    her decision to grant permission she wrote:

         "At paragraph 15 of the decision the Judge records  'they  hope  to
         marry once her immigration status is settled and both of  them  are
         divorced from their current spouses'.  This is not consistent  with
         the information provided by the Appellant's partner in his  witness
         statement where he states 'we hope to get married as  soon  as  her
         immigration status is regularised and we both obtain our respective
         divorces'."

10.  Judge Osborne concluded that as neither the Appellant  or  her  partner
    were free to marry in the United Kingdom  "had  the  Judge  taken  this
    evidence into account he may have reached a  different  decision  about
    the possibility of the Appellant having the ability to  make  a  proper
    and honest application to join [the  Sponsor]  in  the  UK".  That  was
    arguably an error of law on the basis of an inaccurate statement of the
    facts.  I comment in more  detail  on  this  aspect  of  the  grant  of
    permission below, see paragraphs 21 and 22.

11.  A second reason given for granting permission at  paragraph  8  of  the
    grant was:

         "Although the Judge has made a simple finding that the decision  to
         refuse the application is proportionate to all the circumstances in
         the case this has  not  followed  a  detailed  examination  of  the
         Appellant's Article 8 rights outside the Rules.  If  that  is  what
         the Judge intended then it was incumbent upon him to  make  a  full
         assessment of the Appellant's Article 8 rights  outside  the  Rules
         including the application  of  Section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The  Judge's  reasoning  in  this
         regard  is  therefore  not  clear  and  accordingly  I  find   that
         permission to appeal is to be granted".

12.  The Respondent replied to the grant of permission by letter  dated  6th
    February 2015 stating that she opposed  the  Appellant's  appeal.   The
    Respondent wrote:

         "The  Appellant  clearly  cannot  satisfy   the   requirements   as
         enunciated by the Judge at paragraph 9 and 23 of the determination.
          It was further open for the  Judge  to  conclude  that  there  was
         nothing  exceptional  in  this  case  and  it  was  open  for  [the
         Appellant] to make the necessary application  from  abroad  if  she
         wished (see paragraphs 27 and  28).   As  to  the  requirements  of
         Section 117B of the 2002 Act these  are  at  best  neutral  to  the
         Appellant.  There were therefore no material errors of law  in  the
         determination".

The Hearing before Me

13.  The matter came before me to  decide  in  the  first  instance  whether
    there was an error of law such that the determination fell  to  be  set
    aside and the decision re-made.  If there was  not  then  the  decision
    would stand.  In oral submissions Counsel indicated he  relied  on  the
    grant of permission which he described as  "unusually  detailed".   The
    Judge at first instance had accepted that  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor
    were in a genuine relationship but dismissed the appeal  on  the  basis
    that the  Appellant  could  return  to  Nigeria  and  apply  for  entry
    clearance from there.  The Judge was in error because he had failed  to
    consider critical factors which were material to whether the  Appellant
    could so return.  The  Judge  had  indicated  that  both  parties  were
    divorced when in fact they were both still  married,  merely  separated
    from their spouses.  The Judge was not right to  describe  this  as  an
    ordinary case.  It showed a casual approach to the facts.  It would  be
    extremely difficult where neither the Appellant nor  the  Sponsor  were
    divorced even if they were in a genuine relationship for the  Appellant
    to apply for entry clearance.

14.  The Judge had ignored the factors set  out  in  the  skeleton  argument
    (see paragraph 5 above).  The Sponsor had mentioned  in  his  statement
    that on two occasions in September 2012 he had passed out whilst he was
    at home but fortunately the Appellant  was  there  and  had  called  an
    ambulance.  The Judge had failed to deal with that.  The  fainting  was
    caused by high blood pressure.  If it happened again the Sponsor  could
    be in real danger.

15.  Citing a Scottish case and a decision of a  Deputy  High  Court  Judge,
    Counsel argued that  in  deciding  whether  there  were  insurmountable
    obstacles the test was still one of  reasonableness.  Counsel  conceded
    that failure to mention Section 117B was not a material  error  and  he
    would not make submissions thereon.

16.  In response the Presenting Officer argued that the primary  finding  of
    the Judge was that  there  were  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
    Appellant returning to Nigeria.  Since the Appellant failed  under  the
    Rules it was not necessary to go on outside  the  Rules  if  everything
    which could be argued  was  already  covered  within  the  Rules.   The
    question of insurmountable obstacles was concerned with the practice of
    relocation.  The Judge  had  in  mind  the  authority  of  Nagre.   The
    Appellant was in a precarious situation.  There was a  very  small  gap
    between failing under paragraph EX.1 of the Immigration Rules  and  the
    human  rights  assessment  outside  the  Rules.   There   was   nothing
    exceptional which would enable the Appellant to succeed.  The Sponsor's
    health problems were high blood pressure and rheumatism, these were not
    debilitating diseases.  The facts of this case did not  come  close  to
    the facts in the House of Lords decision of Chikwamba.   In  that  case
    the Sponsor  could  not  travel  to  Zimbabwe  as  the  Sponsor  was  a
    recognised refugee and the Appellant would have succeeded under what is
    now paragraph EX.1 of  Appendix  FM.   This  was  not  a  case  of  the
    Respondent saying that the Appellant should go back to apply purely for
    administrative reasons, rather the  Judge  was  saying  there  were  no
    insurmountable obstacles to the Appellant doing that.

17.  In response Counsel argued that if all the Judge had done was  look  at
    whether there were insurmountable obstacles that would be an  error  of
    law as that was not the appropriate test, see Izuazu.   The  Judge  had
    not grappled with the factual situation as summarised in  the  skeleton
    argument.  The Sponsor's health problems were serious; at such  an  age
    if he was losing consciousness that could not be described as  a  minor
    problem.  It could be  life-threatening.   Citing  the  case  of  Iqbal
    [2014] EWHC 1822 the "Chikwamba point" (the need to return to apply for
    entry  clearance)  was  one  of  those  potential  issues  relating  to
    proportionality which was not covered by the  drafting  of  the  Rules.
    There could conceivably be cases where  there  were  no  insurmountable
    obstacles to the continuation of family life outside  the  UK  but  the
    requirement to return to the applicant's country of origin to  make  an
    application for leave to enter  the  UK  would  be  a  disproportionate
    interference with their Article 8 rights.  It  was  not  reasonable  to
    expect the Sponsor to go out to Nigeria.  There was  no  question  mark
    over the Sponsor's means, therefore this  was  very  much  a  Chikwamba
    case.

Findings

18.  The Judge found that the Appellant and Sponsor were in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship but that there were no insurmountable obstacles
    to family life between the Appellant and Sponsor continuing outside the
    United Kingdom.  Whilst there were minor inconveniences  they  did  not
    amount to insurmountable obstacles.  Further the appeal  could  not  be
    allowed outside the Immigration  Rules  as  there  was  nothing  of  an
    exceptional nature in the facts of the case.

19.  The challenge to the Judge's determination in this case is very much  a
    reasons based challenge.  The thrust of the Appellant's case being that
    the Judge has  placed  insufficient  weight  on  the  difficulties  the
    Sponsor would face if he were obliged to travel  to  Nigeria  with  the
    Appellant or indeed if the Appellant were to return to Nigeria to apply
    for entry clearance from there.

20.  Before I deal with this main point, there are a  number  of  peripheral
    matters that I should deal with.  First is the question of the  marital
    status of the Appellant and the Sponsor.  The Appellant and Sponsor are
    it seems still married to other persons but according to the statements
    they submitted to the Judge they hoped to get married.   What  in  fact
    happened in this case is that the Judge  quoted  from  the  Appellant's
    statement at paragraph 4.  That read:

         "We hope to get  married  as  soon  as  my  immigration  status  is
         regularised and we both obtain our respective divorces".

21.  Reading the Appellant's  statement  it  is  perfectly  clear  what  she
    intended by that.  She meant that she and the Sponsor wish to marry but
    there are two conditions precedent before they can do so.  The first is
    that her immigration status is settled which means some form  of  grant
    of leave.  The second condition precedent is that she and  the  Sponsor
    obtain divorces from their respective spouses.  The confusion  in  this
    case such as it is appears to have arisen because the Judge has  quoted
    directly from  the  Appellant's  statement  dated  7th  December  2011,
    paragraph 4 but in doing  so  has  inserted  a  comma  after  the  word
    "settled".  I can only assume that this is  a  typing  error  since  no
    comma appears in the original statement.

22.  However I would disagree with  Judge  Osborne  who  granted  permission
    that this sentence is to be read disjunctively and that  the  Judge  in
    quoting this section of the Appellant's statement that he believes that
    both the Appellant and the Sponsor are already divorced.  In  my  view,
    notwithstanding the insertion of a rogue comma, what the Judge has said
    is perfectly clear just as what the Appellant in her statement said was
    perfectly  clear.   The  parties  are  in  a  genuine  and   subsisting
    relationship which they wish to cement at some future date by marrying.
     However they cannot marry until they are free to do  so.   It  follows
    therefore that there was no arguable error of law in  paragraph  15  of
    the determination and the grant of permission was not  correct  to  say
    that the Judge had made an inaccurate statement of the facts.  In point
    of fact, even if the Judge had wrongly assumed that  the  parties  were
    divorced, it is difficult to see how this  impacted  adversely  on  the
    Appellant in the determination.  If  anything  such  an  error  was  of
    assistance to the Appellant since it  indicated  that  there  were  few
    obstacles indeed  to  the  parties  furthering  their  relationship  by
    marriage underlying the fact that this was  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    marriage, something which  the  Respondent  had  not  accepted  in  the
    refusal letter.

23.  However as I indicate this is a peripheral matter,  the  key  issue  is
    whether the Judge has adequately examined  the  Appellant's  Article  8
    claim outside the Immigration Rules.  Paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM  is
    not a freestanding basis for an application.   Although  the  Appellant
    could show that she was in a genuine and subsisting relationship with a
    partner who was a British citizen, the Judge found that there  were  no
    insurmountable obstacles to family life  with  the  Sponsor  continuing
    outside  the  United  Kingdom.   The  Appellant  attacks  the   Judge's
    reasoning by arguing that the Judge  has  overlooked  relevant  factors
    specific to the Sponsor such as his health and  his  employment.   This
    argument overlooks paragraph 17 of the determination  where  the  Judge
    stated:

         "[the Sponsor] is now 64 years of age and  there  is  a  suggestion
         that he has health problems.  However the evidence before  me  does
         not show that it is to be anything other than the 'sad concomitants
         of age'.  I do note that he is employed as a security guard".

24.  The Appellant prays in aid two incidents which  occurred  almost  three
    years ago where he fainted.  It is difficult to see how  that  evidence
    in any way controverts the Judge's  finding  at  paragraph  17  of  the
    determination.  The Sponsor continues to be able to  hold  down  a  job
    which as a security guard might at times be physically quite demanding.
     The Judge has had in mind the medical evidence but  has  rejected  it.
    It was not necessary for the Judge to set out each and every  piece  of
    the medical evidence put before him.  The test is  whether  the  losing
    party can understand why they have lost.  In this case the losing party
    should reasonably be expected to understand that medical  evidence  was
    not sufficient to show that there were insurmountable obstacles to  the
    Sponsor travelling to Nigeria with the Appellant.   The  Sponsor  might
    lose his job as a security guard but the Judge found that  the  Sponsor
    had a history of working as a teacher in Nigeria  and  could  therefore
    reasonably be expected  to  obtain  alternative  employment.   Further,
    although the Sponsor had lived in the United Kingdom for a long  period
    of time the Judge was fully aware that the Sponsor travelled frequently
    to Nigeria and thus  maintained  good  contacts  with  his  country  of
    origin.

25.  As to the Chikwamba point, it does not appear  that  any  evidence  was
    presented to the Judge that if the Appellant were to return to  Nigeria
    and apply from there, there would be an unduly long wait.  The  Sponsor
    had indicated in his evidence that he could take two weeks off work  by
    way of a holiday to accompany the Appellant to the High Commission.  It
    does not appear that it was presented in argument to the Judge that the
    turnaround time at the High Commission  in  Abuja  or  Lagos  would  be
    significantly longer than that. In any event this was not  a  Chikwamba
    case since the Judge's main finding was that the Sponsor could relocate
    permanently with the Appellant.

26.  Having found that the Appellant could  not  bring  herself  within  the
    Rules the question then was whether the Appellant could succeed outside
    the Rules.  It is fair  to  say  that  the  Judge's  treatment  of  the
    Appellant's claim outside the Rules at paragraphs 27 to 29  is  concise
    but that of itself does not mean that it is wrong.  The test is whether
    the losing party can understand why they  have  lost.   The  Judge  had
    directed himself earlier in the determination in  accordance  with  the
    authority of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 and was  aware  therefore  that  the
    test  outside  the  Rules  under  Article  8  still  came  down  to   a
    proportionality  exercise.   The  Judge  had  already  dealt  with  the
    relevant points that I have  explained  above  and  I  agree  with  the
    Presenting Officer's submission that once it was established  that  the
    Appellant could not succeed under  paragraph  EX.1(b)  there  was  very
    little else that needed to go into  the  scales  on  the  side  of  the
    Appellant in carrying out the proportionality  assessment  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.

27.  Of course the Immigration Rules are not the final word on  the  matter,
    in a non-deportation case they are not a complete code and therefore as
    the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MM  have  made  clear   there   remains   a
    proportionality exercise to be carried out informed by  Strasbourg  and
    UK jurisprudence.  However there was no point in  the  Judge  repeating
    what he had already said in deciding that there were no  insurmountable
    obstacles.  All that could be taken as read.  What the Judge did do  at
    paragraph 28 was give his  reason  why  this  case  could  not  succeed
    outside the Rules because it was what  he  described  as  "an  ordinary
    case".  There was nothing of an exceptional nature in the case.  This I
    take to be another way  of  saying  there  were  no  compelling  and/or
    compassionate circumstances such that  the  appeal  should  be  allowed
    outside the Rules, particularly bearing in  mind  the  Appellant's  bad
    immigration record.

28.  She could not succeed under the private life  provisions  since  little
    weight  could  be  afforded  to  her  private  life  in  this  country,
    established as it had been whilst her  status  here  was  unlawful  and
    indeed no submissions were made to me on that point.  At the end of the
    day the Article 8 assessment was for the Judge to make on the basis  of
    findings of fact.  Another Judge might on the same facts have formed  a
    different Article 8 assessment but that is not to say that  this  Judge
    in this case made an error of law.  He found that any interference with
    the family life of the Appellant and Sponsor caused by the Respondent's
    decision to remove the Appellant was proportionate  to  the  legitimate
    aim pursued.  In effect the grounds of appeal and arguments put forward
    by the Appellant are a mere disagreement with the  result  but  do  not
    demonstrate any error of law.  I therefore dismiss the appeal.  I  make
    no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold the decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal.

Appeal dismissed.



Signed this 15th day of April 2015

....................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal has been dismissed there can be no fee award.



Signed this 15th day of April 2015

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft
