
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38343/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 January 2016                    |On 21 January 2016                   |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                               Mr Dileep Kumar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Chhotu, Counsel, Chambers of Mr Julius Seal
For the Respondent:    Mr Chris Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge A W  Khan  (hereafter  the  judge),  promulgated  on  26
    January 2015, in which he dismissed the Appellant's appeal against  the
    Respondent's  decision  of  30  September  2014  refusing  to  issue  a
    residence  card  under  the  Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006 (the  Regulations).   The  Respondent's  decision  was
    based solely on the  assertion  that  the  Appellant's  marriage  to  a
    Hungarian citizen, Miss A Kondor,  on  14  January  2014,  was  one  of
    convenience  only.   The  Respondent  concluded  therefore   that   the
    Appellant was not in fact the spouse of an EEA national and so was  not
    entitled to a residence card.

 2. At the hearing before the judge the Appellant's representative  applied
    for an adjournment on the basis that Miss Kondor was out of the  United
    Kingdom.  It was said that she was in Hungary because  a  relative  (it
    turns out to have been her grandmother) was unwell and the family there
    required Miss Kondor's assistance.  It was said that her attendance  at
    the Appellant's appeal was  important  and  that  a  short  adjournment
    should be granted. In support of  the  application  the  Appellant  had
    provided a handwritten letter setting out in basic  terms  the  reasons
    why the adjournment was sought. In addition, there was  an  email  from
    Miss  Kondor  to  the  Appellant's  then  solicitors  confirming  those
    reasons.

 3. The judge refused the application and gave  reasons  for  so  doing  in
    paragraph 5 of  his  decision.   It  was  said  that  Miss  Kondor  had
    apparently been away in Hungary at the time of  the  Respondent's  home
    visit to their property on 22 July 2014.   The  judge  noted  that  the
    notice of hearing had been sent out to  the  Appellant  on  28  October
    2014; therefore Miss Kondor would have known of the hearing date  of  7
    January in good time.  Yet, the judge says, she had gone to Hungary and
    had not returned without giving satisfactory reasons as to why she  was
    unable to do so.  The judge stated  that  there  were  "not  any  valid
    reasons" why the appeal should be adjourned.

 4. The judge then went on to consider the merits of the  case.   He  found
    ultimately that the marriage was one of convenience only.  At paragraph
    13 of his decision he essentially restated a number of the reasons  for
    refusing to adjourn the appeal in support of his conclusion  that  Miss
    Kondor's absence at the hearing severely undermined the credibility  of
    the Appellant's case.  At paragraph 17 the judge  went  on  to  observe
    that there was a distinct lack of evidence to support the  relationship
    and he concluded by stating: "Looking at the whole of the  evidence  in
    the round, I am satisfied that this is a marriage of convenience simply
    entered into in order for the Appellant to be able  to  remain  in  the
    UK."

 5. The Appellant sought permission to appeal.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    refused by the First-tier Tribunal but then granted by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Blum on 2 July 2015.  His grant  of  permission  focused  on  the
    adjournment issue citing the case of Nwaigwe [2014] UKUT  00418,  which
    establishes that the essential question in  these  types  of  cases  is
    whether the Appellant had been  deprived  of  a  fair  hearing  by  the
    refusal to adjourn.

The hearing before me

 6. Mr Chhotu sought to amend the grounds of appeal to  include  a  further
    ground based upon what he said was a misdirection as to the  burden  of
    proof in marriage of convenience cases.  Mr Avery had no  objection  to
    this amendment and I granted the application.  Mr Chhotu relied on  the
    grounds and his amended skeleton argument.  He clarified  that  it  was
    the Appellant's wife's grandmother who had died and  not  in  fact  her
    mother.  In essence, Mr Chhotu  submitted  that  the  judge  had  acted
    unfairly in failing to adjourn the case  and  in  respect  of  the  new
    ground of appeal he relied on what the judge said in  paragraph  11  of
    his decision.

 7. Mr Avery submitted that on the basis of the evidence before  the  judge
    he had not acted unfairly in refusing to adjourn.   The  Appellant  had
    had an opportunity to provide more evidence, which he  had  not  taken.
    In respect of the new ground Mr Avery submitted that the judge had  not
    erred in substance although he had not perhaps set out as clearly as he
    might have the relevant law relating to the burden of proof in marriage
    of convenience cases.

Decision on error of law

 8. Although I have a degree of sympathy for the judge in  respect  of  the
    somewhat sparse evidence before him, I find that he did err in  law  by
    refusing the application for an adjournment, an error which led to  the
    Appellant being deprived of a fair hearing.

 9. The judge set out a number of factors at  paragraph  5  upon  which  he
    based his conclusion that the application  for  adjournment  should  be
    refused.  However, nowhere does  he  expressly  address  the  issue  of
    fairness, that being the ultimate test.  Simply concluding  that  there
    were no good reasons why an appeal should be adjourned is not the  same
    as dealing with the matter from the perspective of fairness,  something
    which is made clear in the Nwaigwe case  (a  case  concerning  the  old
    Tribunal Procedure Rules  but  nonetheless  in  my  view  having  equal
    application to the new Procedure Rules).

10. There was nothing in the judge's decision as  to  what  the  Presenting
    Officer's view of the application was and whether any of  the  evidence
    provided in support of the application was being disputed or challenged
    by the Respondent.  There had been  no  previous  adjournments  and  in
    fairness  to  the  Appellant  he  had  made  the  application  for  the
    adjournment in advance of the hearing  itself  by  way  of  the  letter
    (together with an email from Miss Kondor), although it does not seem as
    though this application was sent in on time to be dealt with by a  Duty
    Judge.

11. The point made by the judge in respect of the advanced  notice  of  the
    hearing is relevant in  my  view  to  this  extent.   Miss  Kondor  had
    originally booked  her  return  flight  for  2  January  2015,  thereby
    ensuring that was able to be in the United Kingdom for the hearing on 7
    January.  This was, on the face of it, an indicator that she  did  want
    to attend on behalf of the Appellant.  A reason, albeit unsupported  by
    medical evidence, was then put forward as to why she could  not  return
    to the United Kingdom as first planned (namely, a continuing  need  for
    her assistance in Hungary).

12. I also note that there is no express finding  by  the  judge  that  the
    Appellant and/or Miss Kondor  were  lying  about  any  of  the  matters
    relating to the trip back to Hungary in late 2014.

13. Overall, given the matters set out above  and  the  centrality  of  the
    wife's attendance at the hearing, in my view  the  judge  did  not  act
    fairly in refusing the adjournment on the basis stated in the decision.

14. The error of law was clearly material given the  fact  that  the  judge
    placed significant weight upon Miss Kondor's absence  at  the  hearing.
    Given the above I therefore set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. There is no need to  deal  with  the  Appellant's  additional
    ground of appeal.

Disposal

15. Both representatives were agreed that if I should find that there  were
    material errors of law in respect of the refusal to adjourn, the matter
    would need to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  Having regard to
    paragraph 7 of the Practice Statements and Section 12 of the Tribunals,
    Courts and Enforcement Act 2007, I therefore remit the appeal  back  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.  I set out appropriate directions below.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

Directions to the parties
      1. The remitted appeal will be a complete rehearing, with none of  the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings preserved;
      2. The sole issue in the remitted appeal is  whether  the  Appellant's
         marriage was one of  convenience  only,  the  burden  of  proof  of
         establishing this resting on the Respondent (see Rosa  [2016]  EWCA
         Civ 14);
      3. Either party shall have the opportunity to adduce further  evidence
         in accordance with standard directions to be issued by  the  First-
         tier Tribunal;
      4. If an interpreter is required for the Appellant or any witness, the
         Appellant's representatives shall inform the First-tier Tribunal of
         this in writing in good time before the remitted hearing.

Directions to Administration
      1. The appeal is remitted to the Hatton Cross hearing centre;
      2. The appeal shall not be reheard by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  A  W
         Khan;
      3. The Hatton Cross hearing centre shall fix a date for  the  remitted
         hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 19 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
