
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/38139/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12 June 2014                               |On 2 July 2014               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                SAVEENA HANET
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Earnest, Kumar Legal Ltd
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This determination refers to parties as they  were  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

2. The appellant, a national of India, appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal
  against the decision of the respondent  to  refuse  her  application  for
  leave to remain in the UK as a Tier 4 (General Student) under the  Points
  Based System (PBS). First-tier Tribunal Judge I Ross allowed  the  appeal
  and the Secretary of State now appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

3. The appellant entered the UK as a Tier 4 (General) student on 14  October
  2011 with leave to enter until 31 July 2013. She applied for an extension
  of leave to remain and that application was  refused  by  the  respondent
  because she did not achieve the 10 points claimed for  maintenance.  This
  was because the bank  statements  she  provided  related  to  the  period
  between 19 and 22 June 2013, a  period  of  less  than  the  required  28
  consecutive days and more than one month before the application  date  of
  24 July 2013.

4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge decided that a loan  letter  from  Catholic
  Syrian  Bank,  which  had  been  provided  by  the  appellant  with   her
  application, could be taken into account  and  when  it  was  taken  into
  account the appellant could show that she was entitled to the  10  points
  for maintenance. The Judge was satisfied that  the  letter  contains  the
  specified information listed in Appendix C paragraph 1B (d) [7].

Error of law

5. The relevant provisions of Appendix  C  1B  applicable  at  the  date  of
  decision in this case are as follows;

      "1B In all cases where  Appendix  C  or  Appendix  E  states  that  an
      applicant is required to provide specified  documents,  the  specified
      documents are:

      ...

       (d) If the applicant is applying as a Tier  4  Migrant,  an  original
       loan letter from a financial institution regulated for the purpose of
       student loans by either the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) and the
       Prudential Regulation Authority (PRA) or, in  the  case  of  overseas
       accounts,  the  official  regulatory  body  for   the   country   the
       institution is in and where the money is held, which is dated no more
       than 6 months before the date of the application and clearly shows:
           (1) the applicant's name,
           (2) the date of the letter,
           (3) the financial institution's name and logo
           (4) the money available as a loan,
           (5) for applications for entry clearance, that  the  loan  funds
           are or will be available to the applicant before he  travels  to
           the UK, unless the loan is an academic or student loan from  the
           applicant's country's national government and will  be  released
           to the applicant on arrival in the UK,
           (6) there are no conditions placed upon the release of the  loan
           funds to the applicant,  other  than  him  making  a  successful
           application as a Tier 4 Migrant, and
           (7) the loan is provided by the national government,  the  state
           or regional government or a government  sponsored  student  loan
           company or is part of an academic or educational loans scheme. "

6. The respondent appealed against that decision on  the  grounds  that  the
  Judge had erred in considering the loan letter because it did not contain
  the details required by Appendix C paragraph 1B (d). It was contended  in
  particular that the loan letter did not confirm the details  set  out  in
  paragraph 1B (d) (7)). It was contended that the Judge  made  no  finding
  that paragraph 1B (d) (7) had been met and had given  inadequate  reasons
  for finding that the letter met paragraph 1B (d).

7. At the hearing before me Mr Earnest submitted a print off from  the  UKBA
  website  entitled  'Table  3:  Financial  institutions  whose   financial
  statements are accepted - India'. The Catholic Syrian Bank  is  named  on
  that list. Mr Whitwell submitted that this list is from  Appendix  P  and
  relates to a different part of the Immigration Rules. I am satisfied that
  this list does not confirm that the bank meets Appendix  C  paragraph  1B
  (d) (7).

8. Mr Earnest asserted  that  the  Catholic  Syrian  Bank  is  a  Government
  supported bank and that student loans are provided through the  bank  but
  was unable to refer to any evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
  to that effect. He submitted print outs from the Reserve  Bank  of  India
  and Catholic Syrian Bank websites. However  these  were  not  before  the
  Judge and in any event neither document refers to  either  bank  being  a
  student loan company or part of an academic or educational loans scheme.

9. The Judge made a general finding that the  letter  from  Catholic  Syrian
  Bank met the requirements of paragraph 1B  (d).  The  letter  appears  to
  provide the evidence listed in paragraph 1B (d) (1) - (4)  and  (6),  (5)
  does not apply as it is not an application for entry  clearance.  However
  the letter does not confirm the information set out in paragraph (7)  and
  there was  no  other  evidence  before  the  Judge  to  demonstrate  that
  paragraph (7) had been met. In these circumstances  the  Judge's  finding
  that the letter contains the specified information listed in paragraph 1B
  (d) is not supported by the evidence.  This is a material error and I set
  the decision aside.

Re-making the decision

10. I heard oral evidence from the appellant who said  that  the  government
  in India provides educational  loans  through  banks  recognised  by  the
  government to provide loans for higher studies abroad. She said that  the
  Catholic Syrian Bank is such a recognised bank. When asked about this  in
  cross-examination  the  appellant  said  that  when  she  referred  to  a
  recognised bank she meant one that was listed on the  UKBA  website.  She
  accepted that she had no other evidence that the Catholic Syrian Bank  is
  connected to the Indian Government.

11. The  appellant's  evidence  on  this  issue  was  confused.  She  seemed
  confused between the Indian and the UK government's approval of the Bank.
  The appellant provided no documentary evidence to support her  assertion.
  I cannot therefore attach any weight to her evidence  that  the  Catholic
  Syrian Bank administers an academic or educational loans scheme.

12. On the basis of the evidence before me  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
  letter from the Catholic  Syrian  Bank  dated  22  June  2013  meets  the
  requirements of Appendix C paragraph 1B (d) (7). The  appellant  has  not
  therefore shown that she meets the maintenance requirements of Appendix C
  of the Immigration Rules.

Conclusion:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on point of law.

      I set aside the decision.

      I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.

Signed
                       Date: 1 July 2014

A Grimes


Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


