
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38011/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 26 June 2014                               |On 07 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Mr Jean Justin Serge Yao

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Collins, Counsel instructed by David A Grand


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The respondent (whom I shall refer  to  as  the  appellant  as  he  was
    before the First-tier Tribunal), Jean Justin Serge Yao, is a citizen of
    the Ivory Coast and his date of birth is 12 December 1992.  He made  an
    application to remain in the UK on the basis of his private life.  This
    application was refused by the Secretary of State in a  decision  of  6
    September 2013 pursuant to paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

2.   The appellant appealed against the decision and his appeal was  allowed
    by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal McIntosh in a  decision  which  was
    promulgated on 21 March 2014 following a hearing on 14 February 2014.

3.   The application was made on 20 November 2012.  The Secretary  of  State
    was granted leave to appeal by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Foudy
    in a decision of 6 May 2014.  Thus the matter came before me.

The Background

4.   The appellant and his younger sister Akissi Patricia Yao  came  to  the
    UK on 21 October 2008 in order to join their mother  Julienne  Yao  who
    had come here on 26 October 2001 in the capacity as a member  of  staff
    of the Embassy of the Ivory Coast and was thus at the time exempt  from
    immigration control.  The appellant was at that time aged  15.   On  19
    November  2012  the  appellant,  his  mother  and   sister   all   made
    applications for leave to remain.  The appellant's mother's application
    was based on her ten years'  residence  in  the  UK  and  his  sister's
    application was based on her being a minor  dependant  of  her  mother.
    The appellant was aged 19 at the date of the application.  His mother's
    application and that of his sister were successful but the  appellant's
    application was refused.

5.   The appellant lives with his mother, sister and  stepfather  Mr  Gableo
    Theodore Guedegbe.  The family have lived  together  since  2008.   The
    appellant's stepfather Mr Guedegbe is a British citizen.


The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

6.   The First-tier Tribunal accepted the evidence  of  the  appellant,  his
    mother, his sister and his stepfather.   They  were  all  found  to  be
    credible and the Judge found that although the appellant could not meet
    the Immigration Rules his appeal should be allowed under Article 8.

The Grounds Seeking Leave to Appeal and Oral Submissions


7.   The grounds seeking leave  to  appeal  argue  that  the  Judge  made  a
    material misdirection in the Article 8 assessment because he failed  to
    follow the guidance in Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC).  The Judge  did
    not provide reasons why the appellant's circumstances  were  compelling
    or exceptional.  The Article 8 assessment is challenged  on  the  basis
    that the decision that there is family life between the  appellant  and
    his family was not in  accordance  with  the  judgment  in  Kugathas  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31.

8.   Mr Whitwell made oral submissions and he made an application  in  order
    to amend the grounds seeking leave to appeal in order to challenge  the
    balancing exercise that was conducted by  the  Judge.   I  refused  the
    application, given that there had been ample opportunity  for  such  an
    application to have been made before the date of the hearing.

9.    The  appellant  cannot  meet  the  Immigration  Rules  and  in   these
    circumstances the First-tier Tribunal should have gone on  to  consider
    the guidance in Gulshan ( Article 8 -  new  Rules  -  correct  approach
    [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC).  However, this does not  amount  to  a  material
    error of law. In this case  there  is  no  specific  challenge  in  the
    grounds seeking leave to appeal to the proportionality  balancing  act.
    What is challenged is the Judge's finding that  there  is  family  life
    with which removal would interfere (Article 8(1) of the 1950 Convention
    on Human Rights).

10.  The Judge did not refer to the case of Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA  Civ
    31 or to any other case law relating  to  relationships  between  adult
    children and their parents.  However, I have  considered  the  case  of
    Kugathas in the context of the more recent case  of  Ghising  (  family
    life- adults - Gurkha policy) Nepal [2013] UKUT 160 (IAC).   The  Judge
    accepted the evidence of the appellant and  family  members  that  they
    lived together as a family unit.  It was accepted  that  the  appellant
    wishes to continue with his education in the UK.  He wishes to complete
    a degree course and significantly he  is  financially  and  emotionally
    dependent on his family.  He is a young man of 21.  He has always lived
    with his sister and since 2008 the family have lived together as a unit
    and the appellant has a strong bond with his family.

11.  It was open to the Judge to find that the appellant has a  family  life
    with adult family members that would engage Article 8(1)  of  the  1950
    Convention. This finding is lawful and  sustainable.  The  Judge  erred
    because he did not follow  Gulshan,  but  (having  made  a  lawful  and
    sustainable finding that Article 8 (1) was engaged) the grounds do  not
    disclose that the ultimate  balancing  exercise  under  Article  8  was
    flawed and in these circumstances the error is not material.

12.  The decision to allow the appeal stands.



Signed   Joanna McWilliam                                 Date 6 July 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam


