
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38627/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th April 2015                            |On 27th April 2015            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                               ms sufia khatun
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Khan (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms L Kenny (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Kanagaratnam, promulgated on 19th September 2014, following  a  hearing
    at Hatton Cross on 22nd August 2014.  In the determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of Ms Sufia Khatun.   The  Appellant  subsequently
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female citizen of Bangladesh who  was  born  on  5th
    April 1943, and is currently 72 years of age, and she appealed  against
    the decision of the Secretary of State dated  2nd  September  2013,  to
    refuse to vary her leave to remain in the UK on the basis that  she  is
    dependent on her son, Mr Jamal Razaque, who is settled in the UK.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim was summarised by the judge (at paragraph  4)  on
    the basis that she wished to join her only son, who worked as  a  chef,
    and supported his aged mother in Bangladesh, up until  her  arrival  in
    the UK as a visitor on 26th August 2012, in what was her  second  visit
    to the UK.  During the currency of her leave, she had applied  on  27th
    November 2012 for indefinite leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of  her
    exceptional circumstances.

 4. The judge described how her claim was that she suffered from  diabetes,
    high blood pressure and arthritis and had to depend on  medication  for
    her normal life.  Although she had a sister in Bangladesh, the fact was
    that

         "most of the time she felt lonely.  Her son in England  too  missed
         her and she  had  grandchildren  and  stepchildren  in  the  United
         Kingdom.  Her health deteriorated when she was  in  Bangladesh  and
         she felt better while in the United Kingdom".

    It was said that if she returned to Bangladesh  she  could  not  access
    medical care on her own "and as her sister was ailing too she could not
    go live with her".  She  was  without  support  in  that  country  (see
    paragraph 4).

The Judge's Findings

 5. The judge  found  that  the  Appellant  could  not  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules because she had not spent a period of twenty years in
    this country or half her life and  had  only  been  here  for  thirteen
    months.  The judge held that,

         "while the Appellant claims that she is financially and emotionally
         dependent on her son, the Appellant conceded that she had relatives
         in Bangladesh at the hearing and at the time of her entry clearance
         application she  had  also  returned  to  Bangladesh  after  having
         visited the United Kingdom in 2011 ..." (paragraph 9).

 6. The judge also held that there was material available  from  the  World
    Health Organisation which set up the country's profile and this  showed
    that "there has been a significant improvement in the service  delivery
    of the health secretary in Bangladesh".

 7. The judge then went on to recount that,  "the  Appellant  self-concedes
    that she can access drugs in her covering letter  dated  22nd  November
    2012.  She has a house in which she can live indefinitely and a  sister
    in Bangladesh" (paragraph 9).  It was on the basis of these facts  that
    the judge then went on to consider proportionality and held that,  even
    with regard to the principles in Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640,  she  could
    not succeed under Article 8.  Finally, regard was given to Section  117
    of the 2014 Act and it was held that the public interest did not  weigh
    in the Appellant's favour (paragraph 10).

Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application state that, although the judge  purports  to
    have regard  to  the  public  interest  considerations,  he  failed  to
    consider that the Appellant was lawfully in  the  UK  at  the  time  of
    making the application and that she was not a burden on the taxpayer or
    the NHS because she was being supported by her son,  who  had  given  a
    five year undertaking that he would continue to support her for medical
    care in this country.  Second, in considering the "Gulshan  principles"
    the judge had erred because there was  no  reference  here  to  whether
    there were

      a) arguable grounds of compelling circumstances not  recognised  under
         the Rules; and

      b) whether there were particular  features  in  the  Appellant's  case
         which would render removal to be unjustifiably harsh.

    Third, the objective evidence showed that the Appellant's home  country
    was poorly resourced for independent living of elderly  and  physically
    vulnerable individuals (and this was set out at pages 40 to 56  of  the
    Appellant's bundle).  Furthermore, the Appellant's own  sister  gave  a
    statement from Bangladesh that she was not in a position to  take  care
    of the Appellant if she returned to Bangladesh (see pages 32 to  34  of
    the Appellant's bundle).  But most importantly, there was a  change  of
    circumstances in that since the  Appellant's  arrival  in  the  UK  her
    health had deteriorated and this was set out  in  the  Appellant's  own
    witness statement (paragraphs 8 to 11), and in the witness statement of
    her son, Jamal Razaque, at pages 26 and 27 of the  bundle.   The  judge
    did not have regard to this.

 9. On 11th February 2015, the Upper Tribunal  granted  permission  to  the
    application.

10. On 25th January 2015, a Rule 24 response was entered by the  Respondent
    on the grounds that it was open to the judge to conclude as he did.

Submissions

11. At the hearing before me on 17th April 2015, I had the  benefit  of  Mr
    Khan's well compiled and helpfully clear skeleton argument.   In  this,
    he made the point that there was essentially one argument only, namely,
    whether the First-tier Tribunal considered the special features in this
    case.  Mr Khan submitted that the judge had made factual errors in this
    regard.  First, the judge referred to  the  fact  that  "the  Appellant
    herself concedes that she can access drugs in her covering letter dated
    22nd November 2012 (see paragraph 9).  However, there was  no  covering
    letter of 22nd November 2012.  There was a letter of 27th November 2012
    and this emanated from the solicitors making the application (see  B1),
    but this in no way implied that the Appellant could access drugs on her
    own.  Therefore, the very basis of the factual  considerations  by  the
    judge was wrong.

12.  Second, the judge referred to the fact that  "the  Appellant  conceded
    that she had relatives in Bangladesh at  the  hearing"  (paragraph  9).
    Again, the Appellant conceded no such thing.   There  was  only  sister
    that the Appellant conceded having, and even there, she made  it  clear
    that the sister was in no position to provide her with  care,  and  the
    sister herself had submitted a statement to this effect.

13. Third, the hearing bundle from J. Stifford Law Solicitors,  dated  20th
    August 2014, which was before the judge contained  a  "personal  health
    report" (see pages 12 to 24).  This was completely  overlooked  by  the
    judge.  Yet, it could have been relevant.  This was because at page  20
    there is a suggestion that, "your lung age is greater than your  actual
    age.  This was due to your smoking and I strongly advise you to  stop".
    Mr Islam also suggested that at page 21 there was a  reference  to  the
    Appellant having  a  possible  problem  with  her  kidneys.   This  is,
    however, not correct because at page 22 there is a clear statement that
    "your kidney function tests are within acceptable limits".

14. Fourth,  Mr  Islam  argued  that  the  Section  117  "public  interest"
    considerations have not been properly weighed in  the  balance  because
    this was an Appellant who did not have a "precarious" existence in  the
    UK when she made her application, because she had valid leave, and  she
    would not have been a burden on the taxpayer.  She  was  also  over  65
    years of age, so that she would not  have  to  meet  with  the  English
    language requirement test.

15. For her part, Ms Kenny submitted that  the  judge's  determination  was
    well balanced and this amounted to nothing  more  than  a  disagreement
    with  the  conclusions.   There  were  no  particular   features   here
    whatsoever.  The fact that  the  Appellant  did  not  have  an  English
    language test could not be waived in her favour.  She did not apply  as
    a dependant relative from overseas in the first place.   Her  essential
    complaint had been that she felt lonely in Bangladesh at her age as did
    her son and this was recounted at  paragraph  4  of  the  determination
    itself.  The judge did not find her to be dependent.  It is  true  that
    there is a letter of 27th November 2012 but that this does not say that
    she cannot access drugs in  Bangladesh.   She  did  have  a  sister  in
    Bangladesh.  She did have a home there.  Therefore, the judge was right
    in concluding that she could return there.

16. In reply, Mr Islam  emphasised  that  the  Appellant  did  not  have  a
    "precarious" immigration history and there were  significant  obstacles
    to her being able to return to her country at the age of 72.



Error of Law

17. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside this decision.  My  reasons  are  as
    follows.  First, the judge has erred  in  stating  that  the  Appellant
    "concedes that she can access drugs in her covering letter  dated  22nd
    November 2012" (paragraph 9).  There is  no  covering  letter  of  22nd
    November 2012.  There is no concession to this effect by the Appellant.
     The relevant letter is dated 27th November 2012 and this does not  say
    that the Appellant can access drugs herself.

18. Second, the Appellant's case, as put by her solicitors in the  covering
    letter of 27th November 2012, is that  she  is  "old  and  fragile  and
    suffers from diabetes and  arthritis"  and  that  she  lives  alone  in
    Bangladesh and  needs  "constant  help  in  reminding  me  to  take  my
    medication, help with washing, cooking and personal care".  She  has  a
    house but states that it has "no electricity or running water" and that
    the water has to be collected from a well a  long  way  away  from  the
    house.  She emphasises the fact that, "because of  my  old  age,  I  am
    unable to do my shopping and  have  to  ask  my  neighbours  to  do  my
    shopping which I cannot rely on" (see P2).  The judge does not refer to
    any of these facts at all in his assessment of "findings  of  fact  and
    credibility" at paragraph 9.

19.  Third,  the  judge  refers  to  the  Appellant  having  relatives   in
    Bangladesh.  The Appellant's evidence, however,  was  that  she  had  a
    sister in  Bangladesh.   The  sister  was  unable  to  look  after  the
    Appellant because she was also in ill-health.

20. Fourth, there is no proper assessment of the Article  8  jurisprudence,
    and his application outside the Rules, even though the case of  Gulshan
    [2013] UKUT 00640 is referred to.   But  there  is  equally  no  proper
    consideration of the Section 117B "public interest" considerations.

21. Finally, although my attention was drawn to the personal health  report
    there is nothing in this whatsoever that assists the Appellant  as  far
    as I can see.  The report is unsigned and it is unclear how it has been
    commissioned.  Moreover, there is no evidence whatsoever  that  it  was
    specifically brought to the attention of the judge.  It is  not  enough
    to say that it is in the Appellant's bundle.  It is incumbent upon  the
    representative in question to put his or her  best  points  before  the
    judge during submissions.  There is no evidence that this was done.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal is  referred
back to the First-tier Tribunal, to be heard by a  judge  other  than  Judge
Kanagaratnam, under Practice  Statement  7.2,  because  the  effect  of  the
errors outlined above have been such as to deprive a party before the First-
tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for  the  party's  case
to be put and considered by the First-tier Tribunal.  No  previous  findings
are preserved.  It is open to the Appellant to put further  evidence  before
the  judge.   Accordingly,  this  appeal  is  remitted  to  the   First-tier
Tribunal.

No anonymity order is made.




Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 25th April 2015


