
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38638/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |                   Decision & Reasons |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 22 September 2015                  |                   On 6 October 2015  |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                              Ashraf Choudhury
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. P. J. Lewis, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr. P. Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  Immigration
    Judge I. Ross promulgated on 9 March 2015.  Judge  Ross  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision to cancel leave to
    remain as a Tier 4 student.

 2. In the decision granting permission to  appeal,  Judge  Lambert  stated
    that there was an obvious lack of reasoning in the adverse  credibility
    finding, that it was an extremely short decision given  the  complexity
    of the evidence involved  in  these  cases,  and  that  there  was  "an
    arguable failure, bearing in mind the burden of proof on the Respondent
    with regard  to  dishonesty,  to  consider  the  extent  to  which  the
    Appellant's particular test result has been shown by  the  Respondent's
    evidence to be linked to the evidence of invalidity provided by ETS."

Submissions

 3. I heard submissions from both  representatives.   Mr.  Lewis  submitted
    that there was a lack of real reasoning  given  the  type  of  evidence
    before the judge and the issues  involved.   There  had  been  evidence
    before the judge that the Appellant  had  previously  taken  two  IELTS
    tests and passed with high marks in 2008 and 2011.   This  was  a  more
    difficult test.  The judge had failed to  have  regard  to  this  fact.
    Paragraph 12 of the cancellation report specifically  refers  to  TOEIC
    tests being easier than IELTS.  There was no reference to the fact that
    the Appellant was studying at a reputable and  established  university.
    By the time of the appeal, he had passed  his  second  year  of  a  law
    degree.  Evidence that he was a good student who engaged in  class  had
    been provided, but there was no reference to it.  The Appellant intends
    to become a barrister.  He was not working.   These  were  all  factors
    which should have been taken into account to indicate  that  he  was  a
    genuine student with a history of taking and passing  English  language
    tests.

 4. It was submitted that the fact that the Appellant  could  not  remember
    the date of his test, given that it had been  taken  three  years  ago,
    enhanced rather than undermined his credibility.  It was submitted that
    no reasons were given in paragraph [12] for rejecting  the  Appellant's
    evidence.   The  only  evidence  provided  were  the  generic   witness
    statements of Rebecca Collings ("RC") and Peter Millington  ("PM").   I
    was referred to the case of R (on the application of Gazi) v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department (ETS -  judicial  review)  IJR  [2015]
    UKUT 00327 (IAC), which referred to the very real possibility of  human
    error in such cases.  I was also  referred  to  paragraph  47  of  PM's
    statement which stated that a test may be invalidated on the  basis  of
    test administration irregularity "including the fact  that  their  test
    was taken at a UK testing centre where numerous other results have been
    invalidated on the basis of a "match".  It was submitted that there was
    a real need to consider the evidence given the serious consequences for
    the individual, and that anxious care should be given having considered
    all of the evidence.

 5. Mr. Duffy submitted that the judge had been entitled to take  on  board
    the statements.  I was referred to paragraph 28 of RC's statement,  and
    paragraph 31 of PM's statement.  There was less than  a  2%  margin  of
    error in order for a candidate's name to appear on a  spreadsheet.   It
    was submitted that it was hard for the Appellant to shift the burden of
    proof once the judge had considered the  two  statements.   Either  the
    Appellant employed a proxy test taker, or he is the proxy  test  taker.
    He submitted that the judge was entitled to make the  finding  made  in
    the last bullet point of [12], as the  evidence  was  before  him.   He
    submitted that while  Gazi  found  that  the  statements  were  generic
    evidence; this was evidence of the process not of the  individual.   He
    submitted that the statements were strong evidence which the judge  was
    entitled to take into account, and it was not necessary for  the  judge
    to give further reasons.  The evidence  was  very  strong,  beyond  the
    balance of probabilities.

 6. As Mr. Duffy had referred to a spreadsheet, I asked him  if  there  was
    one, there not being one in the Respondent's bundle, and there being no
    reference to a spreadsheet in the decision.  He referred to a  document
    entitled "Addendum" to which the spreadsheet was attached.  I  found  a
    copy of this in the file, although not part of the Respondent's bundle.
     It appeared to have been put on the file prior to the hearing  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Mr. Lewis indicated that he  had  not  seen  this
    before.

 7. In response to Mr. Duffy, Mr. Lewis submitted that  the  judge  had  no
    regard to the fact that the Appellant had taken two previous  tests  or
    any other facts in his decision.  The analysis in Gazi  indicated  that
    there was clear scope for human error given that the analysts had  very
    little training.  He also pointed out the failure of the judge to refer
    to the addendum and spreadsheet.

Error of law decision

 8. I considered that the decision involved the making of an error  of  law
    as the judge had failed to give adequate reasons for his  finding  that
    the Respondent had satisfied the burden  of  proof  to  show  that  the
    Appellant had engaged in dishonesty.

 9. Paragraph [12] contains the totality  of  the  judge's  findings.   The
    judge  relies  entirely  on  the  generic  evidence  provided  by   the
    Respondent.  There is no reference to  any  evidence  which  links  the
    Appellant to the evidence of invalidity provided  by  ETS.   The  judge
    fails to make any reference to the spreadsheet.

10. Further, the judge fails to take  into  account  any  evidence  of  the
    Appellant's English language ability.  Paragraph 40 of Gazi  refers  to
    the decisions being taken in the First-tier Tribunal and states "Within
    these one finds emphasis on self-evidently important issues such as the
    appellant's evident English language ability,  demeanour  and  previous
    life events."  There is no reference in this decision to any  of  these
    "self-evidently important issues".  The cancellation report  itself  at
    paragraph 10 states that the interview  was  conducted  in  English  "a
    language that the Appellant both spoke and understood fully", but there
    is no reference to that in the decision.  There is no reference to  the
    fact that  he  had  previously  passed  two  English  tests  which  the
    cancellation report acknowledges are harder than TOEIC.   There  is  no
    reference to the fact that he has completed two years of a  law  degree
    at an established university.

11. There is no explanation given as to why the judge did not  believe  the
    Appellant's evidence that he did not know the date of his test, or that
    he had lost the letter inviting him to take it.

12. For these reasons, I found that the decision involved the making of  an
    error of law.  I announced this at the hearing, and stated that I would
    proceed to remake the decision.



Remaking

13. I heard further short submissions from both representatives.  Mr. Duffy
    relied on the cancellation report, the two statements of RC and PM, and
    the Addendum and attachments.  He submitted that the Respondent had met
    the burden of proof to show that the Appellant had used deception.

14. Mr. Lewis submitted that the generic statements had been criticised  in
    Gazi.  The case had acknowledged that there would be human  error,  and
    there had been a human error  here  in  identifying  the  Appellant  as
    having undertaken the test by proxy.  He had passed  a  more  difficult
    exam twice.  He had given detailed  answers  to  complex  questions  at
    interview.  There was no suggestion that his evidence of  having  taken
    the test in August, at around 9am /10am, was not  consistent  with  the
    facts.  His inability to recall further details  was  evidence  of  his
    credibility.  The only evidence provided  was  the  generic  statements
    which were not enough to identify that an individual had  undertaken  a
    test using a proxy test taker.  Compelling evidence had  been  provided
    by the Appellant in response.  The spreadsheet did not indicate whether
    the test had been cancelled due to irregularity when several tests  had
    been cancelled as part of a batch.  Even taking  the  spreadsheet  into
    account, the burden of proof had not been met.

Decision

15. In coming to my decision, I have taken into account  the  documents  in
    the  Respondent's  bundle,  the  Addendum  and  attachments,  and   the
    documents contained in the Appellant's bundle provided at the  hearing.
    In addition to the submissions above [13] and [14], I have  also  taken
    into account the submissions made in relation to the error of law  ([3]
    to [7] above).

16. I find that the Respondent has failed to discharge the burden of  proof
    to show that the Appellant used deception for the purpose of  obtaining
    leave.

17. In the cancellation report the Respondent states:

    "ETS has a record of your  speaking  test.   Using  voice  verification
    software, ETS has detected where  a  single  person  has  sat  multiple
    tests.  ETS undertook a check of your test and  found  that  there  was
    significant evidence to conclude that you did not sit the test and that
    the English certificate was fraudulently obtained."

18. The cancellation report refers to "significant  evidence"  to  conclude
    that the Appellant did not sit the test, but  the  Respondent  has  not
    provided any of this  "significant  evidence"  from  ETS.   I  have  no
    details from ETS relating to the centre where the  Appellant  took  his
    test, and the date and the time at which the Appellant took  his  test.
    The cancellation report states that ETS  are  able  to  detect  when  a
    single person has sat multiple tests, yet I have no evidence  from  ETS
    to show that one person undertook multiple tests  at  the  test  centre
    which the Appellant attended on the day and at the time  that  he  took
    his test.

19. In paragraph 10 of the cancellation report it states that the Appellant
    said that he sat his test at Queensway College.  He could not  remember
    the exact date but he said that it was in August 2012 at  approximately
    10 o'clock.  There is no evidence from the Respondent to  suggest  that
    this is not the case so as to undermine  the  Appellant's  credibility.
    The cancellation report refers to him  having  taken  the  test  on  29
    August 2012 at Queensway College, but there is  no  evidence  from  the
    Respondent or from ETS relating to tests taken at Queensway College  on
    29 August 2012.

20. The Respondent stated in the Addendum that the spreadsheet provided  is
    from the  "ETS  Lookup  Tool",  a  database  providing  information  on
    candidates.  It is entitled "ETS SELT SOURCE DATA".  However  there  is
    nothing on this document from ETS to confirm that it  is  a  print  out
    from their database.  This document indicates that the Appellant's test
    is "invalid", but does not give any details.

21. I do not find that this document can be relied on  to  prove  that  the
    Appellant used a proxy test taker to take his English test.  It  merely
    states that the Appellant's test is invalid.  It is not clear from this
    document that the reason that the Appellant's test  has  been  declared
    invalid is because of the possibility of irregularity as referred to in
    paragraph 47 of PM's statement.  There is no "substantial  evidence  of
    invalidity" on this spreadsheet.

22. As accepted by Mr. Duffy, the witness  statements  of  RC  and  PM  are
    evidence of the process, not of the individual.   I  have  no  evidence
    beyond the spreadsheet which relates to the Appellant  himself.   I  am
    mindful of the criticism of the two statements in Gazi,  and  the  very
    real possibility of human error in invalidating a test result.

23. I find that the Appellant was interviewed twice by the Respondent.   At
    paragraphs 7 and 10 of the cancellation report it records that on  both
    occasions it was noted that English was "a language that the  Appellant
    both spoke and understood fully".  The report refers to  the  Appellant
    having already passed an IELTS test, acknowledged as being harder  than
    a  TOEIC  test  (paragraph  12  of  the  cancellation   report).    The
    cancellation report also refers  to  the  Appellant's  study.   He  was
    studying an LLB (Hons) Law Course  at  Birmingham  City  University,  a
    reputable and established university.  He was not working.   These  are
    all issues which the Respondent should have  taken  into  account  when
    considering the Appellant's circumstances and the possibility that  the
    Appellant's test had been declared invalid due to human error.

24. The Respondent has failed to provide the "significant  evidence"  which
    she claims to have relating to the Appellant's particular test  result.
    She has not provided any evidence from ETS regarding the date and  time
    that the Appellant sat his test and the centre at which he sat it.  She
    has relied on the generic witness statements  and  a  printout  from  a
    database, but there is no confirmation on this printout that it is been
    provided by ETS, and it contains no details.

25. Given all the above, I find that the Respondent has failed to discharge
    the burden of proof to show that the Appellant  employed  deception  to
    qualify for leave to remain.  I find that the Appellant's leave  should
    not have been cancelled.


Notice of Decision

There decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  an  error
of law and is set aside.

I remake the decision allowing the Appellant's appeal.


No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date 5 October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain



