
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA388682014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On : 14 June 2016                  |On : 15 June 2016                     |
|                                   |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                           olumide abimbola alabi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Eteko of Iras & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born on 14 August 1984. He  has
      been given permission to appeal against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Howard, dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's
      decision to refuse his application for leave to remain in  the  UK  on
      the basis of his family and private life.

   2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on  25  September  2010  with
      leave to enter as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant until 29 February
      2012. He was subsequently granted an extension of stay  as  a  Tier  1
      Post Study Migrant, until 5 March 2014. On 19 February 2014 he applied
      for leave to remain as a spouse, having married on 9 December 2013.


   3. The appellant's application was refused by the respondent on 14 August
      2014, on the grounds that  he  could  not  meet  the  requirements  in
      paragraph R-LTRP 1.1(c)  in  relation  to  the  income  threshold  for
      maintenance and that he could not meet the criteria in Appendix FM and
      paragraph 276ADE(1) in relation  to  family  and  private  life.  With
      regard to Appendix  FM,  he  could  not  benefit  from  EX.1(b),  with
      reference to EX. 2, because he had not demonstrated  that  there  were
      insurmountable obstacles to family life  with  his  spouse  continuing
      outside the UK. With regard to paragraph 276ADE(1) it was not accepted
      that  there  were  very  significant  obstacles  to  integration  into
      Nigeria.  The  respondent  considered  further  that  there  were   no
      exceptional circumstances justifying a  grant  of  leave  outside  the
      immigration rules.

   4. The appellant appealed against that decision. His appeal was heard  on
      6 July 2015 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Howard. The judge heard  from
      the appellant and his wife. He found that there were no insurmountable
      obstacles to family life continuing in Nigeria and that the  appellant
      could not meet the relevant criteria under the immigration  rules.  He
      found that the respondent's decision was proportionate and that  there
      was no breach of Article 8. He accordingly dismissed the appeal.


   5. The appellant then sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,
      on the grounds  that  the  judge  had  given  inadequate  reasons  for
      concluding that there were no significant difficulties to  integration
      or relocation for the sponsor and had erred in his approach to Article
      8 outside the rules by applying the  "insurmountable  obstacles"  test
      when considering proportionality.


   6. Permission to appeal was granted on 29 April 2016.

   7. At the hearing before me  Mr  Eteko  expanded  upon  the  grounds.  He
      submitted that the judge had erred,  when  considering  insurmountable
      obstacles, by using the appellant's ability to integrate into  the  UK
      as a reason for concluding that the sponsor would be able to integrate
      into Nigeria, when the two situations  were  entirely  different.  The
      judge had failed to take into account the fact that  the  sponsor  was
      heavily pregnant. The judge had replicated the error in his Article  8
      assessment outside the rules and had failed to take into  account  all
      of the appellant's circumstances.

   8. Mr Wilding submitted that no evidence was offered before the judge  to
      show that there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  and  the  judge  was
      therefore entitled to conclude as he did,  both  with  regard  to  the
      rules and Article 8 outside the rules.


   9. I advised the parties that in my view there was no error of law in the
      judge's decision. My reasons for so concluding are as follows.


Consideration and findings


  10. It is correct to say that the judge's reasoning is brief. However,  it
      is also correct to say that the evidence before him was very  limited.
      I asked Mr Eteko  to  show  me  the  evidence  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal of the insurmountable obstacles upon which the appellant  was
      relying and his response was that there was no evidence, but  that  it
      had been expected that the judge would ask questions of the  appellant
      and sponsor in that regard. As  I  reminded  Mr  Eteko,  however,  the
      burden of proof lies upon the appellant and it was not for  the  judge
      to make the appellant's case for him.

  11. Turning to the evidence that was before the  judge,  aside  from  some
      country information about Nigeria, the documents within the two appeal
      bundles produced by the  appellant  related  solely  to  the  couple's
      finances, marriage and cohabitation. However the  genuineness  of  the
      relationship and the marriage has not been disputed and there  was  no
      claim made before the judge that the appellant was able  to  meet  the
      financial requirements of the immigration  rules.  The  focus  of  the
      appeal was on EX.1(b) and the question of  "insurmountable  obstacles"
      and Article 8 outside the immigration rules, yet the large bundles  of
      documentary evidence contained nothing other than  the  statements  of
      the appellant and the sponsor in that regard.


  12. The statements of the appellant and the sponsor were  themselves  very
      brief. Neither statement  gave  reasons  why  the  sponsor  could  not
      relocate with the appellant to Nigeria but referred  briefly  only  to
      the question of being apart from each other.  The  judge's  record  of
      proceedings shows that the appellant simply adopted his  statement  as
      his evidence and the sponsor gave little  reason  why  she  could  not
      relocate to Nigeria other than that her family were in  the  UK.  That
      was a matter considered by the judge at  [12]  in  his  decision.  The
      judge considered that the sponsor would  be  able  to  integrate  into
      society in Nigeria just as the appellant  had  managed  to  assimilate
      into UK society. I do not agree with the suggestion in the grounds, or
      in the grant of permission, that the judge was applying any particular
      test in such a  consideration.  He  was  simply  considering  all  the
      circumstances on the very limited evidence that  he  had  before  him.
      Whilst he did not specifically refer to the sponsor's pregnancy, there
      was no evidence before him to suggest that that would  have  posed  an
      insurmountable obstacle to relocation to Nigeria. Plainly, on the very
      limited evidence available, the appellant had simply  failed  to  make
      out his case and  the  judge  was  perfectly  entitled  to  reach  the
      conclusion that he did, for the reasons adequately and properly given.

  13. Likewise, with regard to his consideration of Article  8  outside  the
      immigration  rules,  the  judge  followed  the  correct  approach   in
      considering whether or not the appellant's circumstances  justified  a
      grant of leave. He considered at [25] the relevant factors at  section
      117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. Contrary  to
      the assertion in the grounds he was not applying  the  "insurmountable
      obstacles" test again, but he found that that  requirement  under  the
      immigration rules not having been met, there was  nothing  further  in
      the appellant's circumstances to outweigh the public  interests.  That
      was a conclusion which was entirely open to him on the evidence before
      him, and in reality was the only conclusion that he could have reached
      on that very limited evidence.


  14. Accordingly, and for the  reasons  given,  I  find  that  the  judge's
      decision was one that was fully and properly open to him and  that  he
      did not make any errors of law in his approach to the requirements  of
      the immigration rules or to Article 8 outside the rules.

DECISION

  15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to dismiss the appeal stands.









Signed

Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated: 15th June 2016
