
IAC-FH-CK-V4
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38831/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 19 November 2014               |On 19 December 2014               |
|Prepared 19 November 2014         |                                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     F S
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Vydyadharan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms N Nnamani, Counsel instructed by Howe & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this determination the Appellant is referred to as the Secretary  of
    State and the Respondent is referred to as the Claimant.

2.   The Claimant, a national of Kosovo, appealed against  the  Respondent's
    decision, dated 22 July 2013, to refuse to issue a derivative residence
    card with reference to Regulation 15A(7)(b)(i) and (4A)(a) and  (c)  of
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006,  (the  2006
    Regulations).  An appeal against that decision was made on  that  basis
    to First-tier Tribunal Judge Boyes, who on 5 August 2014 dismissed  the
    appeal against the refusal of the derivative residence card but allowed
    the appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.

3.   The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal that decision  which
    was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  P  J  M  Hollingworth  on  14
    October 2014.

4.   The basis of the Secretary of State's appeal is  essentially  that  the
    judge did not take the necessary gateway steps to satisfy himself  with
    reference to MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192, Nagre [2013]  EWHC  Civ
    720 (Admin) and Gulshan [2013] UKUT 640  that  it  was  appropriate  to
    consider the case outside of the Rules under Article 8.  It  seemed  to
    me the course contemplated in Huang [2007] UKHL 11, MM (Lebanon) [2014]
    EWCA Civ 1654  and  Ganesabalan  [2014]  EWHC  2712  (Admin)  are  also
    relevant in this challenge.

5.   Essentially it  was  said  therefore  that  the  judge  had  failed  to
    consider whether  there  were,  with  the  Immigration  Rules  being  a
    complete code as a starting point, with  compelling  circumstances  not
    recognised by the Rules and that an appeal should only be allowed where
    there were exceptional circumstances: Obviously intrinsic to  that  was
    that there was a reasonable prospect of such an argument succeeding.

6.   It is clear that what the judge did.  Having concluded that the  appeal
    failed under 2006 EEA Regulations, it was stated as follows:

           "26.     Having  considered  whether  the  requirements  of   the
             Immigration Rules relating  to  family  life  are  met,  I  am
             required to go  on  to  consider  the  case  separately  under
             Article 8 the ECHR arise.  This approach was approved  by  the
             Upper Tribunal in the case of Sanade [2012] UKUT 48."

7.   What was being argued by the  judge  was  that  because  the  Appellant
    could return it would be wrong for the Sponsor and their two  children,
    British citizens, although one a baby, to force them  to  follow,  thus
    depriving the children of their treaty rights to reside in the European
    Union, let alone the UK.

8.   The Secretary of State does not assert under  which  Rule  or  part  of
    Appendix FM or with reference to paragraph 276ADE  the  Claimant  could
    have succeeded.  That at least is consistent with the  Claimant's  case
    that the Claimant was the primary carer of  the  children,  the  father
    works  long  and  unsocial  hours  as  a  cleaning  supervisor  on  the
    underground, the company is responsible for  cleaning  the  underground
    trains, the Sponsor works at night and sleeps during the day and leaves
    home at 8pm and returns the following day at 8am in the morning and  is
    unable to care  for  the  children  and  that  the  Claimant  is  still
    breastfeeding the youngest child.  The latest daughter E was born on  1
    March 2014 and the elder child V was born on 29 June 2011.

9.   It was not apparent to me what basis there  was,  if  looking  at  this
    within the Immigration Rules, to enable her to  stay.   Ms  Vydyadharan
    did not suggest there were.  I do not find the Immigration Rules  as  a
    complete code in immigration decision.

10.  It seemed to me that it was an error by the judge in  not  setting  out
    the relevant considerations: On the case argued there were none.

11.  Plainly the circumstances even contemplated by the judge were  somewhat
    difficult in that it was contemplated through the breastfeeding E could
    remain on the basis of being bottle-fed formula milk and cared  for  by
    the Sponsor.   This  course  was  in  the  context  of  him  giving  up
    employment, hoping to find some suitable employment which would fit  in
    around childcare as well as being probably needing to go on  to  social
    security benefits.  The analysis  of  those  options  really  was  very
    superficial but it is not the subject of an appeal  or  cross-challenge
    on  those  findings.   I  conclude  that  there  is  no  threshold   to
    considering Article 8 outside the Rules.   Plainly  circumstances,  the
    strength  of  the  case,   the   degree   of   compelling/compassionate
    circumstances, the scope of the Rules,  the  public  interest  are  all
    material to proportionality.

12.  In the circumstances it seemed to me that the judge's analysis  of  the
    Article 8 considerations was not criticised in the  grounds  to  assert
    that any different considerations should have arisen.

13.  As a result,  whilst  there  may  be  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to
    relocating as a family  to  Kosovo  the  question  is  whether  in  the
    circumstances it is reasonable to do so when on the face  of  it  there
    was no accommodation, funding, work, arrangements to  enable  the  best
    interests of the children as British nationals to be protected.

14.  Plainly the best interests of the children remain in being  with  their
    family than rather simply  present  in  the  United  Kingdom.   In  the
    circumstances I conclude that the judge's errors would not have made  a
    material difference to the outcome of the appeal.  Therefore the appeal
    by the Secretary of State fails.

15.  The original Tribunal's decision stands.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is dismissed.

An anonymity direction is made because of the presence of the child.

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Respondent  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Respondent and to  the  Appellant.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed        Date 18 December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

