
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA380642014
     ia360622014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 June 2016                         |On 16 June 2016                      |
|Given orally at the hearing            |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                ERMAL HABILAJ
                             ELENA LAVINIA BEJAN
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondents:   Mr M Cogan, Counsel instructed by Malik & Malik
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal of the Secretary  of  State  against  a  decision  of
    Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Bird  who  in   a   determination
    promulgated on 24 November 2015 allowed the appeals  of  Ermal  Habilaj
    and Elena Lavinia Bejan against  two  decisions  of  the  Secretary  of
    State, the first to curtail the leave of Ms Bejan  on  the  basis  that
    although she had had leave to remain as an extended family member of an
    EEA national she  had  entered  into  a  marriage  of  convenience  and
    secondly, to refuse the application for leave to remain of  Mr  Habilaj
    who had applied for leave to remain as the partner of a woman  who  had
    leave to remain as an extended  family  member  under  the  Immigration
    (EEA)  Regulations 2006.  For ease of reference I will  refer  in  this
    determination to the Secretary of State as the respondent  as  she  was
    the respondent in the First-tier  Tribunal  and  I  will  refer  to  Mr
    Habilaj and Ms Bejan as the appellants as they were the  appellants  in
    the First-tier.

2.   The judge made clear and unequivocal findings that this was  a  genuine
    marriage.  She found the  parties  were  credible  and  accepted  their
    evidence.  On that basis she allowed the appeals.

3.   There is a certain lack of clarity  in  the  application  made  by  the
    Secretary of State as to what exactly has been challenged but that  has
    been clarified by Ms Brocklesby-Weller this morning when  she  made  it
    clear that there is no challenge to the decision of the judge to  allow
    the appeal of Ms Bejan.  I therefore  have  to  deal  solely  with  the
    appeal of Mr Habilaj.

4.   The clear finding of the judge was that this  was  a  genuine  marriage
    and  that  is  why  she  allowed  the  appeal.   However,  there  is  a
    distinction in the Regulations between family members under  Regulation
    7 and extended family members  under  Regulation  8.   Insofar  as  the
    Regulations deal with extended family members I have  to  consider  the
    provisions of Regulation  17(4).   The  terms  of  that  are  that  the
    Secretary of State may issue a residence card  to  an  extended  family
    member not falling within Regulation 7(3) who is not an  EEA  national.
    The term 'may' gives  to  the  Secretary  of  State  a  discretion  and
    therefore this was an issue where the judge having made clear  findings
    should have remitted the appeal to the Secretary of State  for  further
    consideration to consider the exercise of the  discretion  set  out  in
    Regulation 17(4).  The judge made an  error  of  law  in  allowing  the
    appeal outright rather than allowing it  to  the  extent  that  it  was
    remitted to the Secretary of  State  for  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    consider the application taking into account findings made by the Judge
    on the status of Mr Habilaj.  I therefore set aside the decision of the
    judge insofar as it relates to Mr Habilaj but only to the  extent  that
    rather than allowing the appeal outright I  consider  that  the  appeal
    should be allowed to the extent that it is remitted to the Secretary of
    State and that is what I now do.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is remitted to the respondent to consider  the  granting  of  the
appropriate residence permit to the  appellant  as  the  spouse  of  an  EEA
national.


Signed                                  Date 16 June 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
