
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/38869/2014
                                                               IA/38870/2014
                                                               IA/38871/2014
                                                               IA/38872/2014
                                                               IA/38873/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 29 April 2016                     |On 11th May 2016                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              KUBENDRAN PILLAY
                          NADEEMA DOMINIQUE SAMUELS
                               NAZNEEN SAMUELS
                                    [M P]
                                    [Z P]
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Harding (Counsel) instructed by Bhogal
partners, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of these Appellants. Having considered all the circumstances and evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal  but
in order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Head-Rapson, promulgated  on  23  July
2015, which allowed the Appellants' appeals

Background

3.    The Appellants are all members of the same family. The  third,  fourth
and fifth appellants are the children of the first  and  second  appellants.
The first appellant was born on 10 March  1975.  The  second  appellant  was
born on 13 June 1978. The third appellant was born on 27 November 1998.  The
fourth appellant was born on 7 November 2005. The fifth appellant  was  born
on 21 March 2011. All five appellants are South African nationals.

4.    The first and second appellants entered the UK (from South Africa)  in
July 2003. The third appellant  is  the  second  appellant's  daughter.  She
entered the UK in January 2004 and has lived in the UK  since  then.  On  11
January 2013 the appellants submitted applications for leave  to  remain  in
the UK. The respondent refused those applications on 10  April  2013.  Those
refusals did not carry a right of appeal. The appellants  then  embarked  on
judicial review procedure, as a result of which consent orders  were  signed
by the parties and were sealed by the court on 25 June 2014.

5.    On 17 September 2014 the Secretary of State reconsidered her  decision
but adhered to the original decision  to  refuse  to  grant  the  appellants
leave to remain in the UK.

The Judge's Decision

6.     The  Appellants  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Head-Rapson ("the Judge") allowed  the  appeals  against  the
Respondent's decision.

7.    Grounds of appeal were lodged and, on 31st October 2015,  Judge  Foudy
gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

    "3.    The Judge found that some of the minor appellants met  paragraph
    276ADE by virtue of the length of their presence in the UK. However, it
    is arguable that the Judge applied the incorrect version of  the  Rules
    when he reached that decision, ignoring  the  requirement  that  it  be
    unreasonable to expect that Appellants to leave  the  UK.  This  is  an
    arguable error of law.

    4.     The Judge allowed the appeal under Article 8  ECHR.  It  is  not
    clear what factors weighed in the Judge's mind when  he  conducted  the
    balancing exercise between the  interests  of  the  Appellant  and  the
    public. This lack of reasoning is an arguable error of law."

8.    In a decision promulgated on 25 February 2016 the Upper  Tribunal  set
aside the Judge's decision, finding that it  contained  material  errors  of
law, and directed that the case should be considered of  new  at  a  resumed
hearing of the Upper Tribunal.

The Resumed Hearing

9.    All five appellants were present in court. Mr Harding told me that  he
intended to  take  evidence  from  the  first  three  appellants  only.  His
intention was that  the  first  and  second  appellants  would  adopt  their
witness statements, dated 9 April 2015,  before  being  offered  for  cross-
examination, and that the third appellant would adopt her witness  statement
dated 9 April 2015 and her updated  (handwritten)  statement,  prepared  for
today's hearing. Mr Bramble told me that he had no intention of  asking  any
questions in cross-examination. The hearing proceeded on the basis that  the
first  three  appellants  adopted  the  terms  of  each  of  their   witness
statements,  so  that  the  hearing  swiftly  moved  to   parties'   agents'
submissions.

10.   (a) Mr Harding, for the appellants, told me that he would rely on  the
case of PD and others  and  the  respondent's  own  immigration  directorate
instructions on family migration. He told  me  that  the  first  and  second
appellants cannot succeed under the immigration rules and  that,  in  truth,
the focus in this case is on the third and fourth  appellants.  He  reminded
me that the third appellant was born in 1998 and came to the UK  in  January
2004. She is now 17 � years of age and has lived  in  the  UK  for  over  12
years. Mr Harding  drew  my  attention  to  the  fact  that,  if  the  third
appellant was just six months older,  there  would  be  no  "reasonableness"
test to be satisfied because she would be an adult who had been  in  the  UK
for more than half of her life.

(b)   Mr Harding took me to para.  11.2.4  of  the  respondent's  IDI  dated
August 2015. He quoted the last sentence of  the  first  paragraph  of  that
section of the guidance, which says

    "... the longer the child has resided in the UK, the more  the  balance
    will begin to swing in terms of it being  unreasonable  to  expect  the
    child to leave the UK, and strong reasons will be required in order  to
    refuse a case with continuous UK residence of more than 7 years."

He told me  that  the  strong  reasons  required  by  the  respondent's  own
guidance do not exist in this case.

(c)   Mr Harding told  me  that  all  the  evidence  indicated  that  it  is
unreasonable for the third appellant to  face  the  disruption,  stress  and
significant upheaval which would be caused by the removal from the UK.

(d)   Mr Harding turned to the case of the  fourth  appellant,  reminded  me
that she was born on 7 November 2005 in the UK. She has only ever  lived  in
the UK. In terms of the British Nationality Act 1981, the  fourth  appellant
is entitled to a British passport. He told me  that  the  third  and  fourth
appellants fulfil the requirements of paragraph 276 ADE(iv)

(e)   Mr Harding turned to the fifth appellant's  case.  He  explained  that
the fifth appellant is a six-year-old boy, born in the UK  in  2011.  He  is
too young to meet the requirements of 276 ADE (iv). Mr Harding urged  me  to
follow the guidance given in PD and others, & find  that  -  because  it  is
unreasonable for the third and fourth appellant's to leave the UK, then  the
first and second Appellants succeed under s. 117B(6) of the  2002  Act,  and
that, inevitably, means  that  the  fifth  appellant's  appeal  succeeds  on
article 8 ECHR grounds.

11.   Mr Bramble graciously conceded that Mr Harding had  set  out  the  law
and the arguments for all five appellants fairly. He agreed that  first  two
appellants cannot succeed under the immigration rules and that the focus  in
this case is on the third & fourth appellant's. He also relied on  the  case
of PD and others, and urged me to consider the  appeals  of  the  first  and
second appellants in the context of sections 117A & 117B of  the  2002  Act.
He reminded me that I must  consider  s.55  of  the  Borders  Citizenship  &
Immigration Act 2009 when considering the appeals of the third,  fourth  and
fifth appellants.

Findings of Fact

12.   The first and second appellants entered the UK from  South  Africa  in
July 2003. The third appellant  is  the  second  appellant's  daughter.  She
entered the UK in January 2004 and has lived  in  the  UK  since  then.  The
fourth and fifth appellants were born in the UK. Neither the fourth nor  the
fifth appellants have ever been  to  South  Africa.  The  third  and  fourth
appellants are all engaged in the UK education system. The  third  appellant
has been to primary school and has now almost finished  secondary  education
or UK.

13.   None of the appellants have left the UK since 2003. Between  September
2003 and July 2013 the first appellant worked for  a  plastic  manufacturer.
He was promoted a number of times, so that by the time he had to leave  work
in 2013 his salary had almost doubled.

14.   In September 2008 the second appellant started studying  to  become  a
nurse. She qualified as a nurse in September 2012.

15.   The third appellant has lived in the UK since she  was  5  years  old.
She is now in her penultimate year of secondary school and is  studying  for
her A levels. She is an intelligent, gifted student, with a close circle  of
friends. She has no real  memory  of  life  in  South  Africa,  and  neither
friends nor relatives there. Her teachers speak highly of her.

16.   The fourth appellant is now 11 years old. She has only ever  lived  in
the UK. Because she was born in the UK and has lived here for more  than  10
years, she is entitled to a British Passport. She is a pupil at [H  Academy]
where she is doing well (and working hard). She is  an  intelligent,  gifted
student, with a close circle of friends. She knows nothing of life in  South
Africa, and has neither friends nor  relatives  there.  She  speaks  with  a
London Accent.

17.   The fifth appellant was born in the UK. He has now started at  primary
school where he has settled well.

Analysis

18.   In EM and Others (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG  [2011]  UKUT  98  the  Upper
Tribunal stated:

    "2.    Guidance is also given on the  assessment  of  the  private  and
    family life of a Zimbabwean national present in the United Kingdom  for
    over 11 years with children born and/or resident most of their lives in
    the United Kingdom.

    3.     In the absence of  countervailing  factors,  residence  of  over
    seven years with children well-integrated into the  educational  system
    in the United Kingdom, is an indicator that the welfare  of  the  child
    favours regularisation of the status of mother and children".

19.   Paragraph 276 ADE(1) (iv) of the Rules says:-

         "(1)     The requirements to be met by an applicant  for  leave  to
             remain on the grounds of private life in the UK  are  that  at
             the date of application, the applicant ...

             (iv)       is  under  the  age  of  18  years  and  has  lived
             continuously in the UK for at least seven  years  (discounting
             any period of imprisonment) and it    would not be  reasonable
             to expect the applicant to leave the UK".

20.   Section 117B of the 2002 Act provides:

         "117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable  in  all
         cases

         (1)      The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
         the public interest.

         (2)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         financially independent, because such persons-

             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)      Little weight should be given to-

             (a) a private life, or

             (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)       Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a   private   life
         established by a person at a time  when  the  person's  immigration
         status is precarious.

         (6)      In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
         the public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom."

The third and fourth  Appellants  have  the  status  of  "qualifying  child"
within the Part 5A regime because they have each lived in the  UK  for  more
than 7 years.

21.   In Treebhawon and others (section 117B(6)) [2015]  UKUT  00674  (IAC),
section 117B(6) was analysed and construed in [12] -  [23].   This  Tribunal
expressed its conclusions in the following terms, at [20] - [21]:

         "20.      In  section  117B(6),  Parliament  has  prescribed  three
             conditions, namely:

             (a) the person concerned is not liable to deportation;

               b)  such  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, namely a person  who
                  is under the age of 18 and is a  British  citizen  or  has
                  lived in the United Kingdom for  a  continuous  period  of
                  seven years or more; and

               c) it would not be reasonable to expect the qualifying  child
                  to leave the United Kingdom.

             Within   this   discrete   regime,   the   statute   proclaims
             unequivocally that where these three conditions are  satisfied
             the public interest does not require the removal of the parent
             from the United Kingdom. Ambiguity there is none.

         21.     Giving effect to the analysis above, in our  judgment  the
             underlying Parliamentary intention is  that  where  the  three
             aforementioned conditions are satisfied the  public  interests
             identified in section 117B(1) - (3) do not apply."

22.   For the purposes of these appeals, the test in terms of paragraph  276
ADE(1)(iv) & (vi) and the test for consideration of article 8  ECHR  outside
the rules amounts to the same question.  Is  it  reasonable  to  expect  the
third, fourth and fifth appellants to leave  the  UK?  The  answer  to  that
question is determinative of the  appeals  of  both  the  third  and  fourth
appellants.

23.   In PD and Others (Article 8  -  conjoined  family  claims)  Sri  Lanka
[2016] UKUT 00108 (IAC) it was held  that  when  considering  the  conjoined
Article 8 ECHR claims of multiple  family  members,  decision-makers  should
first apply the Immigration Rules  to  each  individual  applicant  and,  if
appropriate, then consider Article 8 outside the Rules. This  exercise  will
typically entail the consideration and determination of all claims  jointly,
so as to ensure that all material facts and considerations  are  taken  into
account in each case.

24.   The third and fourth appellants are qualifying children  in  terms  of
s.117 of the 2002 Act. The first &  second  appellants  are  not  liable  to
deportation and have a genuine  parental  relationship  with  the  remaining
appellants.

25.   The respondent's own guidance calls for "strong reasons ... to  refuse
a case with continuous UK residence  of  more  than  7  years".  Even  after
considering each strand of evidence on this case, I cannot see  what  strong
reasons the respondent relies on.

26.   The fourth appellant has no connection at all  to  South  Africa,  and
thinks of herself as a Londoner. She is entitled to a British Passport.  The
third  appellant  has  almost  completed  her  passage   through   secondary
education. She has been immersed in the UK educational system since she  was
5 years old, and clearly has potential to  proceed  to  tertiary  education.
Both the  third  and  fourth  appellant's  have  established  and  developed
significant friendships in the UK (and nowhere else).

27.   I have no hesitation in finding that it is unreasonable to remove  the
third and fourth appellants from the UK. Their  removal  would  snatch  from
them their only secure established way of life and force them  to  go  to  a
country they know nothing about.  They  know  no-one  there,  and,  although
citizens  of  South  Africa,  would  be  outsiders  there,   struggling   to
understand new customs and practices while trying to  establish  friendships
& routines - and trying to integrate into a  different  educational  system.
The  respondent  does  not  point  to  "strong  reasons"  to  refuse   their
application, and rests solely on the statutory presumption that  Immigration
control is in the public interest.

28.   The third and fourth appellant's therefore meet  the  requirements  of
paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules. In this case (as in  PD  &
others) the four persuasive factors are

    (i)    their length of residence in the UK

    (ii)   their full integration into UK society

    (iii)  their age and

    (iv)   their lack of ties to South Africa

29.   It is beyond dispute that  the  first,  second  and  fifth  appellants
cannot succeed under the Immigration rules. In SS (Congo) and Others  [2015]
EWCA Civ 387 Lord Justice Richards said at paragraph 33  "In  our  judgment,
even though a test of exceptionality does not apply in  every  case  falling
within the scope of Appendix FM, it is accurate  to  say  that  the  general
position outside the sorts of special contexts referred  to  above  is  that
compelling circumstances would need to be identified to support a claim  for
grant of LTR outside the new Rules in Appendix FM. In our view,  that  is  a
formulation which is not  as  strict  as  a  test  of  exceptionality  or  a
requirement of "very compelling reasons" (as referred to in MF (Nigeria)  in
the context of the Rules applicable to foreign criminals), but  which  gives
appropriate weight to the focused consideration of public  interest  factors
as finds expression in the Secretary  of  State's  formulation  of  the  new
Rules in Appendix FM. It also reflects the formulation  in  Nagre  at  para.
[29], which has been tested and has survived scrutiny in  this  court:  see,
e.g., Haleemudeen at [44], per Beatson LJ".

30.   In line with the case of PD & others,  there  are  compelling  reasons
for considering this case outwith the rules.

31.   The first and second appellants have  resided  in  the  UK  unlawfully
since the start of 2004. They are the parents of the remaining  appellant's.
Setting aside considerations  of  immigration  law,  they  are  law-abiding,
fluent in English and self-sufficient.  I  remind  myself  of  AM  (S  117B)
Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC)

32.   The focus in the appeals of the first and second appellants is  firmly
on s.117B (6)  of  the  2002  Act.  The  third  and  fourth  appellants  are
Qualifying children. I have already found that  it  is  not  reasonable  for
either of them to leave the UK. By analogy, the first and second  appellants
benefit from  the  terms  of  s.117B(6)  of  the  2002  Act.  The  statutory
presumption  that  immigration  control  is  in  the  public   interest   is
displaced.

33.   Family life and private life within the meaning of article 8 ECHR  are
both  engaged  in  these  appeals.  The  respondent's  decision  amounts  to
interference  with  those  rights.  The  burden   of   proving   that   that
interference  is  proportionate  rests  with   the   respondent.   S.117B(6)
indicates that there is no public interest in the removal of the  first  and
second   appellants.   The   respondent's   decision    is    therefore    a
disproportionate breach of their right  to  respect  for  both  private  and
family life. The appeals  of  the  first  and  second  appellants  therefore
succeed on article 8 ECHR grounds

34.    The  best  interests  of  the   fifth   appellant   are   a   primary
consideration. In ZH (Tanzania) (FC) (Appellant) v Secretary  of  State  for
the Home Department (Respondent) [2011] UKSC 4 Lady Hale noted Article  3(1)
of the UNCRC:  which  states  that  "in  all  actions  concerning  children,
whether undertaken by ...  courts  of  law,  administrative  authorities  or
legislative bodies, the best interests of  the  child  shall  be  a  primary
consideration." Article 3 is now embodied in  section  55  of  the  Borders,
Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009  which  provides  that,  in  relation,
among other things, to immigration, asylum or nationality, the Secretary  of
State  must  make  arrangements  for  ensuring  that  those  functions  "are
discharged having regard to the need to safeguard and  promote  the  welfare
of children who are in the United Kingdom".

35.   It has long been established that it is in the interests  of  children
to remain with their parents. The best interest of the fifth  appellant  are
served by  ensuring  that  he  remains  with  his  family  (the  first  four
appellants). As the first four appellant's appeals  are  allowed,  then  the
fifth appellant must succeed on article 8 ECHR grounds.

Decision

36.   The decision of the first tier tribunal was set aside by  my  decision
promulgated on 25 February 2016

37.   I substitute the following decisions

38.   The appeals of the third and fourth appellants are allowed  under  the
immigration rules.

39.   The appeals of all five appellants  are  allowed  on  article  8  ECHR
grounds.


Signed      Date 2 May 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
