
[pic]
IAC-AH-dh-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38120/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 16 July 2014                                 |On 21st Oct 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                                    P M R
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Hitchens, Ryedale Citizens Advice Bureau


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent, P M R, is a citizen of the United  States  of  America.
    He has appealed against the decision of the Secretary of State dated  3
    September 2013 to refuse his application for leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.  His appeal was  allowed  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Malik) in a determination promulgated on 4 February  2014.   The
    Secretary of State now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.
     I shall hereafter refer to the appellant as  the  respondent  and  the
    respondent as the appellant (as they respectively appeared  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal).

2.   Both parties agree that the appellant's application could  not  succeed
    under the Immigration Rules because it failed to meet the  requirements
    of  E-LTRP2.1.   In  addition,  the  appellant  failed  to   meet   the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE because he  had  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom for less than twenty years and was over the age  of  18  years.
    The issue in the appeal  is  whether  the  judge  from  the  First-tier
    Tribunal should have left matters at that  point  and  whether  he  was
    right to (a) go on to consider the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds and
    (b) to allow the appeal on that ground.

3.   The grounds complain that the judge failed to follow  the  decision  of
    the Upper Tribunal in Gulshan  [2013]  UKUT  00640  (IAC).   The  judge
    failed to identify compelling or exceptional circumstances in the  case
    which would justify an Article 8 ECHR  analysis.   The  grounds  assert
    that the appellant's spouse had been able to cope for the  majority  of
    her life without the  appellant's  presence  with  her  in  the  United
    Kingdom and had assistance from social services and other agencies.

4.   The appellant is married to a British  citizen  (TR),  having  met  her
    online in March 2011.  He came to visit her in the  United  Kingdom  in
    August 2012 and remained for five months before returning to  the  USA.
    A week later, TR travelled to the USA and  the  parties  were  married.
    Both the appellant  and  his  wife  travelled  to  the  United  Kingdom
    together, the appellant on a visit visa.  During the currency  of  that
    visa, he applied for further leave to remain.  TR suffers  from  severe
    mental health problems including severe bulimia  and  major  depressive
    illness with suicidal tendencies.  The judge had before him a number of
    items of medical evidence which indicated that TR was at possible  risk
    of committing  suicide  if  her  husband  returned  to  the  USA  which
    indicated that the appellant's presence in the United Kingdom was "very
    positive" for TR.

5.   Having found that the appeal should be dismissed under the  Immigration
    Rules, Judge Malik wrote at [10],

         Whilst the appellant does  not  meet  the  requirements  under  the
         Rules, I have gone on to consider his family and private life under
         Article 8 of the ECHR.

6.   Mrs Pettersen, for the Secretary of State,  submitted  that  the  judge
    had failed to identify any  compelling  circumstances  which  justified
    considering the matter under Article 8.

7.   Dealing first with the question whether the judge was right  to  go  on
    to consider Article 8, I acknowledge that the decisions in Gulshan  and
    also Nagre [2013] EWHC  720  (Admin)  certainly  appear  to  impose  an
    intermediary test, between the dismissal of an Immigration Rules appeal
    and the possible consideration of Article 8 ECHR, which  the  judge  in
    this instance has not conducted.  However, whether that constitutes  an
    error of law such that the determination  should  be  set  aside  is  a
    different matter.  In MM [2014]  EWCA  Civ  985  the  Court  of  Appeal
    recently considered the various authorities  observing  as  follows  at
    [129]:

         Sales J's  decision  therefore  follows  the  logic  of  Laws  LJ's
         statements in [38]-[39] of AM(Ethiopia), analysed  above.  However,
         there is  a  difference  in  that  in  Nagre  the  new  rules  were
         themselves attempting to cover, generally, circumstances  where  an
         individual should be allowed to remain  in  the  UK  on  Article  8
         grounds; whereas in AM(Ethiopia) and in  the  present  appeals  the
         rule challenged stipulates a particular requirement that has to  be
         fulfilled before the applicant will be allowed to enter or  remain.
         The argument in each case is that it is that  specific  requirement
         that offends Article 8. Nagre does not add anything to the  debate,
         save for the statement that if a particular person is  outside  the
         rule  then  he  has  to  demonstrate,  as  a   preliminary   to   a
         consideration outside the rule, that he has an arguable  case  that
         there may be good grounds for granting leave to remain outside  the
         rules.  I  cannot  see  much  utility  in  imposing  this  further,
         intermediary, test. If the applicant cannot satisfy the rule,  then
         there either is or there is not a further  Article  8  claim.  That
         will have to be determined by the relevant decision-maker.

8.   Applying the principle enunciated in MM to the current appeal,  I  find
    that the judge did not err in law by failing  to  identify  exceptional
    compelling circumstances before going on to consider Article 8.  It  is
    quite clear that the judge considered that the  circumstances  in  this
    appeal were so compelling that he needed to consider them  to  complete
    his determination on all the relevant grounds of  appeal.   As  regards
    the analysis itself, I do not identify any error of law.  The judge has
    set out the jurisprudence accurately and has applied it to the facts as
    he found them.  He identified the negative impact which would be caused
    to TR and also TR's daughter by requiring the appellant  to  return  to
    the USA to make an out of country application for entry clearance.   He
    found that TR's ill health precluded her from joining the appellant  in
    the USA, even in the short term.  Medical  evidence  before  the  judge
    (which he accepted in its entirety) paints a very alarming  picture  of
    the possible impact which the appellant's removal would have  upon  TR.
    In the circumstances, I find that the judge reached a conclusion  which
    was open to him on the facts and which he  has  supported  by  adequate
    reasoning.  Accordingly, this appeal is dismissed.

DECISION

9.   This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 20 September 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

