
[pic]
IAC-YW-LM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/38241/2014
                                                             & IA/38245/2014

                             THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 9 November 2015                       |On 14 March 2016                    |
|And 24 February 2016                     |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                        TEMITOPE OLUWATOYIN SOYE (1)
                                  [A S] (2)
                                                                  Appellants


                                     and



                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Haji, instructed by Nathan Aaron solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Presenting Officer (9/11/15)
      Mr S Walker, Presenting Officer (24/2/16)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Geraint Jones QC promulgated on 14  April  2015  in
    which he  dismissed  their  appeals  under  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) regulations 2006 ("the  EEA  Regulations")  against  the
    decision of the respondent to refuse to issue them with residence cards
    as confirmation of their right of permanent  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom under the EEA regulations.

Appellants' case


 2. The first appellant is the mother of the  second  appellant.  Both  are
    citizens of Nigeria. The  first  appellant  has  lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom since at least 2006 and the second  appellant  has  lived  here
    since her birth in 2007.  On 14 May 2009, the first  applicant  married
    Ousmane Sady Ndiaye, a French Citizen at Brent Registry  Office.   That
    marriage was dissolved on 26 March 2015.

 3. The appellants' case is that prior  to  the  marriage  and  during  the
    marriage until it was dissolved, Mr Ndiaye had been  exercising  Treaty
    rights in the United Kingdom as a  self-employed  person  and  on  that
    basis, as they are the family  members  of  an  EEA  national  who  has
    resided in the United Kingdom in accordance with  the  EEA  Regulations
    for a continuous period of five years, they have acquired the right  of
    permanent residence pursuant to reg. 15 (1) of the EEA Regulations.  On
    that basis, their case is that they  are  entitled  under  reg.  17  to
    residence cards as confirmation of that status and on 14 July 2014 made
    the relevant application to the respondent.

The Respondent's Case

 4. The respondent's case is set out in the refusal letter of 24  September
    2014.  In summary, she was not satisfied by the material provided  that
    the Mr Ndiaye had been self-employed  or  otherwise  exercising  Treaty
    rights to cover any of the years in the period 16/01/2009 to 2014.

 5. The respondent considered that no valid application for leave to remain
    on the basis of article 8 of the Human Rights Convention had been  made
    and so, if she wished that to be  considered,  a  separate  application
    would need to be made.

The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The judge heard evidence from the first appellant and submissions  from
    her representative; the respondent was not represented.

 7. The judge found that:-

       i) there were no documents before him of a type he  would  ordinarily
          expect to find generated by an operating business [17];  that  the
          evidence supplied by  Vertice  Services  as  to  income  generated
          between 6 April 2014 and 30 September 2014 was unsatisfactory [18]-
          [20]; that the evidence of  tax  returns  and  National  Insurance
          Records did not show that Mr Ndiaye was  engaged  in  any  or  any
          meaningful self-employment, the sums earned being negligible [26],
          there being nothing suggestive of him  being  self-employed  as  a
          fashion designer; or, what kind of work or self-employment he  has
          undertaken from the end of fiscal year 2013/2014 [27];

      ii) although [28] there was some evidence  capable  of  leading  to  a
          conclusion that Mr Ndiaye had undertaken some very modest work, he
          was not satisfied that  he  could  be  characterised  as  a  self-
          employed person, the level of  the  earnings  being  trivial;  and
          thus, the requirement of reg.4 of the EEA regulations were not met
          [29]; and, on that basis the appeal under reg. 15 failed;

     iii) the first appellant did not come within re. 10 (5)  as  there  was
          insufficient evidence to show  that  Mr  Ndiaye  was  a  qualified
          person within the meaning of reg. 6 of the EEA Regulations;

      iv) although there was no oral argument with respect to article 8,  he
          should nonetheless consider that [33] and the  best  interests  of
          the second appellant [34]-[35]; but, he  was  not  satisfied  that
          requiring the appellants to depart from the United  Kingdom  would
          not be disproportionate [41],[42]

 8. The appellants sought permission to appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
    judge had erred in law:-

       i) in disregarding the claim that reg. 10 and  not  reg.  15  was  in
          issue in these appeals;

      ii) in assessing the evidence in an unfair  and  unreasonable  manner,
          relying on trivial differences in the evidence, and in applying to
          high a standard of proof;

     iii) in misdirecting himself as to the provisions  of  the  regulations
          and EU law as to the meaning of  self-employment, there  being  no
          evidence that Mr Ndiaye was not compliant  with  the  requirements
          for self-employment, thus not  having  regard  to  the  "purposive
          momentum" of the EEA regulations;

      iv) in failing to have proper regard to the interplay between the 2006
          Regulations and  Directive  2004/38;  and  that,  having  met  the
          requirements of reg. 10 (5) (d) (i), the first appellant's  rights
          of residence fell to be assessed on her  own  right  as  a  worker
          rather than on the basis of her ex-spouse's employment up  to  the
          dissolution of the marriage;

       v) in dismissing the appeal on human rights grounds

 9. On 10 August 2015, First-tier Tribunal Judge Ransley granted permission
    on all grounds.

The Hearing before the Upper Tribunal on 9 November 2015

10. Ms Haji accepted that confusion appeared to have arisen  from  reliance
    on reg.10, given that, on the appellants' case, the right of  permanent
    residence had accrued prior to the divorce. She accepted also  that  it
    would have been better had the bundle of evidence been  accompanied  by
    schedules indicating what had been earned and when;  and  grouping  the
    evidence by year.

11. Ms Haji submitted that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  had  misdirected
    himself  in  seeking  to  impose  on  the  appellants  requirements  to
    establish that Mr Ndiaye was self-employed over and above those set out
    in the EEA Regulations or European Law.

12. Ms Haji submitted that while it was clear that Mr Ndiaye had not earned
    enough to support himself and  his  family,  the  first  appellant  had
    worked as she was entitled to do; and, as it was not submitted that  Mr
    Ndiaye was self-sufficient, no arguments as to whether he could rely on
    the first appellant's income to demonstrate self-sufficiency arose, and
    thus the decision in Kuldip Singh [2015] EUECJ C-218/14.

13. Ms Holmes submitted that the judge had not misdirected himself, and had
    been entitled, on the material before him, to conclude that  Mr  Ndiaye
    had not been exercising Treaty rights for  the  required  period;  and,
    that in any event, any error was not material. She submitted also  that
    the evidence was simply insufficient to show self-employment during the
    relevant periods.

The Law

14. The central issue in these appeals  is  whether  Mr  Ndiaye  was  self-
    employed for the purposes of European  Law.   Self-employment  for  the
    purposes of the EEA Regulations is defined in reg.4 as follows:-

      (1) In these Regulations-
           (a) "worker" means a worker within the meaning of Article 45 of
      the treaty on the
           Functioning of the European Union;
           (b) "self-employed person" means a person who establishes
           himself in order to pursue activity as a self-employed person in
           accordance with Article 49 of the treaty on the Functioning of
           the European Union

15. Article 49 TFEU provides:

       Within the framework of the provisions set out below, restrictions on
       the freedom of establishment of nationals of a Member  State  in  the
       territory  of  another  Member  State  shall  be   prohibited.   Such
       prohibition shall also apply to restrictions  on  the  setting-up  of
       agencies, branches or subsidiaries by nationals of any  Member  State
       established in the territory of any Member State.
       Freedom of establishment shall include  the  right  to  take  up  and
       pursue activities as self-employed persons and to set up  and  manage
       undertakings, in particular companies or firms within the meaning  of
       the second paragraph of Article 54, under the conditions laid  down
       for  its  own  nationals  by  the  law  of  the  country  where  such
       establishment is effected, subject to the provisions of  the  Chapter
       relating to capital.

16. Ms Haji's submission is in effect, that all that is  required  is  that
    the  individual  establishes  himself,  that  is,  complies  with   the
    formalities and that there is, in effect, no continuing requirement  of
    economic activity; the historical fact of  having  established  oneself
    being sufficient.   I reject that proposition. Were  it  correct,  then
    there would be no need for the Citizenship Directive at art. 7  (3)  to
    provide for the self-employed who have ceased economic to  retain  that
    status in limited circumstances. Further, It is sufficiently clear from
    the case law of the CJEU, in particular Jany [2001] EUECJ C-268/99  and
    Deli�ge [200] EUECJ C-51/96 that there is a continuing  requirement  to
    be undertaking economic activity

17. It is also evident from the jurisprudence, and in particular from Jany,
    that, so far as is possible, the position of the self-employed is to be
    equated  with  workers,  the  difference  being  that  the  latter  are
    "subordinated" [34] , that is,  carrying  on  their  economic  activity
    under the direction and control of another.   It  is  the  quality  and
    extent of that economic activity which is in  issue,  not  that  it  is
    "work" as can be seen in Vatsouras [2009] C-22/08 which at [26] to [30]
    sets out a summary of the law:
      1. It must be pointed out in that regard that,  according  to  settled
         case-law, the concept of 'worker' within the meaning of Article  39
         EC has a specific Community meaning and  must  not  be  interpreted
         narrowly. Any person who pursues  activities  which  are  real  and
         genuine, to the exclusion of activities on such a small scale as to
         be regarded as purely marginal and ancillary, must be regarded as a
         'worker'. The essential feature of an employment  relationship  is,
         according to that case-law, that for a certain  period  of  time  a
         person performs services for and under  the  direction  of  another
         person in return for which he  receives  remuneration  (see,  inter
         alia, Case 66/85 Lawrie-Blum [1986] ECR 2121, paragraphs 16 and 17,
         and Case C-28/07 Petersen [2008] ECR I-0000, paragraph 45).
      1. Neither the origin of the funds from which the remuneration is paid
         nor  the  limited  amount  of  that  remuneration  can   have   any
         consequence in regard to whether or not the person  is  a  'worker'
         for the purposes of Community law (see Case 344/87  Bettray  [1989]
         ECR 1621, paragraph 15, and Case C-0/05 Mattern and Cikotic  [2006]
         ECR I-3145, paragraph 22).
      1. The fact that the income from employment is lower than the  minimum
         required for subsistence  does  not  prevent  the  person  in  such
         employment from being regarded as a 'worker' within the meaning  of
         Article 39 EC (see Case 53/81 Levin [1982] ECR 1035, paragraphs  15
         and 16, and Case C-17/93 Nolte [1995] ECR  I-4625,  paragraph  19),
         even  if  the  person  in  question  seeks   to   supplement   that
         remuneration by  other  means  of  subsistence  such  as  financial
         assistance drawn from the public funds of the  State  in  which  he
         resides (see Case 139/85 Kempf [1986] ECR 1741, paragraph 14).
      1. Furthermore, with regard to the duration of the  activity  pursued,
         the fact that employment is of short duration  cannot,  in  itself,
         exclude that employment from the scope of Article 39 EC (see Case C-
         3/90 Bernini [1992] ECR I-1071,  paragraph  16,  and  Case  C-13/01
         Ninni-Orasche [2003] ECR I-13187, paragraph 25).
      1. It follows  that,  independently  of  the  limited  amount  of  the
         remuneration and the short duration of the  professional  activity,
         it cannot be ruled out that that professional  activity,  following
         an overall  assessment  of  the  employment  relationship,  may  be
         considered by the national authorities as real and genuine, thereby
         allowing its holder to be granted the status of 'worker' within the
         meaning of Article 39 EC.

18. It is apparent from in particular at [27] and [28] that, the  level  of
    remuneration is not an important factor and is far  from  determinative
    of whether economic activity is genuine and real.

19. It is self-evident that there is a wide spectrum of  economic  activity
    between, for example, working 60 hours a week  and  activity  which  is
    only marginal or ancillary. As A-G Colomer observed in his  opinion  in
    Vatsouras at [26],  there  is  little  guidance  for  interpreting  the
    concept of 'marginal and ancillary work' but it is to be noted that  on
    O v Sari [2015] EUECJ C-432/14 at [24] - [27] the ECJ  did  not  reject
    the possibility that a contract of employment of 4  days  duration  was
    genuine and real, leaving the issue to be resolved  as  a  question  of
    fact by the referring  court.   What  is  "marginal  or  ancillary"  is
    primarily a question of fact for the referring Court - see Genc  [2010]
    EUECJ 14/09 at [29]-[33], albeit that  it  must  be  considered  within
    principles of European Law and given a wide  interpretation  so  as  to
    give effect to the freedom to move and reside in another member state.

20. There is in the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  no  express
    self-direction as to the law but it  is  sufficiently  clear  that  the
    judge considered  the  question  of  whether  the  self-employment  was
    genuine or real. It is, however, also evident from the determination at
    [21], [25] and [28] that the level of earnings was a significant factor
    taken into account in reaching the conclusion that Mr  Ndiaye  was  not
    self-employed. That was a clear error of law. Given the  evidence  that
    there was some level of self-employment  as  disclosed  in  returns  to
    HMRC, that error was clearly material insofar as there was evidence  of
    earnings up to and including fiscal years 2013/2014.

21.  While the judge may have been entitled to conclude that there  was  no
    evidence of earnings for the period from 5 April  2014,  there  was  no
    evident consideration of the position of Mr Ndiaye in terms of  reg.  5
    and reg.6 of the EEA Regulations as to whether  previous  status  as  a
    self-employed person had retained. Given that  it  needed  only  to  be
    shown that he had retained status until 14 May 2014 in  order  for  the
    appellants to have acquired the right of permanent residence, the error
    identified above at [20] is material to the outcome.

22. Turning to the first and fourth grounds of  appeal,  it  is  no  longer
    submitted by the appellants' that reg. 10 is relevant. It  is,  in  any
    event, difficult to understand why it is relevant, given  that  on  the
    appellants' case, the right of permanent residence accrued  before  the
    marriage was dissolved.  It would only be necessary to have  regard  to
    reg.10 if,  in  order  to  have  acquired  five  years  residence,  the
    appellants needed to take into account time accruing after the divorce.
    Neither of these grounds are thus made out.

23. In the light of my conclusions with respect to ground 3, ground 2 is no
    longer relevant. I do not, however,  consider  that  the  determination
    viewed as a whole indicates that  an  incorrect  burden  of  proof  was
    applied or that the assessment of the evidence was  per  se  unfair  or
    unreasonable. The judge was clearly entitled to note  that  the  bundle
    was not prepared in a helpful manner, and that  the  witness  statement
    was lacking in detail.  That said, the judge's concerns could have been
    expressed in  more  temperate  language,  and  what  is  said  at  [15]
    irrelevant. The issue was not in  dispute  and  the  language  used  is
    inappropriate.

24. It is not, however, arguable that there is any error  in  the  decision
    with respect  to  article  8.  There  is  no  decision  to  remove  the
    appellants, nor have they made a human rights claim. The issue was  not
    pursued before the First-tier Tribunal in  submissions,  as  the  judge
    noted. There is no indication that the respondent has served  a  notice
    pursuant to section 120 of the 2002 Act,  and  given  the  decision  in
    Amirteymour and others (EEA appeals; human rights) [2015] UKUT 466,  it
    is not arguable that the First-tier Tribunal (or  the  Upper  Tribunal)
    has jurisdiction to consider human rights arguments in an appeal  under
    the EEA Regulations to  refuse  residence  documents.  Any  error  with
    respect  to  consideration  of  article  8,  within  which  the  issues
    concerning section 55 of the UK Borders  Act  2009  would  need  to  be
    considered, could not therefore be material. That said, it follows that
    the findings of fact reached in respect of article 8 are a nullity.

25. It therefore follows that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  must
    be set aside insofar as it relates to the EEA Regulations  and  remade.
    The hearing was then adjourned until 24 February 2016.

    Remaking the decision

26. The first appellant attended and adopted her witness  statement.  There
    were no supplementary questions from Miss Haji and  Mr  Walker  elected
    not to ask any questions of the appellant.  Mr Walker accepted that the
    first appellant's husband had been  self-employed  and  that,  although
    this was at a relatively low level, nonetheless it was given  the  case
    law set out in the error of  law  decision,  sufficient  to  amount  to
    economic activity.

27. In light of these submissions and in light of the  evidence  which  has
    not been challenged, I am satisfied that Mr Ndiaye was  in  fact  self-
    employed at all material times and that his self-employment was neither
    marginal nor ancillary.

28. Accordingly for these reasons  I  am  satisfied  that  the  appellant's
    husband, had at all material times been a qualified person, before  and
    during the marriage. It follows that on that basis, the first appellant
    acquired the right of permanent residence on 14  May  2014.   As  I  am
    satisfied that as at that date the  appellant  acquired  the  right  of
    permanent residence it also follows that  her  daughter  also  acquired
    permanent residence at the same date.

29. I am therefore satisfied that the appellants are entitled to  residence
    cards confirming their right  of  permanent  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom and that is on the basis  that  they  have  fulfilled  all  the
    requirements of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 and accordingly I allow the appeal on that basis.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS


 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law, and I set it aside.

 2. I remake the decision by allowing  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 3. No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                       Date: 3 March 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

