
[pic]

Upper Tribunal         Appeal Number
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)        IA/38838/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard                   at                    Field                    House
                                             Determination promulgated
On 11 June 2014        On 12 June 2014

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                               Farouk Benakila
                          (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                   Respondent
Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms. A. Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:            Mr. B. Halligan of Counsel.

                   DETERMINATION AND REASONS: ERROR OF LAW

   1. This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Aujla promulgated on 18 March  2014,  allowing  Mr  Farouk  Benakila's
      appeal against a decision of the Respondent dated 4 September 2013  to
      remove him from the UK. The Judge allowed the appeal on the basis that
      the decision was not in accordance with the law, and  to  the  limited
      extent that the case was remitted to the Secretary of  State  for  the
      Home Department for further consideration and a  fresh  decision  (see
      paragraphs 16 and 17 of the determination).


   2. Although before me the Secretary of State  is  the  appellant  and  Mr
      Benakila is the respondent, for  the  sake  of  consistency  with  the
      proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter refer  to
      Mr Benakila as the  Appellant  and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
      Respondent.


Background

   3. The Appellant is a national of Algeria born on 24  December  1970.  He
      claims to have arrived in the UK on 15 May 1998. On 29  June  2012  he
      applied for indefinite leave to remain in the UK pursuant to  the  so-
      called long residence rule (paragraph 276B of the  Immigration  Rules)
      on the basis that he had been  continuously  resident  in  the  United
      Kingdom for at least 14 years.


   4. His application was rejected as invalid and returned on 28 August 2012
      because the specified fee had not been paid. It is accepted  that  the
      Appellant's representatives  enclosed  an  unsigned  cheque  with  the
      application.


   5. The Appellant's representatives forwarded, again, the  application  to
      the Respondent under cover of letter dated 31 August 2012 enclosing  a
      duly signed cheque. In due course this  application  was  accepted  as
      valid, treated as having been made on 3 October 2012, and considered.


   6. However, in the meantime on 9 July 2012  the  Immigration  Rules  were
      amended  and  the  Rule  in  respect  of  14  years   long   residence
      (276B(i)(b)) deleted.


   7. The Respondent considered the Appellant's application  with  reference
      to paragraph 276ADE and  Appendix  FM  of  the  Rules  as  they  stood
      following the amendments of 9 July 2012, and refused  the  Appellant's
      application for reasons set out in  a  'reasons  for  refusal'  letter
      dated 29 August 2013. A decision to remove the Appellant was  made  in
      consequence on 4 September 2013, and served on 6 September 2013.


   8. The Appellant appealed to the IAC.


   9. The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal  for
      reasons set out in his determination: see further below.


  10. The Respondent sought permission to appeal which was granted by First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Lambert on 23 April 2014.


Error of Law

  11. It is evident from paragraphs 11-15 of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's
      determination that he dealt with the appeal by way of consideration of
      a preliminary issue in respect of the validity of the application made
      on 29 June 2012 and the lawfulness of its rejection on 28 August 2012.
      The Judge reached the  conclusion  that  the  decision  that  was  the
      subject of the appeal - the removal decision of 4 September 2013 - was
      not  in  accordance  with  the  law  because  it  was  based  on   the
      Respondent's consideration of the Appellant by reference to the  Rules
      as they stood post- 9 July 2012, whereas - as the Judge  found  -  the
      Respondent should have considered the Appellant by  reference  to  the
      Rules as they stood pre- 9 July 2012.


  12. The Judge concluded: "The Appellant's application remains outstanding,
      to be considered on the basis it was made on 29 June 2012"  (paragraph
      15).


  13. The Judge's reasons for this conclusion are indicated at paragraph  13
      where he essentially adopts the submissions recorded at  paragraph  12
      in respect of the Respondent's "policy of evidential flexibility". The
      key passages in paragraph 13 in respect of the decision not being  'in
      accordance with the law' are these:

"The  Respondent  had  failed  to  follow  her  own  policy  in  respect  of
      evidential flexibility which was subsequently  incorporated  into  the
      Immigration Rules and appears at paragraph 245AA"; and

"The Respondent's decision was therefore not  in  accordance  with  the  law
      firstly, because of  her  failure  to  follow  her  own  policy,  and,
      secondly, on account of her failure to consider the application on the
      basis that it was made on 29 June 2012, not 03 October 2012".


  14. I have no hesitation in concluding  that  the  Judge's  reasoning  was
      wrong in law. The Respondent's  evidential  flexibility  policy  is  a
      policy that was introduced in respect of applications under the Points
      Based System and related to  defects  or  omissions  in  the  evidence
      submitted in support of such applications. There is nothing in any  of
      the wording in the policy document (which may be found annexed to  the
      decision in Rodriguez  [2013]  UKUT  00042  (IAC))  which  relates  to
      defects or omissions in respect of the paying of fees - far less  does
      Judge Aujla identify anything relevant in the policy or indicate why a
      policy in respect of PBS evidence should be extended to fees for other
      applications.


  15. Furthermore, paragraph 245AA of the Immigration Rules - which  in  any
      event was not in force at the time the Appellant attempted  to  submit
      his application on 29 June 2012, or when the Respondent rejected it as
      invalid on 28 August 2012 - relates to the failure to submit specified
      documents pursuant to Part 6A or any of the appendices referred to  in
      Part 6A of the Rules, which relate to applications  under  the  Points
      Based System and so was of no analogous application  to  the  type  of
      application  made  by  the  Appellant.  Indeed  quite  the   contrary:
      paragraph 245AA underscores that the submissions advanced on behalf of
      the Appellant were misconceived.


  16. Mr Halligan, who did not appear before the First-tier Tribunal, sought
      to advance alternative submissions,  but  none  of  these  'save'  the
      reasoning of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.


  17. Mr Halligan's submissions focused on  the  contents  of  the  covering
      letter dated 31 August 2012 sent on the Appellant's  behalf  following
      the rejection of the first application, and enclosing the  application
      again, together with supporting documents, and a  signed  cheque.  The
      letter requested that the Respondent treat the application  as  having
      been made 'on-time':

"We should  be  grateful  if  you  could  treat  and  process  our  client's
      application as an on-time application as our client's application  had
      been validly submitted on 01 July 2012, which you received on 02  July
      2012."


  18. It is of  course  the  case  that  the  application  was  not  validly
      submitted on 01 July 2012 for the very reason that  the  fee  was  not
      paid.


  19. Be that as it may, I can see nothing in  this  mere  request  for  the
      Respondent to overlook the invalidity of the initial application,  and
      to go behind her decision to treat it as  invalid,  that  changes  the
      nature of that invalid application, or requires  that  the  now  valid
      application be backdated to the date of the invalid application.


  20. The matter is really  very  simple.  The  Appellant  made  an  invalid
      application - invalid because  of  the  failure  to  pay  a  fee:  see
      paragraph 34A(ii) and 34C of the Rules. This  is  entirely  consistent
      with the contents of the letter of acknowledgement dated 4 July  2012,
      which itself draws a distinction between  missing  documentation,  and
      any issue over the fee:

"If there is any problem with validity of the application, such  as  missing
      documentation, a caseworker will write to you as soon as  possible  to
      advise what action you need to take to rectify the problem.  If  there
      is an issue with the fee you  have  paid,  your  application  will  be
      deemed to be invalid and returned to you as soon as possible by  post.
      You will be advised on what action you need to take to  make  a  valid
      application."


  21. The decision to reject the application of 29 June 2012 as  invalid  is
      not itself an immigration decision amenable to appeal. It has not been
      challenged by way of judicial review. Even the  request  contained  in
      the letter of 31 August  2012  does  not  assert  in  terms  that  the
      decision was in error: I am not prepared to read the reference to  the
      earlier application having been 'validly submitted'  as  taking  issue
      with the Respondent's reasoning; indeed the tone of the letter and the
      request for 'backdating' acknowledges the difficulty  that  arises  by
      reason  of  the  failure  to  enclose  the  due  fee.  In   all   such
      circumstances the decision of 28 August 2012  to  reject  the  initial
      attempted application stands  as  a  valid  and  lawful  decision.  It
      follows that the subsequent application was appropriately  treated  as
      made after 9 July 2012, and appropriately considered  under  the  then
      applicable  Rules  i.e.  paragraph  276ADE  and   Appendix   FM.   The
      Respondent's decision to deal with the application  in  this  way  was
      entirely in accordance with the law.


  22. I find no merit in Mr Halligan's submissions in this regard.


  23. Mr Halligan also sought to suggest that  in  circumstances  where  the
      Appellant could no longer meet the requirements of the  Rules  by  the
      date of  the  resubmitted  application,  the  Respondent  should  have
      considered returning his application and cheque. I find this to  be  a
      submission wholly without merit. In the first instance it  presupposes
      a  consideration  of  the  substance  of  an  application   before   a
      consideration  of  the  validity  of  application.  Moreover,  it   is
      tantamount  to  suggesting  that  where  a  hopeless  application   is
      submitted, the Respondent should  advise  an  applicant  as  such  and
      return the application without considering it further  or  determining
      it. Yet further, this submission gives no consideration to  where,  if
      it is right, it would leave the Appellant either in the appeal process
      or otherwise: it is premised on the basis that the Appellant could not
      succeed on his application, and thereby could not succeed on an appeal
      (indeed should not even have been given an appealable  decision),  and
      accordingly  only  leaves  any  issue  in  respect  of   whether   the
      application fee should be restored to him.


  24. In all the circumstances I find that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      made a fundamental error of law, and his decision must be  set  aside.
      Further, there is no basis to remake the decision in the same terms on
      the basis of the alternative submissions advanced by Mr  Halligan,  or
      otherwise.


Future Conduct of the Appeal

  25. Because the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  determined  the  appeal  on  a
      preliminary issue, he did not hear evidence from the Appellant and did
      not otherwise  descend  to  a  consideration  of  the  merits  of  the
      Appellant's case.


  26. As such the Judge's error of approach has meant that the Appellant has
      not had a full hearing of his appeal, and has not had the  opportunity
      to advance the merits of his case - which, given that it is  suggested
      by Mr Halligan that he cannot meet the requirements of the Rules, will
      likely involve a consideration of Article 8 of the  ECHR  pursuant  to
      the guidance in Gulshan and Nagre.


  27. In this context, as I observed  at  the  hearing,  even  if  paragraph
      276B(i)(b) does not apply, it is open to the Appellant to advance  the
      circumstance of the error of his representatives in  failing  to  sign
      the cheque sent with his  initial  attempted  application  -  and  the
      resulting loss of the opportunity to be considered under the  14  year
      rule through no apparent fault  of  his  own  -  as  a  matter  to  be
      considered in the context of Article 8. Whether, and to  what  extent,
      this should sound favourably in any proportionality balancing exercise
      will be a matter for the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  who  rehears  his
      appeal, and is not a matter for me to make any further comment upon.


  28. The parties agreed that no specific further directions  were  required
      in the appeal.


Decision

  29. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contained  an  error  of
      law and is set aside.


  30. The decision in the appeal is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, before any judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Aujla,
      to be re-listed on the first available date.


  31. No further directions are required.




Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     11 June 2014
