
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38867/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 21 July 2014                               |On 1st Aug 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and


                            MUHAMMAD NOMAN TARIQ

                                                                    Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Claimant: no appearance


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1.  The  Secretary  of  State  appeals   with   permission   against   the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge P J Clarke promulgated on 15
    May 2014 in which he allowed the claimant's appeal against the decision
    of the Secretary of State made on 5 September 2013 to refuse  to  issue
    him a  residence  card  as  confirmation  as  his  right  of  permanent
    residence in the United Kingdom as the dependant of his father, Mehmood
    Tariq, a citizen of Netherlands.   The  claimant's  case  is  that  his
    father has been living and working in the United  Kingdom  continuously
    since 1 July 2004 although with some absences in  2005.   The  claimant
    joined him here as did his wife but she died in 2007.  The sponsor  was
    in May 2012 convicted of drugs related offences and released  in  March
    2014.   It  appears  that  his  appeal  against  the  deportation   was
    successful.

 2. The claimant's case is that as the minor dependant of an  EEA  national
    who had been exercising treaty rights  for  a  period  of  five  years,
    during which they had both lived in the United Kingdom, he was entitled
    to a residence card as confirmation of that right.

 3. The Secretary of State refused the application on the basis that it was
    not established that  the  sponsor  was  a  qualified  person  for  the
    relevant five year period.

 4. On appeal Judge Clarke found:-

      a) that the sponsor was not a credible witness [12]  and  he  was  not
         satisfied that he had been a qualified person  for  the  five  year
         period before his arrest in 2011;

      b) that he was not satisfied in the absence of more evidence than that
         that had been produced to him that the  sponsor  was  currently  in
         employment [16] and thus was not satisfied that  the  claimant  was
         entitled to a derivative right of residence pursuant  to  paragraph
         15(a)  of  the  EEA  Regulations;  that  he  was  obliged  in   the
         circumstances to consider human rights issues [20]  and  found  the
         claimant satisfied the requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
         Immigration Rules [20];

      c) that the appeal was to be allowed on human rights grounds.

 5. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds that:-



      a) that the judge had  materially  misdirected  himself  in  law  with
         respect to paragraph 276ADE as he had not mentioned  or  considered
         all the requirements of the relevant sub-Sections as he had  failed
         to consider paragraph 276ADE(iv) which  required  him  to  consider
         whether it would be reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the
         United Kingdom;

      b) that it would not be unreasonable to expect the claimant  to  leave
         the United Kingdom given that he is an adult who is able to lead an
         independent life, could return to Pakistan and make an  application
         to return.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Bartlett on 3 June 2014.

 7. There is no cross-appeal nor any response pursuant to Rule 24 from  the
    claimant.

 8. When the matter came before me there was no appearance on behalf of the
    claimant.  Upon enquiries being made, I received a letter from  Stanley
    Richards Solicitors, advising that they were no longer representing the
    appellant, attaching a copy of a letter from MA Consultants of 145 Alum
    Rock Road, Birmingham to the effect that they had  been  instructed  by
    the claimant to take over conduct of his case.   That  letter  requests
    that they forward a complete file of papers concluding:

         "Please note that our client doesn't have much time for his  appeal
         submission and he kindly requests that you forward  all  the  above
         documents asap".

 9. The natural inference to be drawn from this letter is that the claimant
    and MA Consultants were aware of the  hearing  on  21  July  2014,  the
    hearing notice having been sent out on 16 June 2014.

10. There is no explanation from MA Consultants for their failure to attend
    and I note that at no stage has the claimant  given  an  address  other
    than that of his former representatives.

11.  In  the  circumstances,   I   am   satisfied   that   the   claimant's
    representatives had been given proper notice of the appeal and that  it
    would be appropriate to proceed in his absence and in  the  absence  of
    representation from him.

12. I heard brief submissions from Mr Tarlow who accepted that the  grounds
    did contain an error in that the claimant is aged  17  and  is  not  an
    adult.

13. Paragraph 276 ADE of the Immigration  Rules  provides,  so  far  as  is
    relevant:-


      276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant  for  leave  to
      remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at  the  date
      of application, the applicant:


      ...

      (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the UK
      for at least 7 years (discounting any period of imprisonment)  and  it
      would not be reasonable to  expect  the  applicant  to  leave  the  UK
      [emphasis added]; or

      ...


14. It is clear  that  in  purporting  to  allow  the  appeal  pursuant  to
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules that Judge  Clarke  erred  in
    failing to make any finding about whether or not it would be reasonable
    to expect the claimant to leave the United  Kingdom.  He  was,  as  the
    grounds aver, under a duty to consider whether the  applicant  met  all
    the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(iv)

15. On that basis  and  in  his  failure  to  do  so,  it  is  evident  the
    determination involved the making of an error of law  clearly  material
    to the outcome.

16. Given that the only basis on which the judge  considered  the  decision
    was not in accordance with Article 8 arises from his finding  that  the
    applicant  met  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE,  it  is   not
    sufficiently or adequately reasoned, and so that finding is unsafe  and
    must be set aside.

17. In the circumstances, it is necessary to remake the  decision.   I  was
    satisfied that I could do so without the need to  adjourn  the  hearing
    as, on the basis of Judge  Clarke's  findings  of  fact,  the  claimant
    cannot meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE.

18. The claimant has been present in the United Kingdom as the dependant of
    an EEA national.  At no time has he been granted leave to remain in the
    United Kingdom.  A stay in this country under the  EEA  Regulations  is
    not leave to remain under the  Immigration  Rules  or  the  Immigration
    Acts, and so it appears he has never been granted  leave  to  enter  or
    remain within the meaning of the Immigration Acts or Immigration Rules.

19. Paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules requires an  applicant  under
    the age of 18 to have spent a continuous period of seven years  in  the
    United  Kingdom.   The  "continuous  residence"  for  the  purposes  of
    paragraph 276ADE means

         "Residence in the United Kingdom for an unbroken  period,  and  for
         these purposes, the period should not be considered  to  have  been
         broken where an applicant is absent from the United Kingdom  for  a
         period of six months or less or at any one time, provided that  the
         applicant in question had existing limited leave to enter or remain
         upon their departure and return,  but  to  be  considered  to  have
         broken if the ....".

20.  "Lived  continuously"  means  "continuous  residence"  by  virtue   of
    paragraph 276A(c).

21. Accordingly, as it was found that the applicant  had  left  the  United
    Kingdom at various times during his time  here,  he  cannot  have  been
    continuously resident for a period of seven years prior to the date  of
    application and thus does not meet the requirements of the  Immigration
    Rules.

22. Whilst I accept that the claimant has lived in the United Kingdom for a
    substantial  period,  he  does  not  meet  the  requirements   of   the
    Immigration Rules.

23. Further, as this decision is to be promulgated after 28 July 2014, I am
    required by Section 117A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    to apply Section 117B and C of  that  Act.   Section  117B  has  little
    relevance here given it is not in dispute  that  the  applicant  speaks
    English and where his father is an EEA national.  The  father  has  the
    right to seek working here but as Judge Clarke found  that  the  father
    was not exercising treaty rights, it does not necessarily  follow  that
    it is unreasonable to require the claimant and his  father  to  go  and
    live in the Netherlands or Pakistan and no evidence  has  been  adduced
    before me to say why they should not be expected to do so.

24. I am of course conscious that there is nothing to stop  the  claimant's
    father from obtaining employment and thus, if he is  exercising  treaty
    rights, the claimant cannot be removed.

25. Accordingly, for these reasons, I find that the claimant has failed  to
    satisfy me that his removal would be in breach of his  rights  pursuant
    to Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.  I therefore  dismiss  the
    appeal on all grounds.


SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

   1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making  of  an
      error of law and I set it aside.


   2. I remake the decision by dismissing the appeal on all grounds.



Signed                                  Date 1 August 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul



