
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
Appeal Number: IA387462014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:  Manchester                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 27th May 2016                             |On : 16th June 2016          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Nahida Khatoon
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety,  Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Patel, KG Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of India born on the 23rd  May  1977.   On
    the 14th April 2015 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Davies) allowed  her
    appeal against a decision to refuse to vary her leave to remain and  to
    remove her from the United Kingdom under s47  of  the  Nationality  and
    Immigration Act 1999.  The Secretary of State  now  her  permission  to
    appeal against that decision.





    The Matter in Issue

 2. The question raised in this appeal is whether the  First-tier  Tribunal
    was entitled to allow as it did Ms Khatoon's  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds. She could not qualify for leave to remain as  a  spouse  under
    the immigration rules and the Secretary of State now contends that  the
    appeal could only be allowed in very limited circumstances,  which  the
    First-tier Tribunal failed  to  identify.  Reliance  is  placed  on  SS
    (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387.




    The Factual Matrix


 3. The undisputed facts are that Ms Khatoon married her British husband in
    April 1996. On the 13th November 1996 she  was  granted  a  visa  as  a
    spouse (with reference to paragraph 281 of the  'old  Rules')  and  she
    came to live in the United Kingdom with him.  Sometime  thereafter  she
    was granted indefinite leave to remain.   Her first child was  born  in
    the UK in 1997.  The family were supported by her  husband  who  worked
    for HSBC.


 4. In 2001 HSBC offered to transfer Ms Khatoon's  husband  to  the  United
    Arab Emirates.  The family moved to Dubai. In 2002 their  second  child
    was born. In 2004 her husband left HSBC and set  up  his  own  property
    business.   Their third child was born in 2006.  In 2008  the  property
    market crashed and Ms Khatoon's husband "lost everything". Although  he
    tried for a period to re-coup his losses, the family decided that their
    only option was to return to the UK.  It was  at  this  point  that  Ms
    Khatoon came to understand that her ILR had lapsed because she had been
    out of the  United  Kingdom  for  more  than  two  years.  She  made  a
    successful application for a multiple entry visit visa and  the  family
    all came back to the  country  in  August  2013.     In  February  2014
    (before she had overstayed her six months maximum permitted  stay)  she
    went back to Dubai, and after a week re-entered the United  Kingdom  in
    accordance with the terms of her visit visa.

 5. Ms Khatoon made an application for leave  to  remain  on  human  rights
    grounds on the 18th August 2014, just a  few  days  before  her  second
    period of six months' visitors leave came to an end.



    The Secretary of State's Decision

 6. The application was refused by way of  letter  dated  the  6th  October
    2014.   Ms Khatoon could not meet  the  'eligibility'  requirements  in
    Appendix FM because she was a visitor.  There  would  therefore  be  no
    consideration of paragraph EX.1 since the application fell at the first
    hurdle. The author of the refusal gave consideration to  whether  there
    were any exceptional circumstances such that leave  should  be  granted
    'outside of the Rules'.   Regard was had to the fact that Ms  Khatoon's
    three British children were now all living  in  the  UK  and  attending
    school here, but the author concluded: "you would be returning to India
    with your children and would be able to support them whilst they became
    used to living there and enjoying their  full  rights  as  citizens  of
    India.....you and your children would return to India as a family  unit
    and continue to enjoy your family life together".




    The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal


 7. Ms Khatoon appealed and on the 14th April 2015 the appeal  came  before
    Judge M Davies in Manchester.  Ms Khatoon and her husband both attended
    and gave oral evidence.   The  Presenting  Officer  was  Mr  Hunt.  The
    Record of Proceedings is brief, no doubt for  the  reason  recorded  in
    clear terms:


         "Mr H does not wish to cross examine either the A  or  her  husband
         and simply relies on the refusal"


 8. The First-tier Tribunal went on to find that the Secretary of State had
    failed to consider the background in this case, including the fact that
    she had previously held ILR.  Given that background it would be "wholly
    unjust"  to  expect  her  to  return  to  India  with  her  family   or
    alternatively to separate her from her family in  order  to  travel  to
    India alone in order to make an application for entry  clearance.   The
    Tribunal had regard to evidence  before  it  which  indicated  that  Ms
    Khatoon's husband was able to meet the financial requirements  set  out
    in the Immigration Rules.  There would be an  "unjustifiable  hardship"
    to the family if the decision was to stand. If she had to  go  back  to
    India there would be a "substantial delay" before she could rejoin  her
    children and husband, and no legitimate  purpose  would  be  served  by
    requiring her to do so. Having then set out the  Razgar  framework  for
    consideration of Article 8 outside of the rules, and  directing  itself
    to the principles set out is s117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002, the Tribunal allowed the appeal.




    The Secretary of State's Appeal

 9. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal are that  the  Tribunal  has
    used Article 8 as a "general dispensing power" and  that  it  erred  in
    concluding, without an evidential basis for doing so, that there  would
    be a "substantial delay" if Ms Khatoon were to travel to India and  re-
    apply for entry as a spouse. Mr McVeety placed reliance on  SS  (Congo)
    and the decision in R (on the application of Chen) v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department (Appendix FM - Chikwamba - temporary separation
    - proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC). He submitted that there
    was no basis upon which the Tribunal could have  concluded  that  there
    would be a substantial delay and  that  the  proper  disposal  of  this
    matter turned on whether it was proportionate to expect Ms  Khatoon  to
    travel to India without her family and make a  proper  application  for
    leave to enter as a spouse.




    My Findings


10. When the  matter  came  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  it  was  the
    Secretary of State's case that the entire family should go to India and
    live there with Ms Khatoon. The refusal  letter  points  out  that  the
    children would be able to attend school there  and  "enjoy  their  full
    rights as citizens of India".    Although  not  now  relevant  I  would
    observe that this was a  wholly  misconceived  approach.  The  children
    could not enjoy citizen rights in India for the simple reason that they
    are not in fact nationals of that country.  Nor would they be  entitled
    to such unless they renounced their British citizenship, India applying
    a prohibition on dual nationality. This was the  Secretary  of  State's
    case before the Tribunal. It is clear from the Record  of  Proceedings,
    and indeed the determination, that the HOPO on the day did not seek  to
    advance  any  alternative  case  (nor  arguably  any  case   at   all).
    Specifically there was no attempt to persuade the  Tribunal  that  this
    appeal should be dismissed applying Chen.


11. It is therefore somewhat surprising that the  Secretary  of  State  now
    appeals on the grounds that the Tribunal erred in its consideration  of
    that very same question.  The  Secretary  of  State,  having  lost  her
    appeal on the matters that she raised, now seeks to argue the  case  on
    an entirely different basis.   I am not  therefore  minded  to  address
    Chen at all, but for the sake of completeness I do so.

12. Complaint is made that there  was  no  evidential  foundation  for  the
    finding that there would be a substantial delay. Although  he  did  not
    have any evidence to hand Mr McVeety submitted that checks  could  have
    been undertaken with the relevant visa post and that  they  might  have
    shown settlement visas being issued  in  as  little  as  a  few  weeks.
    Setting aside the speculative  nature  of  that  argument,  I  find  as
    follows. This appeal  concerned,  at  its  heart,  the  impact  of  the
    decision on three British children. These were children who had already
    been uprooted from their home in the UAE and had  had  to  readjust  to
    life in the UK. It was not in issue that their mother was  the  primary
    carer. The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal indicated that their
    father was working, and also that he was suffering from depression,  no
    doubt as a consequence of having "lost everything".    These  were  the
    matters which led to the First-tier Tribunal's  conclusion  that  there
    would be "unjustifiable hardship" for the children to be separated from
    their mother. It mattered not whether the delay was  of  "only"  a  few
    weeks. There would be uncertainty about whether she could come back  at
    all, and this would of course be stressful for  the  family.  In  those
    circumstances any period of time would be considered  "substantial"  by
    the family  themselves.  The  Tribunal  was  not  making  an  objective
    assessment in the absence of evidence; it was making a point about  how
    the subjective impact of the separation.  It was  a  finding  that  the
    Tribunal was entitled to reach on the evidence before it.

13. As to the ground that  the  Tribunal  used  Article  8  as  a  "general
    dispensing power" it is perhaps clear from the foregoing that I do  not
    find this to be made out. Appendix FM is not a complete code. There  is
    for instance no provision for a married mother to seek to remain in the
    UK as a parent, the Rules for parents being confined to those who  have
    sole caring responsibility. This is  an  obvious  omission.   The  best
    interests, and Article 8 family lives of children, plainly turn on  the
    parent who is their  primary  carer  (particularly  where  their  other
    parent might be largely absent because he works, or is suffering from a
    mental illness).  There can therefore be no rational argument that  the
    Tribunal was not entitled to proceed to consider this  matter  'outside
    of the Rules'.   The Tribunal did not treat Article  8  as  a  "general
    dispensing power". It looked at the facts, considered  the  submissions
    made by the Secretary of State (confined to  the  refusal  letter)  and
    reached a decision open to it on the evidence.



    Decisions

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain any error such
    that it should be set aside. The decision is upheld.


15. I was  not  asked  to  make  a  direction  for  anonymity  and  in  the
    circumstances I see no reason to do so.






                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce

                               10th June 2016
