
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38999/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th August 2015                  |On 3rd September 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                             mr gurjotdeep singh
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No attendance
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of  India  born  on  6th  March  1977.   The
    Appellant claimed to have arrived in the United  Kingdom  hidden  in  a
    lorry on 3rd February 2001 and two days thereafter claimed asylum.  His
    application for asylum was refused on 13th February  2001,  his  appeal
    dismissed on 8th February 2002 and his appeal rights  became  exhausted
    on 5th April 2002.  The Appellant thereafter became an overstayer.   It
    was not until 19th May 2014 that an application for indefinite leave to
    remain outside the Immigration Rules.  The application was  refused  by
    Notice of Refusal dated 8th October 2014.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Suffield-Thompson sitting  at  Newport  on  20th  January
    2015.   In  a  determination  promulgated  on  27th  January  2015  the
    Appellant's  appeal  was  allowed  under  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention of Human Rights.  The Secretary of State lodged  Grounds  of
    Appeal to the Upper Tribunal on 3rd February 2015.  Those grounds noted
    that the Appellant had a Sponsor who had two children one of  whom  was
    the biological child of the Appellant.  It was noted  that  the  family
    were Indian nationals and that none of the family had any  legal  right
    to be in the UK and that the appeal was put forward on the basis  of  a
    claim pursuant to Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.

 3. On 17th March 2015 Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Levin  granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge Levin noted that the judge's  decision  is
    recorded at paragraph 13 of her decision  to  allow  the  Appellant  to
    assist the Sponsor by interpreting the questions for her albeit into  a
    simplified  form  of  English  arguably  amounted   to   a   procedural
    irregularity constituting an error of law.   Further  it  was  arguable
    that the judge's findings at paragraph 35  of  her  decision  that  the
    Sponsor was at risk of persecution in India  by  reason  of  an  honour
    killing were inadequately reasoned and speculative.  Judge  Levin  also
    considered that it was further arguable that the judge had erred in law
    by failing to have regard to the public interest considerations set out
    in Section 117B of the 2002 Act and by failing to weigh up  the  public
    interest in  the  Appellant's  removal  in  circumstances  against  the
    interference caused thereby to private and family life where neither he
    nor any member of his family in the UK has any legal right to remain.

 4. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is material error of law.  I note that this is  an
    appeal by the Secretary of State but  for  the  purpose  of  continuity
    about the appeal process Mr Singh is described herein as the  Appellant
    and the Secretary of State is the Respondent.  The Secretary  of  State
    appears by her Home Office Presenting  Officer  Mr  Whitwell.   Despite
    allowing a considerable period of time to elapse after  the  due  start
    time for the appeal neither the Appellant nor his legal representatives
    attended.  I was satisfied from consideration  of  the  file  that  the
    Appellant had been properly served  with  notice  of  hearing  and  the
    appeal proceeded in his absence.

Preliminary Issue

 5. Mr Whitwell sought to adduce in evidence two documents  which  had  not
    been before the First-tier Tribunal.  The first was an attendance  note
    by the representative who attended before the First-tier  Tribunal  and
    the second was case law in that he sought to rely on the  authority  of
    Dube (ss.117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 00090 (IAC).  I agreed to the admission
    of these documents into the proceedings.  Mr  Whitwell  relied  on  the
    Grounds of Appeal.  However his principal thrust was that the judge had
    failed to take into account  the  provisions  of  Section  117  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 when there was requirement
    both under the Statute and supported by case law for her to do so.   He
    submitted that that failure alone rendered  the  decision  unsafe.   In
    addition he submitted that the reasoning with regard to the effect upon
    the  Appellant's  private  life  was  inadequate  but  that   as   well
    constituted a material error of law.  Further -  albeit  that  he  uses
    this as his last argument rather than his first -  he  points  out  the
    procedural irregularity that took place in the proceedings in that  the
    judge allowed the Appellant's partner to act as interpreter in spite of
    objection by the Home Office representative and relies on extracts from
    the attendance note of the HOPO whereby complaints  were  made  to  the
    judge, firstly  that  the  partner  was  giving  evidence  rather  than
    interpreting and secondly that she was leading  the  Appellant  in  his
    question and answers when that was completely inappropriate  to  do  so
    even in the more informal atmosphere of a Tribunal appeal.

 6. In all the circumstances Mr Whitwell submits that there are substantial
    material errors of law and he asked me to set aside the decision and to
    remit it back to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.

The Law

 7.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 8. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

 9. It is not the role of the Upper  Tribunal  to  rehear  the  proceedings
    unless there have been specific directions to  that  effect.   In  this
    matter the Appellant albeit that he was successful  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal has failed to attend as have his  legal  representatives.
    Submissions are consequently one-sided but I record that I  have  given
    due and full consideration to the history of this matter including  the
    findings made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  Having done this I  am
    satisfied that there are material errors of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  It is clear that the judge was  sympathetic
    to the position of the Appellant and his family and I note at paragraph
    28 she would have made a different assessment had the Appellant been  a
    single man but has based her decision on the basis that  the  Appellant
    has two children and a partner and he has  chosen  to  enter  a  family
    situation that she contends  is  frowned  upon  in  his  culture.   The
    Appellant has on any analysis an  appalling  immigration  history.   He
    overstayed by some twelve years following the exhaustion of his  appeal
    rights in 2002 prior to making any subsequent application.   Of  course
    the Secretary of State can be criticised for having taken no  steps  in
    the interim to remove him.  However there  is  a  requirement  upon  an
    Immigration Judge to give due and proper consideration to  the  factors
    within Section  117  and  in  particular  the  Appellant's  immigration
    history and the requirements of public interest.  It is not  in  itself
    an error of law to fail to refer to  Section  117A-117D  considerations
    providing the judge has applied the test that he or she was supposed to
    apply according to its terms; what  matters  is  substance,  not  form.
    That is the rationale to be found in Dube  (ss.117A-117D)  [2015]  UKUT
    00090 (IAC).  The judge in this instant case has completely  failed  to
    apply that test.  I do not criticise the judge for not making reference
    to Dube after all the decision was not published until a week after her
    determination but the principles in Dube  held  good  before  then  and
    should have been applied and there is thus a material error of  law  in
    the determination.

10. In addition I agree with the Secretary of State's submission that there
    is inadequate reasoning in the judge's analysis of paragraph 35 of  her
    determination and that she has based  her  assessment  on  supposition,
    that she has not explored or given any written consideration,  how  the
    family might be in danger if returned  to  India,  nor  has  the  judge
    considered relocation, nor made any finding on any other Article  other
    than Article 8.  I note that the suggestion regarding an honour killing
    were not part of the Grounds of Appeal for the First-tier Tribunal  and
    that they only presented themselves during examination-in-chief.

11. Finally I have had the opportunity to give  due  consideration  to  the
    attendance note provided by the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer.   I
    acknowledge that because there is no attendance by the Appellant or her
    legal representatives that that note cannot be challenged  but  on  the
    face of it, it seems to me that there is a clear  procedural  error  in
    the judge allowing the Sponsor (in the light of opposition by the  Home
    Office) to act as an interpreter and that when such interpretation took
    place the Home Office were entitled to allege that  the  Appellant  was
    being led by the Sponsor.  Consequently when looked at  in  the  round,
    and certainly not on this basis alone, I am satisfied  that  there  are
    substantial material errors of law in the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal which makes the findings therein unsafe and I  set  aside  the
    decision, remit the matter  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
    reheard and give appropriate directions.  I note the  original  hearing
    was in Newport.  The Appellant appears now to  live  in  London  and  I
    therefore remit the matter back to Taylor House.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of  law
and is set aside.  The appeal is remitted back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
for rehearing and directions are hereinafter given for that rehearing.

Directions

(1)  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law and is set aside.  The appeal is remitted back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal at Taylor House to be reheard on the first available  date  28
    days hence to be heard before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other  than
    Judge Suffield-Thompson.  None of the findings of fact are to stand.

(2)  That there be leave to either party to file  an  up-to-date  bundle  of
    evidence upon which they seek to rely and to  serve  a  copy  upon  the
    other party at least seven days pre-hearing such bundle to include  any
    skeleton arguments or authorities upon which the parties seek to rely.

(3)  That the estimated length of hearing to be heard  at  Taylor  House  on
    the first available date 28 days hence is three hours.

(4)  It is anticipated that the Appellant  will  in  all  the  circumstances
    require an interpreter.  The Appellant's solicitors must  within  seven
    days of receipt of this determination notify the  Tribunal  as  to  the
    language of the interpreter that is required.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

