
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/38399/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 February 2016                   |On 24 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                        MR. PONNI VALAVAN SWAMINATHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. A. Benfield, counsel instructed by CK Law,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. E. Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellant is a national of India, born on 20 January 1980. He  was
give leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Migrant  on
8 February 2013. On 4 October 2014, the Respondent made a decision  refusing
him leave  to  enter  on  the  basis  that  she  was  satisfied  that  false
representations had been employed for the  purpose  of  obtaining  leave  to
remain, in that the TOEIC certificate from ETS Eden College was based  on  a
test taken on 3 October 2012 which had been cancelled because, on the  basis
of information provided to ETS, the Home Office was satisfied that there  is
substantial evidence to  conclude  that  the  certificate  was  fraudulently
obtained and thus that the Appellant had utilized deception to obtain  leave
to remain in the United Kingdom.

2.    The Appellant appealed against  this  decision  and  his  appeal  came
before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Abebrese  for  hearing  on  30  June
2014. There was no Presenting Officer at the appeal hearing  so  whilst  the
Appellant gave evidence, he was not subject to cross-examination. The  Judge
at [8] made reference to a  Respondent's  bundle  but  it  is  unclear  what
exactly he is referring to given that it is  now  clear  that  there  is  no
Respondent's bundle in this case. At [5]  of  the  decision  the  Judge  had
reference  to  the  witness  statements  of  Home  Office  officials   Peter
Millington and Rebecca Collings. In  a  decision  promulgated  on  3  August
2015, the First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissed the appeal,  holding  at  [10]
that  the  respondent  had  discharged  their  burden  in  respect  of   the
allegation  of  fraud/deception;  that  the  findings  of  the  Home  Office
officials are credible and that the Appellant has  not  provided  sufficient
evidence to rebut the allegation. The Judge also proceeded  to  dismiss  the
appeal with reference to Article 8 of ECHR.

3.    An application for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
made on 12 August 2015. The grounds of appeal in support of the  application
asserted  that  the  witness  statements  of  Home  Office  officials  Peter
Millington and Rebecca Collings "were not served on  the  Appellant  or  his
representatives and the Appellant is still not  aware  of  the  contents  of
these documents." A statement from the Appellant's  solicitor  was  attached
by way of confirmation. A copy of the skeleton argument  before  the  First-
Tier Tribunal Judge was also submitted in which  it  was  asserted  at  [13]
that: "the Respondent had not provided any of the evidence  to  the  court."
The grounds of  appeal  further  assert  that  at  the  appeal  hearing  the
Respondent was unrepresented and the Appellant had submitted that there  was
no evidence before the Tribunal to show that the Appellant did in  fact  use
a proxy test take yet the Judge at no  point  sought  the  position  of  the
Appellant in relation to the documents referred to in his decision.

4.    Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
McDade on 30 November 2015, on the basis that there is an arguable error  of
law in that the Appellant has arguably not had the opportunity  to  consider
the case against him in advance of the hearing.

Hearing

5.    At the hearing before me, I clarified with both parties as to  whether
they had a Respondent's bundle as there was no Respondent's  bundle  on  the
Court file. Both parties confirmed that they did  not  have  a  Respondent's
bundle. Mr Tufan helpfully indicated that it appeared that  there  had  been
procedural unfairness and invited me to find that First-tier Tribunal  Judge
Abebrese had made a material error of law  for  this  reason.  He  submitted
that the case should be remitted with  a  direction  that  the  Home  Office
issue and serve a Respondent's bundle prior  to  the  remitted  hearing.  Ms
Benfield, for the Appellant was content with that course of action.





Decision

6.    In light of the parties' agreement that  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Abebrese is fundamentally  flawed  by  reason  of  procedural
unfairness, as the Appellant's representatives were  neither  in  possession
of nor served with material documentation in the  possession  of  the  Judge
and there being no Respondent's bundle to date in this  case,  I  find  that
the First-tier Tribunal Judge did materially err in  law  and  his  decision
cannot stand. I allow the appeal by the Appellant and remit the  appeal  for
a hearing de novo before the First-tier Tribunal, not to  be  listed  before
First-tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese.

Directions

7.    I direct that, if the Respondent wishes  to  rely  upon  the  evidence
that was before the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  or  any  other  evidence  in
support of her contention that false representations had  been  employed  by
the Appellant for the purpose  of  obtaining  leave  to  remain,  that  this
evidence be produced in the form of a Respondent's bundle and served on  the
First-tier Tribunal and the Appellant's representatives, CK Law  Solicitors,
at least 21 days prior to the hearing of the remitted appeal.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

4 February 2016
