
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration                         Asylum                         Chamber)
      Appeal Number: IA/38295/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
Heard             at             Field             House,             London
         Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On             the              9th              September              2015
             On the 6th October 2015

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY

                                   Between

                            MRS CHRISTINE MUKASA
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:        Mrs Christine Macassar in person
For  the  Respondent:      Ms  Brocklesby-Weller  (Home  Office   Presenting
Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS
   1. This is the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-Tier
      Tribunal Judge Agnew promulgated on the 14th January 2015.

Background
   2. The Appellant is a citizen of  Zimbabwe  who  was  born  on  the  19th
      January 1959. She is the mother of Mrs Charmaine Gail Mukasa,  a  lady
      who is married to a Polish national, Mr Marcin Slaworim Kresnicki.


   3. The Appellant had applied for a Residence Card as  confirmation  of  a
      Right to reside in the United Kingdom under European Community Law  as
      the family member of an EEA national exercising Treaty Rights  in  the
      United Kingdom. Her application was dated  the  9th  June  2014.  That
      application was  refused  by  means  of  a  decision  dated  the  11th
      September 2014. The Appellant appealed that decision to the First-Tier
      Tribunal, which was heard  by  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Agnew  and
      decided on the papers at Glasgow on the 12th January  2015,  with  her
      decision being promulgated on  the  14th  January  2015.  Within  that
      decision she found that the Sponsor had been working  with  a  company
      known as Contract Security Services and exercising Treaty Rights since
      March 2010. However, she did not find that it had been established  on
      the evidence before her that the Appellant lived with her daughter and
      son-in-law as claimed, nor was she satisfied on the evidence presented
      that the Appellant was financially dependent on her  son-in-law,  whom
      it was accepted was a qualified person for the purposes of  Regulation
      6 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 as claimed.


   4. The Appellant sought to appeal that decision to  the  Upper  Tribunal,
      and permission to appeal was  granted  by  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Osborne on the 21st May 2015. Within the reasons for that decision,  a
      decision was made to  admit  the  application  out  of  time,  as  the
      Appellant had posted the original application for permission to appeal
      to an old address and it was not until she telephoned the Tribunal  on
      the 26th March 2015 that  this  became  apparent.  She  then  promptly
      resubmitted her Grounds of Appeal.



   5. First-Tier Tribunal Judge Osborne noted how in the Grounds  of  Appeal
      it was argued that the First-Tier Tribunal Judge had erred in  law  at
      [10] in stating that the Appellant had appealed in 2007, but that  she
      was not in the country at the time and that she had further  erred  in
      law at  [11]  in  stating  that  the  Appellant  had  claimed  in  the
      application form to have lived in the United Kingdom for 8  years  and
      11 months, but  that  such  information  related  to  the  Appellant's
      daughter rather than the Appellant herself and that further the  Judge
      had erred at [16] in finding the Appellant was unable to work  because
      she was medically incapable of work and that it was being argued  that
      the Appellant was prohibited from being in a position  to  work  as  a
      result of her application for asylum on the 16th February 2009. First-
      Tier Tribunal Judge Osborne found that even though the Judge may  have
      erred at [11] in finding the Appellant arrived in the  UK  before  the
      Appellant  herself  claims  that  error  was  not  material   to   the
      substantive decision made by the Judge.



   6.  However, First-tier Tribunal Judge Osborne in granting permission  to
      appeal went on at [4] to state that:



      "However the Judge at [13] finds that  the  Council  tax  bill  for  [
              ]does not state that another individual  is  living  with  the
      couple. It is clear that the Council tax bill dated the  22nd  January
      2015 is in the name of 3 people, Mr Marcin  Kresnicki,  Mrs  Charmaine
      Kresnicki and Mrs Christine  Mukasa  (the  Appellant).  That  document
      tends to support the Appellant's case  that  she  lives  with  and  is
      dependent upon her daughter and  son-in-law.  To  that  extent  it  is
      arguable that the Judge erred in law.


      This arguable error of law having been identified, all of  the  issues
      raised in the grounds are arguable."

Submissions


   7. The Appellant herself attended the appeal hearing. She was not legally
      represented. In making her submissions, she adopted and  repeated  the
      submissions that she had made within her application for permission to
      appeal to the Upper Tribunal and read out  again  the  reasons  stated
      therein for appealing, which she relied upon as her submissions. These
      are a matter of record and are therefore not repeated  in  full  here,
      but I have fully taken account of the same in reaching my decision.



   8. In her submissions on  behalf  the  Respondent,  Ms  Brocklesby-Weller
      submitted that there was a typographical error in the Judge's decision
      in stating at [10] that the Appellant had appealed in 2007 as well  as
      2009, but she argued that any such error was not material. In  respect
      of what is said to be the error regarding  the  finding  at  paragraph
      [11] that the Appellant had lived in the UK for 8 years and 11  months
      and that that information related to the Appellant's  daughter  rather
      than the Appellant herself, the Appellant's correct  entry  date  into
      the UK is a 24th January 2009, Ms Brocklesby-Weller  argued  that  any
      such  error  stemmed  from  the  information   provided   within   the
      application form submitted by the Appellant. In answer to the question
      as to how long the applicant had been in the UK, it was stated 8 years
      and 11 months, although I do note  in  that  regard  that  the  asylum
      application form had been submitted in  the  name  of  Charmaine  Gail
      Kresnicki, the Appellant's daughter, with the family member at part  2
      being Christine Mukasa, and that therefore there was an  error  as  to
      the way in which the form had been filled out by the Appellant.


   9. It was further argued on behalf of the Respondent that the  Judge  had
      dealt with the question  regarding  documents  not  appearing  in  the
      bundle at paragraph [15] in terms of the Asda shopping  card  and  the
      Argos gift card and although these had since been provided, the  Judge
      had found that without more that was not enough.  She  further  argued
      that following the Upper Tribunal case of Reyes (EEA Regs) [2013] UKUT
      00314, the mere  fact  that  someone  is  in  the  UK  without  lawful
      permission to work does not mean that he or she is to be considered as
      meeting  the  test  of  dependency  under  the  Immigration  (European
      Economic Area) Regulations 2006.



  10. It was further argued on behalf of the Respondent that the  First-Tier
      Tribunal Judge at [12] had dealt with the question as  to  whether  or
      not the Appellant was unable to work but Ms  Brocklesby-Weller  argued
      that this did not detract from the fact  that  no  evidence  had  been
      provided as to how the Appellant's needs were met by the EEA national.
      She submitted  that  there  had  been  a  complete  lack  of  evidence
      submitted and that on the limited  evidence  available  to  the  Judge
      there had been adequate reasoning and it was open to her to  make  the
      findings made. She argued that if the Appellant wished to submit a new
      application, she was perfectly entitled to do so.



  11. In respect of the ground  on  which  permission  to  appeal  had  been
      granted, Ms Brocklesby-Weller argued that the Council tax bill in  the
      bundle was dated the 7th February 2014 and had only two  names  on  it
      and that the further Council tax bill dated the 22nd January 2015 post-
      dated the decision and that therefore the Judge cannot  be  criticised
      for having failed to consider it and that the Judge can only  consider
      the case on the evidence before her at that time.

My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

  12. Although First-Tier Tribunal Judge Agnew may have erred in stating  at
      [10] that the Appellant had appealed against a decision  in  2007,  in
      that the Appellant, at a time before the Appellant was actually in the
      United Kingdom, I do not consider that any such error was material  to
      the outcome in this case, in that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  at
      [10] did properly set out that it was stated within  the  Respondent's
      bundle that both herself and her daughter had used deception to  enter
      the United Kingdom and both had previous applications  that  had  been
      refused. It is not disputed by the Appellant that she did proceed with
      an appeal in 2009 which was dismissed, and the finding that  both  she
      herself and her  daughter  had  used  deception  previously,  was  not
      challenged by the Appellant, it was simply the fact that she  had  not
      actually appealed the decision in 2007. However, given that the  Judge
      had properly set out the other issues which  established  her  general
      lack of credibility regarding the use of deception and the  appeal  in
      2009, I do not consider it to be material that she also considered  an
      appeal had been dismissed in 2007. In any event, the Judge's reason in
      this regard did not affect her finding that  insufficient  documentary
      evidence had been produced regarding the  Appellant  living  with  and
      being financially dependent upon her Sponsor.


  13. I further do find that  the  First-Tier  Judge  did  err  in  fact  at
      paragraph 11 at [11] in stating that the Appellant had claimed in  her
      application form that she lived in the United Kingdom for 8  years  11
      months i.e. 2006, although the  computer  records  of  the  Respondent
      apparently showed she had arrived in February 2009.  However,  I  find
      that this is as a result of the way  that  the  application  form  was
      completed by and on behalf of the Appellant, in that  the  Appellant's
      details are given as Charmaine Gail Kresnicki, with the family  member
      being listed as Christine Mukasa, but that it was stated  at  question
      10.11 in respect of the question "How long have you lived in the UK?",
      "8 years and 11 months". Although I accept that this did relate to the
      Appellant's daughter rather than herself, the Judge's  error  in  this
      regard did not affect her reasoning or decisions regarding the lack of
      sufficient documentary evidence to show cohabitation and or dependency
      as at the date of the appeal. Any error in this  regard  is  therefore
      not material.



  14. I do not consider that the Judge erred in her findings at [15] as  the
      Judge was correct in stating that the Asda  shopping  card  and  Argos
      gift card did not appear to be in  the  bundle  before  her.  Although
      within the Grounds of Appeal the Appellant sought to attach copies  of
      the Asda shopping card and Argos gift card which she had  retained  as
      evidence that she did submit  the  cards,  this  does  not  in  itself
      establish that this evidence had  reached  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Agnew. In any event, the Judge properly found that  this  evidence  in
      itself would not be sufficient to establish  that  the  Appellant  was
      maintained and her essential needs would be  met  by  her  son-in-law.
      This is a finding that was perfectly  open  to  her  on  the  evidence
      before her regarding the Appellant's contention that she used the Asda
      shopping card and Argos gift card to purchase personal goods.



  15. I do not consider that the Judge  made  any  error  in  terms  of  her
      finding at [16] as the Judge properly stated that  "the  Appellant  is
      aged 55 and has produced no medical evidence to indicate that  she  is
      incapable of work, although she claimed she is not allowed to work.  I
      consider it far more likely that she works and she has an  independent
      income." The Judge here was not making any  finding  saying  that  the
      Appellant was  incapable  of  work  for  medical  reasons.  She  notes
      specifically that the Appellant was saying she was not allowed to work
      and had noted at [12] that in the  Grounds  of  Appeal  it  was  being
      argued that the Appellant was not allowed to work  or  engage  in  any
      business transactions. The Judge was simply stating that there was  no
      medical reason for the Appellant being  incapable  of  work  and  even
      though she was not allowed to work,  she  formed  the  view  that  the
      Appellant was working and had her own independent income. Again,  this
      was a finding that was open to her on the evidence available.



  16. In respect of the  Appellant's  submission  that  the  law  should  be
      lenient and grant her a residence card or  certificate  as  she  would
      like to stay with her family and that her case should be considered on
      humanitarian grounds given that she is now widowed following the death
      of a husband in 2009, this does not in itself establish any  error  of
      law in the decision of First-Tier Tribunal Judge Agnew, which would be
      material to the likely outcome of the case. It would only be if  there
      was a material error of law within the decision of First-Tier Tribunal
      Judge Agnew that I would be in a position to set aside and remake  the
      decision. Until such error of law has been established, I am not in  a
      position to consider remaking the decision.



  17. Although within the grant of permission to appeal, it  was  said  that
      the council tax bill dated the 22nd January 2015 was in  the  name  of
      three people, namely Mr Marcin Kresnicki, Mrs Charmaine Kresnicki  and
      Mrs Christine Mukasa which tends to support the applicant's case  that
      she lives with and is dependent  upon  her  daughter  and  son-in-law,
      given that this council tax bill dated the  22nd  January  2015  post-
      dated the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Agnew  which  was
      decided on the  papers  at  Glasgow  on  the  12th  January  2015  and
      promulgated on the 14th January 2015, I can see no basis  for  finding
      that the First-Tier Tribunal Judge erred in law  in  failing  to  take
      account of this evidence. This evidence post-dated  the  decision  and
      therefore would not have be available to her at that date.  The  Judge
      can only properly consider the case on the evidence presented and  the
      council tax bill that had been presented and which was  before  First-
      Tier Tribunal Judge Agnew dated the 7th February  2014  only  had  the
      names on it of Mr and Mrs Kresnicki. There was  no  reference  to  the
      Appellant on that document. The First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  therefore
      cannot be criticised for having failed to  take  account  of  a  later
      council tax bill that actually post-dated the decision made by her and
      was only  submitted  in  support  of  the  permission  to  appeal  her
      application.


  18. For the reasons set out above, although  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Agnew thereby did contain some  factual  errors,  these
      errors were insufficient to amount to material errors of law  and  did
      not affect the First-Tier Tribunal Judge's decision that  insufficient
      evidence had been submitted to prove cohabitation and  dependency.  No
      material error of law having been disclosed, the  decision  of  First-
      Tier Tribunal Judge Agnew is maintained. The appeal is dismissed.

   Notice of Decision

   1) The decision of First-Tier Tribunal Judge Agnew does not  contain  any
      material errors of law and is maintained. The  Appellant's  appeal  is
      dismissed.

   2) The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule  13  of
      the Tribunal Procedure (First-Tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum
      Chamber) Rules 2014 and no application for an anonymity order was made
      before me. No such order is made.


Signed                                                                 Dated
9th September 2015

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty

