
[pic]
IAC-PE-AW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/38476/2014
                                                               IA/38479/2014
                                                               IA/38481/2014
                                                               IA/38487/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 July 2015                      |On 18 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                    Mr syed rashid ali (first Respondent)
                   mrs Tanzila rashid (second respondent)
                    miss rabina rashid (third respondent)
                    miss hafsa rashid (fourth respondent)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr Johnson, Johnsons Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondents are citizens of Pakistan. The first  respondent  is  42
    years old and the second respondent (his wife) is aged 32  years.   The
    third and fourth respondents are aged 8 years and 6 years respectively.
     The respondents appeal against the decisions of the appellant dated 20
    August 2014 to refuse them indefinite leave to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom on the basis of their private and family life and  Appendix  FM
    and paragraph 276ADE of HC 395 (as amended).  The  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Crawford) in a determination promulgated  on  22  December  2014
    dismissed the appeals under the Immigration Rules  (save  that  of  the
    third respondent) but  allowed  all  the  appeals  on  Article  8  ECHR
    grounds.   The Secretary of State now appeals, with permission, to  the
    Upper Tribunal.

 2. I shall hereinafter refer to the Secretary of State as "the respondent"
    and  to  the  Respondents  as  "the  appellants"  (as   they   appeared
    respectively before the First-tier Tribunal).

 3. The judge found that the third appellant satisfied the requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE.  None of the other  appellants  succeeded  under  the
    Immigration Rules [27].  The judge accepted [25]  that  the  first  and
    second appellants could  not  satisfy  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE; they had not lived in the United Kingdom for over twenty  years
    nor had they severed ties with the country where they had spent most of
    their lives (Pakistan).  The judge also  noted  the  first  and  second
    appellants had not provided evidence that they had passed the  relevant
    English tests  or  life  in  the  UK  test  in  order  to  satisfy  the
    requirements of Appendix FM of HC 395.  The judge did not  accept  [22]
    that the three daughters of the first appellant could not  speak  Urdu.
    The judge found that the children would speak Urdu to their parents  at
    home.  Having regard to sections 117A and 117B of the  Immigration  Act
    2014 [28] the judge found that the public interests in  this  case  did
    not require the removal "of the three children of the first and  second
    appellants".  The child of  the  first  and  second  appellants  Arhama
    Rashid had not made a valid application to remain in the United Kingdom
    so no decision had been made in respect of  her  by  the  Secretary  of
    State.

 4. The appeals turned upon the ability of the appellants  to  satisfy  the
    requirements of the exceptions (EX) available under Appendix  FM.   The
    third appellant had spent more than seven years in the United  Kingdom.
    Both in relation to the parents and to the children, the judge  had  to
    consider whether it would be reasonable to expect the children to leave
    the  United  Kingdom.   The  judge  concluded  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the children to leave and consequently allowed the
    third appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules and the appeals of
    all the remaining appellants under Article 8 ECHR.   The  Secretary  of
    State argues that the  judge's  assessment  was  flawed  by  an  "over-
    emphasis" of the importance of the third  appellant  remaining  in  the
    United Kingdom to complete her education.  The  judge  found  that  the
    third appellant had been educated in English and that  she  had  strong
    ties to the United Kingdom (in terms of friendships and her  education)
    and that this made it  unreasonable  for  her  to  return  to  live  in
    Pakistan.  The judge did not accept that  it  would  be  reasonable  to
    expect  the  third  and  fourth  appellants  to  "enter  the  Pakistani
    education  system  from  scratch  having  never  attended   school   in
    Pakistan".  The judge found that it would not be "reasonable  for  them
    to completely uproot themselves from the only life they have  known  to
    live in Pakistan.  I consider  there  are  serious  and  insurmountable
    problems for them leaving the UK to go and live in  a  strange  country
    where they have never attended school" [26].

 5. Whilst I hesitate to interfere with the  reasoning  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, this is a rare case where I find that the  judge  has  placed
    too much emphasis upon the fact that the third  and  fourth  appellants
    have been educated only in the United  Kingdom.   In  EV  (Philippines)
    [2014] EWCA Civ 874, the Court of Appeal considered the fact  that  the
    education which the children in that case had  enjoyed  in  the  United
    Kingdom would not be as good as that which they might experience in the
    Philippines was "not determinative" [44] [60] but Lewison LJ noted:

         "That is a long way from the facts of our case. In our case none of
         the family is a British citizen. None has the right  to  remain  in
         this  country.  If  the  mother  is  removed,  the  father  has  no
         independent right to remain. If the parents are removed, then it is
         entirely reasonable to expect the children to go with them. As  the
         immigration judge found it is obviously in their best interests  to
         remain with their parents. Although it is, of course a question  of
         fact for the tribunal, I cannot see that the desirability of  being
         educated at public expense in the UK can outweigh  the  benefit  to
         the children of remaining with their parents.  Just  as  we  cannot
         provide medical treatment for the world, so we cannot  educate  the
         world."

 6. The same principles apply in the present case.  As in EV, it  may  well
    be that the judge considered that it would be in the best interests  of
    the children to remain and  continue  their  education  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  However, such a consideration, in  circumstances where family
    life with siblings  and  parents  will  continue  abroad,  will  rarely
    outweigh  the  public  interest  concerned  with  the  maintenance   of
    immigration  control.   Although  the  children  in  this  case   would
    "completely uproot themselves" from  the  only  life  which  they  have
    experienced hitherto, it simply cannot be said that such  a  course  of
    action would be unreasonable where the children's  parents,  whom  they
    will accompany to live in Pakistan as a  family,  have  no  immigration
    status in the United Kingdom entitling them to  any  leave  to  remain.
    There will, of course, be disruption to the children's lives but  there
    was in this case no evidence that there  were  "serious  insurmountable
    problems" as the judge found to be the case  at  [27].   Likewise,  the
    quality of the education in Pakistan may be inferior  but  again  there
    was absolutely  no  evidence  before  the  judge  that  the  children's
    "education would be gravely interfered with and there would be  serious
    emotional and social problems that they would encounter through such  a
    dramatic upheaval" [27].  This latter finding is particularly  worrying
    given that there was no independent expert evidence  before  the  judge
    which might have led her to conclude that  the  children  would  suffer
    "serious emotional and social problems".   That  finding  is  based  on
    nothing more than speculation on the part of the judge.

 7. As I have said, the Upper Tribunal should hesitate  before  interfering
    with the considered assessment of the First-tier Tribunal but  this  is
    one of those rare cases where the  judge's  analysis  is  so  seriously
    flawed for the reasons which I have stated above that it  is  necessary
    for the Upper Tribunal to  intervene  and  to  set  aside  the  judge's
    decision.  In the light of my observations, I remake the  decision  and
    find that it would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the  third  and  fourth
    appellants to relocate with the remainder of their family  to  Pakistan
    and, in consequence, the appeals of all the appellants  on  Immigration
    Rules and Article 8 ECHR grounds must be dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  was  promulgated  on  22
December 2014 is set aside.  I remade the decisions.   The  appeals  of  the
appellants are dismissed under the Immigration Rules.  The appeals are  also
dismissed on human rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR).

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 13 August 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

