
[pic]
IAC-AH-co-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38489/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 10th June 2015                    |On 23rd July 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                              mr Raziq Hussain
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
Appellant:
Respondent:


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    A L B Nixon promulgated on 30th December 2014, following a  hearing  at
    Birmingham on 11th December 2014.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of  Raziq  Hussain.   The  Appellant  subsequently
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, who was  born  on  27th
    January 1990.  On 18th September 2014, his  application  for  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student was refused  and  it  was  against
    that decision that the Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he came as a  student  in  2012  and  had
    valid leave until  22nd  August  2014.   He  failed  the  speaking  and
    listening elements of the English test but had a new date set  for  2nd
    September 2014 to enable him  to  re-sit  those  tests.   He  made  the
    application without having  the  requisite  certificate  as  his  leave
    expired the following day.  He was unable  to  take  the  test  on  2nd
    September as the Respondent was  in  possession  of  his  passport  and
    accordingly  he  was  refused  entry.   He  claims  that  he  has  been
    prejudiced by the fact that his passport was not released to  him  thus
    disabling him from sitting the English language test as he intended  to
    do.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge observed that  there  was  no  dispute  whatsoever  that  the
    Appellant could not meet the Immigration Rules applicable to a  Tier  4
    student as he had not submitted a valid CAS.  The Appellant  could  not
    succeed under the Immigration Rules of paragraph 276ADE of Appendix FM.
     Proper regard was given by the judge to the established  case  law  in
    the form of Nagre [2015] EWHC 720 and Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 and the
    case of Shahzad [2014] UKUT 0085 and the judge  observed  that,  "these
    cases make it clear that the Appellant must raise  arguably  compelling
    or compassionate grounds to cause me to go on to consider  this  appeal
    under Article 8".  (See paragraph 13).

 5. The judge  then  went  on  to  consider  such  exceptional  or  unusual
    circumstances that may be in this case such as to enable her to  go  on
    to  consideration  of  the   claim   under   freestanding   Article   8
    jurisprudence.  She observed that,

         "... I have seen evidence to show that  he  was  not  permitted  to
         entry sit the test as he was not in possession of his passport.   I
         note from his witness statement that he requested  his  return  the
         day before the exam date and accordingly, it was unlikely  that  he
         would have been given the passport with such a short  notice,  even
         if it were the Respondent's policy to return travel documents  when
         the applicant failed to meet the Rules ..." (paragraph 13).

 6.  Notwithstanding  the  Appellant's  complaints   that   he   had   been
    disadvantaged by the failure to return his passport the judge  observed
    that,

         "I do not find this to be unfair.  It seems clear to  me  that  the
         Appellant left his application to the last  minute  and  knew  full
         well  that  he  had  failed  relevant  elements  of   the   English
         requirements.  The burden was always  upon  him  to  show  that  he
         satisfied the legal requirements ..." (paragraph 13).

 7. For completion, the judge ended by a consideration of the latest  Rules
    in the form of the application of  Section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (paragraph 14) and  observed  that  the
    Appellant  could  not  succeed  on  the   basis   that   the   adequate
    proportionality assessment went in his favour because it did  not  (see
    paragraph 14).

 8. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 9. The grounds of application state that the considerations of the  policy
    for Tier 4  students  is  to  ensure  that  properly  financed  general
    students are given an opportunity to benefit from the United  Kingdom's
    education service.  In the circumstances the  public  interest  in  the
    Appellant's removal is reduced given that he  is  able  to  demonstrate
    that he meets the substance of the requirements to be issued  with  his
    student visa (see paragraph 17).  As such a broad statement is  clearly
    questionable as it is simply not an accurate  reflection  of  what  the
    broader policy is for student applications.

10. More circumspect and specific is the statement that the judge erred  in
    law because she dealt with the Appellant's  proportionality  assessment
    of the case in a cursory manner at paragraph 14 when she  stated  that,
    "had I gone on to consider Article 8, my decision would have  been  the
    same,  the  Appellant  having  failed  to   show   the   decision   was
    disproportionate to the need for effective control".

11. Even more significantly, the grounds observe that the judge had not had
    regard to the latest Court of Appeal judgment of MM (Lebanon) which was
    handed down on 11th July 2014 where Lord Justice Aikens  observed  that
    there is no further test of exceptionality as such because,  "I  cannot
    see much utility in imposing this further, intermediary test.   If  the
    applicant cannot satisfy the Rule, then there either is or there is not
    a further Article 8 claim" (see paragraph 129).

12. On 6th May 2015, permission to appeal was  granted  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on the basis that,

         "Even though the judge's decision and reasons was adequate  on  the
         basis of the Immigration Rules, it is nonetheless arguable that  in
         relation to Article 8 the judge  should  have  borne  in  mind  the
         decisions of MM Lebanon [2014] EWCA 985  and  MK  (Pakistan)"  (see
         paragraph 4 of the grant of permission).

The Hearing

13. At the hearing of 10th June 2014 these were the issues before me and  I
    considered the detailed and well compiled submissions in the grounds of
    application  very  carefully.   Having  done  so,  I  am  in  no  doubt
    whatsoever that the decision of Judge A L B Nixon was entirely  correct
    on the facts and there simply is no basis for stating that there is  an
    error of law.  There are two reasons for this.

14. First, it is simply not the case that the judge dealt at  paragraph  14
    "in a somewhat  cursory  manner"  with  the  question  of  whether  the
    Appellant had been able to succeed on the basis of freestanding Article
    8 jurisprudence.  It is not the case  that  the  judge's  reference  to
    proportionality here was inadequate.  Quite the contrary is  the  case.
    The Appellant was not able to sit the test, as the judge very  properly
    recounted, because he had bizarrely made a request for  the  return  of
    his passport the day before the exam date and this was  properly  taken
    into account when the judge observed that, "it seems clear to  me  that
    the Appellant left his application to the last  minute  and  knew  full
    well that he had failed relevant elements of the  English  requirements
    ..." (paragraph 13).

15. Second, it is not the case that the  judge  fell  foul  of  the  latest
    strictures on the application of Article 8 jurisprudence.  The  grounds
    make reference to paragraph 1 to 9 of  the  judgment  of  Lord  Justice
    Aikens in MM (Lebanon) and refer to the fact the  applicable  Rule  can
    now quite simply be put  in  terms  of  the  statement  that,  "if  the
    applicant cannot satisfy the Rule, then there either is or there is not
    a further Article 8 claim".  The judge did in essence apply this  Rule.
    Her conclusion was that there was no further Article 8 claim.

16. It was as simple as that.  But it does not end there.  This is  because
    there have been further developments in relation to Article 8,  and  no
    less than in the Court of Appeal itself.  It is clear from the decision
    in Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 74 at 62, 64 and 67 that MM  (Lebanon),  which
    is now being relied upon, does not in fact undermine  the  judgment  of
    Sales J in Nagre, and in any event Sales J's approach in Nagre has been
    endorsed by the Court of Appeal, presided over by  the  Master  of  the
    Rolls in MF (Nigeria) [2003] EWCA 1192.  That is a complete  answer  to
    this challenge.  There simply is no error of law.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    23rd July 2015




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    23rd July 2015
