
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38988/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : IAC Birmingham            |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On : 31 January 2017                 |On: 02 February 2017                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                           shanice melisa nesbeth
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Sarwar, instructed by Bassi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica, born on 18  January  1996.  She
      has been given permission to appeal against the decision of First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Raikes, dismissing her appeal against the  respondent's
      decision to refuse her application for leave to remain  on  Article  8
      private life grounds.

   2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 8 February 2014 with leave
      to enter as a child visitor, valid until 13 July 2014,  and  made  her
      application for leave to remain on 10 July 2014.


   3. The basis of the appellant's application, as set out in  the  covering
      letter to the application form FLR (FP), was that she wished to remain
      in the UK with her mother as her grandparents, with whom she had  been
      living in Jamaica, could no longer care for her. The  application  was
      made on the basis of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) and Article 8 outside the
      immigration rules. In an accompanying statement from  the  appellant's
      mother, Pamella White, it was said that she had come to  the  UK  when
      the appellant was six years of age, in order to study and improve  her
      future prospects, and had left the appellant  with  her  parents  (the
      appellant's grandparents)  in  Jamaica,  although  retaining  parental
      responsibility for her and making important decisions in her life from
      the UK. The appellant's mother said that her own mother  was  ill  and
      could no longer care for the appellant.  Since  she  had  two  British
      daughters in the UK who had weekly contact  with  their  father,  they
      could not relocate to Jamaica to be with the appellant  and  therefore
      needed the appellant to remain in  the  UK.  It  was  claimed  in  the
      appellant's application that she did not retain any ties  to  Jamaica,
      having no contact with her father and no family members other than her
      grandparents who were unable and unwilling to care for her and  wished
      to travel, and that she would be vulnerable to criminal gangs  if  she
      had to return there without any support network.


   4. The respondent refused the appellant's application in a decision dated
      18 September 2014. The respondent did not accept  that  the  appellant
      had demonstrated a lack of ties to Jamaica  and  considered  that  she
      failed to meet the requirements of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi).  Neither
      did  the  respondent  accept   that   there   were   any   exceptional
      circumstances justifying a grant  of  leave  outside  the  immigration
      rules. It was noted that the appellant's mother had come to the UK  in
      2002 and that her passport showed no travel to Jamaica since then. The
      respondent considered that the application had  been  made  simply  to
      circumvent the immigration rules.

   5. The appellant appealed against that decision. Her appeal was heard  on
      17 December 2014 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Raikes. The judge  heard
      oral evidence from the appellant and her mother. It was claimed by the
      appellant that she had become very close to her half-sisters  and  had
      taken on the  role  of  their  primary  carer  as  her  mother  worked
      unsociable hours. She had nothing to return to in Jamaica  and  feared
      becoming homeless and an easy target for criminals and  gangs  if  she
      had to return there. It was claimed that the appellant's intention, on
      visiting the UK, had been to return to Jamaica and to  return  to  her
      sixth  form  studies,  but  her  grandmother's  ill-health   and   her
      grandparents' subsequent decision that they could no longer  care  for
      her, had led to her applying for leave to remain in the UK. The  judge
      found the evidence of the appellant and her mother to be  inconsistent
      and implausible, in particular in regard to  the  appellant's  claimed
      sixth form studies in Jamaica and  the  timing  of  her  grandparents'
      contact informing her of their inability to continue caring  for  her,
      and did not accept that there had ever  been  any  intention  for  the
      appellant to return to Jamaica. The judge  did  not  accept  that  the
      appellant  could  meet  the  requirements  in  paragraph  276ADE   and
      considered that  her  removal  would  not  be  disproportionate  under
      Article 8. She dismissed the appeal on all grounds.


   6. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on two
      grounds: firstly, that the judge had erred by applying the  "no  ties"
      test in  paragraph  276ADE(vi),  whereas  the  immigration  rules  had
      changed prior to the appeal hearing so  that  the  relevant  test  was
      "very significant obstacles to integration". The judge  had  therefore
      applied the wrong test. Secondly, it was irrational for the judge,  if
      accepting that the appellant provided care for her  half-siblings,  to
      find that family life could continue outside the UK.


   7. Permission to appeal was granted on 20 February 2015 on both  grounds,
      but with particular regard to the first ground.


   8. The appellant's appeal initially came  before  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
      Judge  O'Ryan  but  unfortunately  no  written  decision  was  issued,
      although it was  accepted  that  he  had  dismissed  the  appeal.  The
      appellant did not consent to there being no written  reasons  for  the
      decision. In the circumstances, and in light of Mr Mills' agreement, I
      set aside Judge O'Ryan's decision to dismiss the appeal and  proceeded
      to hear submissions with a view to re-making the decision on the error
      of law.


   9. Having heard submissions from both parties, I advised them that I  was
      upholding Judge Raikes' decision. My  reasons  for  so  doing  are  as
      follows.

Consideration and Findings

  10. There is no dispute that Judge Raikes applied  the  wrong  version  of
      paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), and considered the "no ties" test rather than
      the test of "very significant obstacles to integration". However I  do
      not agree with Mr Sarwar that that error was a material one since,  as
      submitted by Mr Mills, not only is the newer test a more stringent one
      than the "no ties" test but also it is plain that  the  judge  in  any
      event gave consideration to all matters relevant to the  substance  of
      the "very significant obstacles to integration" test.  Mr  Sarwar  did
      not dispute that the appellant retained ties to Jamaica and  that  the
      judge was entitled to conclude as such.  In  addition,  at  [34],  the
      judge found that the appellant was capable of looking after herself in
      Jamaica, having cared for her two  half-siblings  and  being  a  well-
      educated and articulate adult, and she did not  in  any  event  accept
      that her grandparents would refuse to provide  her  with  support.  At
      [37] the judge noted that the appellant had spent her entire  life  in
      Jamaica until coming to the UK as a visitor ten months  prior  to  the
      hearing and took account of the fact  that  her  mother  was  able  to
      financially support her in Jamaica. At [42] the judge  concluded  that
      the appellant would be at no risk in Jamaica.  Accordingly  the  judge
      considered all relevant matters and effectively  applied  the  correct
      test. It was clear, on the evidence  before  the  judge,  and  on  the
      judge's findings,  that  the  appellant  failed  to  demonstrate  very
      significant obstacles to integration in  Jamaica  and  the  judge  was
      accordingly fully entitled to conclude that the criteria in  paragraph
      276ADE(1) could not be met. I therefore find no  merit  in  the  first
      ground.


  11. Although permission was only reluctantly granted in  relation  to  the
      second ground, Mr Sarwar submitted that there was particular merit  in
      that ground. He submitted that the judge had effectively accepted that
      the appellant had taken on  the  role  of  carer  for  her  two  half-
      siblings, and if she had not, then  she  had  failed  to  provide  any
      reasons for so concluding. On the basis that  she  had  accepted  that
      matter, he submitted that the judge's findings at  [46],  that  family
      life could continue outside the UK, was irrational, as it appeared  to
      be a suggestion that the two British children  could  be  expected  to
      leave the UK in order for family life  to  be  maintained.  However  I
      agree with Mr Mills that that was not in fact what the judge meant  at
      [46], and that what she actually meant was  simply  that  family  life
      connections could be maintained from outside the UK. It is clear  that
      the judge gave consideration to the best interests of the  appellant's
      two half-siblings and  to  the  impact  on  them  of  the  appellant's
      departure. That was a matter  considered  at  [46],  where  the  judge
      considered that it was significant to the girls' best  interests  that
      their mother and father remained in the UK with  them.  When  weighing
      all  matters  up  at  [47]  the  judge  balanced  the  impact  of  the
      appellant's departure  on  her  half-sisters  against  other  relevant
      factors, namely the temporary nature of the appellant's leave and  her
      lack of basis of stay in the UK,  as  well  as  the  matters  she  had
      already  considered,  which  included  her  inability  to   meet   the
      requirements of the immigration rules, the short period of time  spent
      in  the  UK,  the  lack  of  previous  contact  and  visits  and   the
      circumstances in which the appellant had come to the UK.  In  view  of
      all those adverse factors the judge was  fully  entitled  to  conclude
      that the appellant's removal was not disproportionate and  that  there
      would be no breach of Article 8.


  12. For all of these reasons I uphold the judge's  decision  and  find  no
      merit in the grounds. The decision is based upon a full  and  detailed
      assessment of all the evidence and is supported by  cogently  reasoned
      and sustainable findings. The conclusions that the judge reached  were
      entirely open to her on the evidence before her. There are no material
      errors of law in her decision.

DECISION

  13. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law requiring it to be set aside. The  decision
      to dismiss the appeal stands.




Signed
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:
