
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/38682/2014
                                                               IA/38683/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28th September 2015               |On 17th February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY


                                   Between

                               Mr Abdul Khaliq
                              Mrs Maria Ghafoor
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A Jaffar, Counsel instructed by Lee Valley
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On 26th July 2014 the first Appellant  applied  for  further  leave  to
    remain under the Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) scheme.  His wife applied as his
    dependant.  He indicated that the business started trading on 19th July
    2014 and involved providing private tuition services.  His  application
    was refused on 15th  September  2014.   As  a  consequence  his  wife's
    application was also refused.

 2. The applicant was required to have been awarded sufficient points under
    attributes and to have supplied particular documents.  It can  be  said
    that the drafting of the requirements is not the easiest to follow  but
    it is aimed at showing that the business is genuinely trading.

 3. The appeals were heard by First-tier Judge Griffith  on  26th  February
    2015.  In a decision promulgated on 10th March 2012  the  appeals  were
    dismissed.  At paragraph 27 the judge  accepted  that  the  advertising
    requirements were met.  However, the judge referred at paragraph 28  to
    the absence of contracts containing  the  specified  evidence  and  the
    absence of a letter from the bank confirming trading.

 4. In the Upper Tribunal the Appellants' representative accepts that there
    was no letter from the  bank.   It  was  submitted  that  this  was  an
    alternative and not an additional  requirement  to  contracts.   Having
    read the provisions I accept this.  It was  contended  that  the  first
    Appellant did submit contracts.  I note that at paragraph 26 the  judge
    refers to an enrolment form submitted with  the  application.   I  have
    been provided  with  the  originals  and  I  am  satisfied  that  these
    constitute the necessary contracts and contain the required details.  I
    find that the lack of a finding by the judge about the enrolment  forms
    referred to at paragraph 26 in relation to the provision  of  contracts
    constitutes a material error of law in the context of these complicated
    and specific provisions.  I am satisfied that these documents  do  meet
    the requirements.

Notice of Decision

There being no other outstanding issues I find that the requirements of  the
Rules are met and I allow both appeals.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly

