
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38651/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 January 2015                             |On 3 February 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            ROGERIO BORGES SILVA
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Ngwuocha, Carl Martin Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS
The Appellant

 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State but nonetheless for the purposes of this appeal I shall refer  to
    the parties as they were described before the First-tier Tribunal, that
    is Mr Rogerio Borges Silva as the appellant and the Secretary of  State
    as the respondent.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Brazil born  on  30  March  1983  and  he
    appealed against the decision of the respondent dated  12  August  2013
    refusing to issue him a residence card as confirmation of his right  of
    residence under the European Community law.

 3. The appellant claimed that he was dependent on his sister with whom  he
    was living and who was the sponsor. The  respondent  claimed  that  the
    appellant had not provided any evidence of his dependency at  any  time
    either in Brazil or in the  United  Kingdom  and  his  application  was
    refused further to Regulation 8 of the Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006.

 4. The appellant's application was also considered under Article 8 of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights and rejected further  to  paragraph
    276ADE under Appendix FM.

 5. The appellant's appeal appeared to be lodged under  two  provisions  of
    the EEA law, namely that he was an extended family  member  further  to
    paragraph 8(2) and also 8(3).

 6. First-tier Tribunal Judge Wyman allowed the appellant's appeal  stating
    at paragraph 39:

         "It is not in dispute that the appellant's sister  is  a  qualified
         person.  I find that the appellant himself satisfies the  Rules  as
         an extended family member under paragraph 8(3) and I find that  the
         appellant does require the personal care of the EEA national spouse
         due to his ongoing epilepsy"

 7. And at paragraph 40 she stated "I note that the  appellant  lives  with
    his sister and has done since he came  to  the  United  Kingdom  [sic].
    Prior to this he was not living an independent life but lived with  his
    parents in Brazil".

 8. It would appear that the judge allowed the appeal further to  paragraph
    8(3) and she stated at paragraph 33

         "In this case, the appellant has provided some  (although  limited)
         evidence of his epilepsy.  A letter dated 19 December 2011 from the
         Royal Free Hospital has been provided.  The consultant neurologist,
         Dr Davey, confirms that the appellant has temporal  lobe  seizures.
         He has episodic attacks which tend to come in clusters where he can
         have a few attacks within a week or so.   The  letter  goes  on  to
         state  it  is  very  important  the  appellant  always  takes   his
         medication regularly"

 9. Application for permission to appeal was made by the respondent on  the
    basis that the appellant's sister was not an EEA national and  nor  was
    she the spouse of an EEA national since she was divorced.

10. There was no finding by Judge Wyman as to when the appellant's  sponsor
    was divorced and she merely stated that it was not in dispute that  the
    appellant's sister was a qualified person.  I note that the grounds for
    permission to appeal note that she was issued with a residence card  on
    the basis that she was married (which was no longer the case) to an EEA
    national although this information had not appeared to  have  made  its
    way to the judge.

11. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Landes on
    the basis that the appellant's sister was a Brazilian national who  was
    divorced from an EEA national and  although  it  was  stated  that  she
    "retained the right of residence" at paragraph 29 of the determination,
    even if this was the case it did not make the appellant  the  "relative
    of an EEA national or his spouse or civil partner".  The  sister  being
    divorced was no longer the spouse of an EEA national.  It is clear that
    the judge does not explain her findings and it is  not  clear  how  the
    appellant's sister is a qualified person  not  being  an  EEA  national
    herself, and this does not explain how the  appellant  qualifies  under
    Regulation 8(3).

12. Permission was also granted on the basis that as the judge did not give
    adequate reasons why she found the appellant required the personal care
    of his sister given the rigorous test referred to  in  the  grounds  at
    paragraph 10 and the lack of medical  evidence  to  establish  personal
    care was needed.

13. Submissions were made by Mr Nath at the hearing  and  he  outlined  the
    grounds of appeal.  At paragraph 33 there was little detail in relation
    to the findings and no clarity.   Nowhere  were  there  serious  health
    grounds explored.  Indeed the judge herself stated that  the  appellant
    had provided some "albeit limited" evidence of his epilepsy. The letter
    from Dr Davey did not establish that the  appellant  required  personal
    care.

14. Mr Ngwuocha emphasised that the appeal was being centred on  Regulation
    8(3) which did not require that the appellant  needed  daily  treatment
    but simply personal care.  The judge had found at paragraph 33 that the
    appellant had temporal lobe seizures and the  judge  had  assessed  the
    evidence and provided a basis for finding that the  appellant  required
    personal care.  His parents were in the UK.

15. Mr Ngwuocha pointed out that the appellant's sister was married  to  an
    EEA national and had retained her rights.   The  appellant  had  always
    been dependent on the sister since coming to the UK and that he claimed
    rights through being dependent on the  sister  who  retained  the  same
    rights as a qualified EEA national.  I was referred to the  Directorate
    2004/38/EU in particular Article 13 which referred  to  family  members
    retaining a right of residence on a  personal  basis.   Notionally  the
    sponsor was an EEA national.

16. The  judge  allowed  the  appeal  under  Regulation  8(3)  of  the  EEA
    Regulations and made no consideration of  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.

17. At paragraph 39 of her decision the judge stated that  it  was  not  in
    dispute that the appellant's sister was a qualified person but she gave
    no reasoning for this finding, and bearing in mind the terms of Article
    8(3) which refer to a person satisfying the condition if  they  were  a
    relative of an EEA national or his spouse or his civil partner, I  find
    that there is an error of law.  The evidence was that  the  appellant's
    sister had divorced but there was no finding as to when the appellant's
    sister had divorced and thus whether she could  still be a  spouse  for
    the purposes of Regulation 8(3).

18. It was suggested by Mr Ngwuocha that the sponsor was a person  who  had
    retained the right of residence and referred me to paragraph  10(6)  of
    the EEA Regulations:

19. 10(6) of the EEA Regulations states



         "6   The condition in this paragraph is that the person-

             (a)  is not an EEA national but would, if he were an EEA
                  national, be a worker, a self-employed person or a self-
                  sufficient person under regulation 6; or

             (b)  is the family member of a person who falls within
         paragraph (a)."


20. This specifically states that the person first of all ins (a) is not an
    EEA national and in (b)  the  reference  is  to  family  member.   This
    section does not refer to extended family members.

21. Even if that were not an error, I am not persuaded that the  judge  has
    made a clear finding  with  adequate  reasoning  in  the  light  of  TR
    (Regulation  8(3)  EEA  Regulations  2006)  [2008]  UKAIT  00004  which
    established the following principle:

         "For a relative to satisfy Regulation 8(3) of the  EEA  Regulations
         2006 the 'serious health grounds' need to be  significantly  beyond
         ordinary ill health and  as  a  matter  of  practice  will  require
         detailed medical evidence in support of any claim.   Personal  care
         must be provided on a day-to-day basis and relate either or both to
         the physical and mental tasks and needs required for  a  person  to
         function.  'Strictly' is a restrictable  limiting  requirement  and
         imports a need for complete compliance  or  exact  performance  and
         reinforces the need for personal care to be provided on  a  day-to-
         day basis."

22. As the judge stated at paragraph 33; "The appellant has  provided  some
    (although limited) evidence of his epilepsy."  The judge referred to  a
    letter dated 19 December 2011 from the Royal Free Hospital in which the
    consultant neurologist  Dr  Davey  confirmed  that  the  appellant  had
    temporal lobe seizures.

23. In fact there were further letters which detailed the severity or  lack
    of it of the appellant's condition and the judge  does  not  appear  to
    have taken note of these.

24. At paragraph 39, having set out the evidence the judge  merely  states:
    "I find that the appellant does require the personal care  of  the  EEA
    national spouse due to his ongoing epilepsy" although she does not  set
    out the reasons for why she finds  there  are  serious  health  grounds
    which "strictly requires the personal care of  the  EEA  national,  his
    spouse or his civil partner".

25. It appears that by the time the appellant's sister  submitted  her  own
    application for a residence card on 28 January 2013  her  marriage  had
    already been dissolved.

26. Bearing in mind that this appeal was made on  the  basis  of  paragraph
    8(2) which is that the appellant was dependent on his  sponsor,  and  I
    note the judge found that the  appellant  lived  with  his  parents  in
    Brazil,  the  initial  application  form  should  be  provided  by  the
    respondent.   In  response  to  Mr  Ngwuocha's  submissions   regarding
    Directive  2004/38/EU,  further  to  AA  (Algeria)  v  SSHD  [2014]  an
    appellant is not entitled to residence as an 'extended  family  member'
    within regulation 8(2) of the EEA Regulations where he claimed to be  a
    dependant or member of the household not of an EEA national but of  the
    spouse of an EEA national.    There  is  no  linguistic  or  conceptual
    justification  for  reading  the  clear  wording  of   the   provisions
    otherwise.

27. As stated in AA (Algeria)
          1. It is common ground that Regulation 8 properly transposes
             Article 3 of the Directive.
          1. It will be noted that both the Citizens' Directive and the
             2006 Regulations distinguish between family members and other
             or extended family members, and that an "other family member"
             for the purposes of Article 3.2 of the Citizens' Directive
             must be a dependant or a member of the household of the Union
             citizen. On a straightforward reading of the wording of
             Article 3.2, it is not enough that they are dependent on or a
             member of the household of the Union citizen's spouse.
          1. In respect of this limitation Regulation 8(2) mirrors Article
             3.2: the "extend family member" must, prior to coming to the
             United Kingdom, have been dependent upon or a member of the
             household of the EEA national.

28. For the reasons given above I find that there is an  error  of  law  in
    Judge Wyman's  decision.   Despite  allowing  the  appeal  on  the  EEA
    Regulations there was no finding in  relation  to  the  status  of  the
    sister or consideration of Article 8.  As Mr Nath  pointed  out,  there
    was no consideration of any available health care in Brazil.

29. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified.  I set aside the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.



Signed        Date 31st January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


Directions

The respondent shall use her  best  endeavours  to  supply  a  copy  of  the
appellant's application form.

All further evidence submitted by either  party  should  be  served  on  the
Tribunal and the opposing party at least 14 days prior  to  any  substantive
hearing.

