
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA386072013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 4th May 2016                          |On 26th May 2016                  |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                  Ayomide Faniyan Samuel (first Appellant)
                     OLAYINKA FANIYAN (SECOND APPELLANT)
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr M Al-Rashid, instructed by David A Grand
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The first Appellant is a citizen of  Nigeria  born  on  21st  September
    2000.  The second Appellant is his mother a Nigerian national  born  on
    22nd August 1979. Both Appellants arrived in the UK on 19th July  2005.
    They did not have leave to enter and remained without leave.
2.   The Appellants made applications for  leave  to  remain  on  Article  8
    grounds under Appendix FM  and  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  Their applications were refused.

3.   There was no Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  in  respect  of  the  first
    Appellant. The Notice of Decision to the first Appellant is dated  24th
    April 2013 and states:

         "You applied for leave to remain  in  the  UK  as  a  dependant  of
         Olayinka Faniyan but your application has been refused.


         The requirements of the Rules for this category include that:


         E-LTRC.1.6    One of the applicant's parents must be in the UK  and
                    have leave to enter or remain  or  indefinite  leave  to
                    remain or is at the same time  being  granted  leave  to
                    remain  or  indefinite  leave  to  remain   under   this
                    Appendix.


         In view of the fact that your  parent  Olayinka  Faniyan  has  been
         refused leave to remain in the UK your application has been refused
         in line with his  application.   The  Secretary  of  State  is  not
         satisfied that you are able to meet the requirements of Appendix FM
         as stated above."

4.   The second Appellant was refused leave to remain on the basis that  she
    too could not satisfy Appendix FM because her  partner,  Samuel  Sunday
    Faniyan, was not a British citizen and was not settled in the UK.   She
    could not satisfy Appendix FM under the partner route and her son could
    not satisfy Appendix FM under the  child  route.  The  Respondent  also
    issued notices of removal under Section 10 dated 13th August 2013.

5.   The Appellants appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Unfortunately,
    there has been some confusion as to whether the second Appellant had in
    fact submitted notice of appeal and indeed the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Devittie refers only  to  the  first  Appellant  Ayomide
    Faniyan Samuel with one appeal number. There has been no allocation  by
    the Tribunal of a file in respect of the second Appellant and she  does
    not have an appeal number.

6.   However, it is quite clear that two notices of  appeal  were  submitted
    in the bundle  of  evidence  which  was  supplied  by  the  Appellants'
    representative on 4th April 2016 in response to directions  I  gave  on
    29th February 2016.  It would appear from reading those documents  that
    notices of appeal were submitted  to  the  Tribunal,  but  there  is  a
    response from the Tribunal  stating  that  the  notice  in  respect  of
    Ayomide  Samuel  Faniyan  was  not  received  and  therefore  this  was
    resubmitted at a later date.

7.   It is clear from this evidence that a 26-page fax was sent  through  on
    15th August 2013 with a covering letter of the same date with reference
    to Miss Olayinka Faniyan and dependent child.  The  grounds  of  appeal
    refer to Faniyan Samuel Ayomide and Miss Olayinka Faniyan and are dated
    15th August 2013.
8.   The application  to  the  Home  Office  is  made  in  respect  of  both
    Appellants.  There is a notice of appeal dated 15th August 2013  signed
    by the second Appellant Olayinka Faniyan and the decision of 9th August
    2013 and removal decision of 13th  August  2015.   There  is  also  the
    removal decision in respect of the first Appellant  dated  13th  August
    2013.

9.   It  would  appear  that  the  Tribunal  Service  wrote  to  the  second
    Appellant, Olayinka Faniyan, and stated that there was no  appeal  form
    submitted in respect of her son, Ayomide Samuel Faniyan.  That  is  why
    his appeal notice was sent again. For some reason, unknown  to  any  of
    the parties present, it would appear that  only  the  appeal  form  for
    Ayomide Samuel Faniyan was allocated an appeal number.

10.  Therefore, looking at that evidence as a whole, I find  that  there  is
    an  appeal  in  respect  of  the  second  Appellant  and  due   to   an
    administrative error she has not been allocated an  appeal  number.  It
    was agreed by the parties that the appeal before  me  relates  to  both
    Appellants. Due to no fault of her own, the second  Appellant's  appeal
    was not in fact registered by the Tribunal Service.

11.  On that basis, when I come  to  consider  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Devittie, it was conceded by Mr Tufan, that his  failure
    to consider the second Appellant amounted to an error of  law  and  the
    matter should be re-decided. Mr Tufan also conceded that in respect  of
    the first Appellant, Ayomide Samuel Faniyan, the judge had erred in law
    at paragraph 4 because he had failed to consider Regulation  7  of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

12.  The judge stated that:

         "The  Free  Movement  of  Persons  Directive  2004/38/E  states  in
         paragraph 15 of  the  preamble  that  family  members  who  have  a
         retained right of residence do so exclusively on a personal  basis.
         This means that they cannot sponsor for another family member.  For
         example, if a non-EEA national with a retained right  of  residence
         gets married to another non-EEA national her new husband  will  not
         have any rights under the Regulations.  Her new husband would  only
         be able to enter or remain in the UK  if  he  qualifies  under  the
         Immigration Rules.  In my view the Appellant's son, the child of  a
         non-EEA national who has retained rights of residence,  is  in  the
         same position as his mother."

13.  However Regulation 7 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations  2006  states
    that:

         "7. - (1) Subject to paragraph  (2),  for  the  purposes  of  these
           Regulations the following persons shall  be  treated  as  family
           members of another person -
             a) his spouse or his civil partner;
             b) direct descendants of his, his spouse or his civil  partner
                who are under 21 or dependants of his, his  spouse  or  his
                civil partner....etc.


14.  The  first  Appellant's  father,  Samuel  Sunday  Faniyan  had  an  EEA
    residence card of a family member valid until May 2017.  Therefore,  it
    would appear that it is possible that the first Appellant could succeed
    under Regulation 7(1)(b), if his father was exercising treaty rights.

15.  The Respondent accepted in the refusal letter of 9th August  2013  that
    the first Appellant's father was Samuel Sunday Faniyan and he  was  the
    partner of the second Appellant Olayinka Faniyan, and that  there  were
    genuine and subsisting relationships as parents and  child.  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Devittie therefore erred in law in failing  to  consider
    the situation.

16.  Accordingly, it having been agreed that  the  judge  erred  in  law  in
    respect of both Appellants, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal dated 1st May 2015, in  its  entirety,  and  I  remake  it  as
    follows.

17.  Having considered all the documentation before me there has  been  much
    confusion in the progress of this appeal.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Molloy attempted to cure the confusion by issuing extensive  directions
    going to four pages on 26th August 2014.  He was particularly concerned
    that there was no evidence on the file from the Respondent,  there  was
    no  Rule  13  bundle  including  an  application  form  and  supporting
    documents, and that there was no Reasons for Refusal Letter in  respect
    of the first Appellant, Ayomide Samuel Faniyan. He directed  that  this
    was  concerning  given  that  the  Respondent  was  under  a  duty   to
    demonstrate  that  she  had  given  attention  to  the  statutory  duty
    contained in Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act
    2009.

18.  Judge Molloy also sought to clarify the position of whether  there  had
    been a notice of appeal and the  basis  of  the  application,  and  the
    immigration status of the Appellant's father giving rise to any  rights
    of residence under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

19.  It is unfortunate that the  Respondent  failed  to  comply  with  those
    directions and indeed that  the  Appellant  only  complied  with  those
    directions after the further directions issued by me on  26th  February
    2016.

20.  However, it  has  been  possible  during  the  appeal  to  clarify  the
    situation and ascertain the nature of the documents.  There is no issue
    in relation to the notice of  appeal  and  the  basis  upon  which  the
    application was made. The immigration status of Samuel  Sunday  Faniyan
    is that he has a derived right of residence which was  granted  in  May
    2012 and valid until 23rd May  2017.   It  would  appear  that  he  was
    granted rights of residence as a  family  member  of  an  EEA  national
    namely as a spouse from 2003 until 2013. However, his marriage ended in
    divorce in  2011  and  he  thereafter  obtained  a  retained  right  of
    residence.


21.  The result of the discussions in court and  the  consideration  of  the
    documents submitted is that, to date, there is no Reasons  for  Refusal
    Letter in respect of the first Appellant, Ayomide Samuel Faniyan.   The
    decision notice refers only to Appendix FM.  The letter of  9th  August
    2013 which deals  with  his  mother's  application  does  consider  the
    decision under the child route in respect of Appendix FM, but fails  to
    deal with paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules or to deal, in  any
    detail, with the best interests of the child.  This letter states that:

         "We have carefully considered your application  however  whilst  we
         acknowledge  that  you  have  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
         relationship with a child  who  you  claim  has  lived  in  the  UK
         continuously for seven years  immediately  preceding  the  date  of
         application  your  application  falls   for   refusal   under   the
         eligibility  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  which   are
         mandatory and which apply to all applicants regardless  of  whether
         EX.1 exemption criteria is met.  As you have failed to  meet  those
         eligibility requirements you cannot benefit from the  criteria  set
         out in EX.1.


         We have taken into consideration that your child is aged 12 and  it
         is claimed he has resided in the United  Kingdom  since  2005.   In
         this case it is considered that he would be able to adapt  to  life
         in Nigeria where you have lived previously and is familiar with the
         language.


         Moreover you would be returning as a family unit and  you  will  be
         able to support your child who is also  a  citizen  of  Nigeria  to
         enjoy their full rights  as  a  citizen,  including  the  right  to
         education.  It is noted that his parents have spent the majority of
         their lives in Nigeria and would be able to  assist  the  child  in
         adjusting to life there.


         Therefore it is considered reasonable for you  and  your  child  to
         return to Nigeria as a family  unit  and  continue  to  enjoy  your
         family life overseas. Whilst this may involve initial disruption to
         your life it is considered that it is  proportionate  in  order  to
         meet the legitimate aims of the state.


         Appendix FM sets out  the  criteria  to  be  applied  in  assessing
         whether to grant leave to a family member on  the  basis  of  their
         family life with a child in the UK.  The criteria reflect the  duty
         in Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009
         to have regard to the need to safeguard and promote the welfare  of
         children who are in the UK, as interpreted in recent  case  law  in
         particular ZH (Tanzania)."


     There then follows a consideration of paragraph 276ADE  in  respect  of
    the second Appellant.



22.  Accordingly, it was agreed by all parties, and I make such  a  finding,
    that the decision to refuse leave and to remove the first Appellant was
    not in accordance with the  law.  The  Secretary  of  State  failed  to
    consider paragraph 276ADE in respect of the  first  Appellant  who  had
    been resident in the UK for over seven years and had failed to consider
    whether, in the particular circumstances of his case, it was reasonable
    for him to leave to UK.  There was no assessment of his best  interests
    in accordance with the duty under Section 55 and the paragraphs that  I
    have recited from the refusal letter of 9th August 2013 in  respect  of
    the second Appellant  do  not  properly  address  his  best  interests.
    Therefore, there has not been a lawful decision in respect of the first
    Appellant and I allow his appeal insofar as the Respondent's decisions,
    to refuse leave and remove him, were not in accordance with the law.

23.  It was also agreed that the decision of his best interests and  whether
    it would be reasonable for him to return under paragraph 276ADE  would,
    of course, affect  a  decision  in  respect  of  the  second  Appellant
    because, if it can be shown that the first Appellant  is  a  qualifying
    child, then that would indeed affect whether it would be  proportionate
    to remove his mother.

24.  There was also little consideration of the Appellant's father, and  his
    relationship with the first Appellant, in the refusal letter,  although
    it was accepted that his relationship with the second Appellant  was  a
    genuine one.

25.  Accordingly, the decision in respect of the second  Appellant  was  not
    in accordance with the law. The refusal failed to properly  assess  the
    situation in relation to the first Appellant and there  was  no  proper
    consideration his best interests or whether it would be reasonable  for
    him to return to Nigeria with his mother.  This  would  impact  on  the
    second Appellant's ability to remain on Article 8 grounds, particularly
    with reference to Section 117B  of  the  Immigration,  Nationality  and
    Asylum Act 2002.

26.  It is worth noting that the first Appellant has  at  no  time  made  an
    application  for  a  residence  card  under   the   Immigration   (EEA)
    Regulations 2006, although it may be that he had a right  of  residence
    on arrival in the UK under Regulation 7, subject to his father and  his
    spouse having exercised treaty rights at that time.  It  is  of  course
    open to the first Appellant to  make  an  application  and  submit  the
    relevant evidence to support it. If the first Appellant has a right  of
    residence,  then  of  course   it   would   affect   the   Respondent's
    consideration under the Immigration Rules and whether it was reasonable
    for him to return to Nigeria.

27.  Accordingly, I allow the Appellants' appeals insofar  as  the  decision
    of 24th April 2013 and the removal decision  of  13th  August  2013  in
    respect of the first Appellant was not in accordance with the  law  and
    the decision of 9th August 2013 and the removal decision of 13th August
    2013 in respect of the second Appellant was not in accordance with  the
    law for the reasons given above.   The  applications  therefore  remain
    outstanding and it is for the  Secretary  of  State  to  re-decide  the
    applications on the evidence before her.

28.  I allow  the  Appellants'  appeals  to  the  limited  extent  that  the
    Respondent's decisions to refuse leave and  remove  them  were  not  in
    accordance with the law.


Notice of decision

Appeals allowed in  so  far  as  the  Respondent's  decisions  were  not  in
accordance with the law.

No anonymity direction is made.


              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 25th May 2016.

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal, I have decided to make a fee award of any  fee
which has been paid.




              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 25th May 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
