
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/38244/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 August 2016                     |On 19 August 2016                    |
|Oral determination given immediately |                                     |
|following hearing                    |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             ONASA HEFFERY OTITE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant (Secretary of State): Mr S Whitwell, Home Office
                                   Presenting Officer
For the Respondent (Mr Otite):  Mr T Airuoyo, Legal Representative of
                                   Church Street Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Charles Bennett who in a determination  promulgated
    on 11 June 2015 following a hearing at Taylor House on 8 May  2015  had
    allowed Mr Otite's appeal against the decision previously made  by  the
    Secretary of State refusing to grant him a residence card on the  basis
    that Mr Otite was entitled to  succeed  under  Article  8  because  his
    removal would be in breach of this country's obligations under  Article
    8.  For ease of reference I shall hereafter refer to Mr Otite  who  was
    the original appellant as the claimant and to the  Secretary  of  State
    who was the original respondent as "the Secretary of State".

 2. This appeal was last before me on 12 November 2015 when I  referred  to
    the then recently reported decision of this Tribunal  in  Amirteymor  &
    Others (EEA appeals: human rights)  [2015]  UKUT  00466  in  which  the
    Tribunal had found that unless a Section 120 notice had been issued  or
    removal decision made in circumstances  such  as  this,  there  was  no
    jurisdiction to allow an appeal  based  on  an  appellant's  Article  8
    rights.  I stated on that occasion that if this  decision  was  correct
    the Secretary of State's appeal must succeed and  a  decision  must  be
    substituted dismissing the claimant's appeal.

 3. I was told on that occasion that permission to appeal had been  granted
    by the Upper Tribunal in Amirteymor to the Court of Appeal  because  it
    had been understood that that case had the status of a test case  which
    was to decide whether in EEA residence cases an appeal should  also  be
    considered on Article 8 grounds where a Section 120 notice had not been
    issued.  Because on that  occasion  there  were  many  cases  currently
    before the Upper Tribunal whose outcome would depend on the decision of
    the Court of Appeal, it was considered appropriate to adjourn this case
    as well as others in which this issue was raised until such time as the
    Court of Appeal had handed down its judgment in that case.

 4. Subsequently the Court of Appeal has given judgment in TY (Sri Lanka) v
    SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 1233 in  which  the  decision  in  Amirteymor  was
    upheld.  The Court  of  Appeal  specifically  upheld  the  decision  in
    Amirteymor at paragraph 36 of its decision in TY.

 5. Before me this morning on behalf of the claimant  Mr  Airuoyo  conceded
    that a Section 120 notice not having been served the appeal  could  not
    succeed and in those circumstances he was instructed  to  withdraw  the
    claimant's appeal.  As the matter is now before me I do not consent  to
    withdrawal but consider it appropriate to give my decision because  the
    decision will involve the setting aside of the previous  decision  made
    by the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. It follows from the decision of the Court of Appeal in  TY  that  Judge
    Bennett's decision allowing  the  claimant's  appeal  under  Article  8
    cannot stand because he had no jurisdiction to make the order  he  did.
    Accordingly I must set this decision aside  as  containing  a  material
    error of law and re-make it by dismissing the claimant's appeal which I
    now do.

Decision

The decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Charles  Bennett  allowing  the
claimant's appeal is set aside as containing a material error  of  law,  and
the Tribunal substitutes the following decision:

The claimant's appeal is dismissed.


Signed:
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date:    18 August 2016
