
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/39639/2014
                                                               ia/39640/2014
                                                               ia/39641/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 August 2016                    |On 13 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                                  Jashy [J]
                              Chinnaduraai [A]
                               [J C] (a minor)
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr S Bellara, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are a wife, her husband, and their 6-year old  daughter:
    the wife is  the  principal  appellant  and,  save  where  the  context
    requires, we refer to her in this decision as 'the appellant'. They are
    all Indian citizens.

 2. The appellant first came  to  the  United  Kingdom  from  India  on  29
    September 2010 with  a  2-year  student  visa,  work  up  to  20  hours
    permitted during term time, and no recourse to public funds.  Her leave
    was extended, to 13 August 2014, with restricted employment  conditions
    and no recourse to public funds.  The appellant's husband and  daughter
    joined her on 16 September 2013, with leave to remain until  13  August
    2014, in line  with  the  principal  appellant,  also  with  restricted
    employment and no recourse to public funds.

 3. On 15 October 2014, the respondent refused to grant  further  leave  to
    remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  under  paragraph  245ZX(a)   of   the
    Immigration Rules HC395 (as amended) as  a  Tier  4  (General)  Student
    Migrant and decided to remove the appellants by way of directions under
    section 47 of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  (as
    amended).  The respondent refused the applications of the  husband  and
    child under paragraphs 319C(b) and 319H(b) of the Rules, in  line  with
    her decision regarding the principal appellant.

 4. The basis of the respondent's decision  to  refuse  further  leave  and
    remove the appellants was that, pursuant to paragraph  322(1A)  of  the
    Immigration Rules HC395  (as  amended),  she  was  satisfied  that  the
    appellant had used deception in her  application  by  relying  on  bank
    statements which the State Bank of India refused to verify as  genuine.
    The applicant achieved  30  points  for  her  CAS  but  no  points  for
    Maintenance  (Funds),  as  the  respondent  considered  that  the  bank
    statements from the State Bank of India had been proven to be false.

 5. In addition, the respondent  warned  the  applicant  that  pursuant  to
    paragraph 320(7B) she would be subject to a 1-year bar on return if she
    left the United Kingdom voluntarily, 5 years if she left voluntarily at
    the expense of the United Kingdom government, and 10 years  if  it  was
    necessary to remove or deport her.

 6. The respondent included a section 120 one-stop notice  in  the  refusal
    letter, requiring the appellants to state  any  additional  grounds  on
    which they should be allowed to stay in the United Kingdom.

 7. The appellants had an in-country right of appeal, which they exercised,
    but opted for an appeal 'on the papers', providing a witness  statement
    from the appellant but not giving the  opportunity  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  to  cross-examine  the  applicant  or  raise  any  points  of
    clarification.

 8. The respondent also did not arrange representation or appear: the First-
    tier Tribunal was required to decide the merits of the appeal solely on
    the documents presented by the parties.

First-tier Tribunal decision

 9. The First-tier Tribunal reviewed the  evidence  from  the  respondent's
    document verification process, presented redacted, and not in the  form
    of a Document Verification Report (DVR).  It was  in  the  form  of  an
    email exchange between a Visa Support Assistant at the  British  Deputy
    High Commission at Chennai and  SBI  Tiruchirappalli  (the  appellant's
    branch of the State Bank of India).

10. There was rebuttal evidence in the form of a witness statement from the
    appellant, stating that the documents were genuine  and  reliable,  and
    that she had contacted her bank.  She said that her  mother  was  using
    the account and had taken the email and a letter to the bank, which was
    not prepared to confirm the authenticity of the email or give any other
    details. There was nothing more from the bank.

11. The First-tier Tribunal was guided by the  decision  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Adedoyin (formerly AA (Nigeria) v SSHD) [2010] EWCA Civ  773,
    and by that of the Upper Tribunal in Begum (false documents  and  false
    statements) [2015] UKUT 00041 (IAC).   The  Judge  concluded  that  the
    respondent had reasonable grounds for suspicion that the documents from
    the SBI Tiruchirappalli were false.  The Judge directed himself that it
    was for the appellant to rebut that reasonable suspicion,  and  that  a
    bare assertion in  a  witness  statement,  unsupported  by  documentary
    evidence from the bank or even the oral evidence of the appellant,  was
    insufficient.   The  Tribunal  noted   that   'it   would   have   been
    comparatively easy for [the appellants] to adduce relevant  documentary
    evidence in refutation  of  the  respondent's  suspicion  had  it  been
    possible actually to obtain the same'.

12. On that basis, the First-tier Tribunal  concluded  that  the  appellant
    'had failed to discharge the burden of proving her appeal' and that her
    appeal,  and  those  of  the  second  and  third  appellants,  must  be
    dismissed.

Error of law decision

13. In an error of law decision promulgated on 21 April 2016  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Murray found that there was  an  error  of  law  in  the
    judge's self direction in reliance  on  Shen  (Paper  appeals;  proving
    dishonesty)  [2014]  UKUT  00236  (IAC)  which  held  inter  alia  that
    "pursuant to paragraph 322 of the Immigration Rules  the  reference  to
    "false" means "dishonestly false".

14. Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray directed that the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal be set aside and re-heard in the Upper Tribunal and
    made directions for an indexed and paginated bundle containing all  the
    documentary  evidence  upon  which  it  is  intended  to  rely  at  the
    forthcoming hearing, pursuant to Rule  15(2A)  and  that  the  previous
    documentary material need not be re-served.

15. That is the basis on which the appeal came before us today.

Evidence before the Upper Tribunal

16. The core documents at the  hearing  today  are  a  statement  from  the
    appellant's mother and a copy of the document verification report.  The
    document verification report  in  the  part  headed  'Contact  History'
    states as follows:

         "Called the above number [for the State Bank of India] and spoke to
         Official - State Bank of India, Tiruchirapalli who stated that  the
         details given in the balance confirmation letter and bank statement
         does not tally with their records.  He refused to give any  further
         details.  Email correspondence  received  from  bank  received  and
         linked below."

    The email from the bank read as follows:

         "Dear Sir

         On scrutiny of the  account  we  observe  that  we  are  unable  to
         ascertain the veracity of the certificate issued by the branch, nor
         the credit balance shown in the certificate  tally  with  that  the
         balance lying in the account [number given] as  on  the  date  17th
         July 2014.

         Regards

         SBI Tiruchirapalli."

17. The statement from the appellant's mother, the original  of  which  was
    produced at the hearing and which was signed  in  Tiruchirapalli  on  8
    August 2016, states that the family had not notified the State Bank  of
    India that the appellant  was  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  that  the
    appellant's mother was using the account with the appellant's ATM  card
    and signed cheque book as the appellant's mother is  alone  and  looked
    after by the appellant and her husband.  The statement continues -

         "4.  ... She also asked me  to  maintain  the  account  because  in
             India, the account will automatically become dormant if  there
             is not transaction for a while.  Then it will be difficult  to
             re-open again.

         5.   She was ordered a statement from the bank over the  phone  and
             they have sent to our home address.  I have posted that to her
             to London.  The bank was not aware she is in  UK.   They  were
             under impression all the transaction in the account  was  made
             by her.  The account is now freeze because of the British High
             Commission verification.  The bank  is  in  suspicion  how  my
             daughter can make transactions in the account in  India  while
             she is in UK.

         6.   My daughter contacted the bank  and  I  have  physically  been
             there  to  get  a  letter  from  the   bank   explaining   the
             circumstances.  Because the bank has started action further to
             the verification the bank is reluctant to give any information
             until otherwise she must be present with her ID.

         7.   I only use the card to make  shopping's  and  household  needs
             like rent, Bills and other expenses.  In India we were  living
             like one family. I can ascertain most  of  the  money  in  the
             account is belong to her and she never turned back to  us  for
             using the money for our self.  She very much knows that we  do
             not misuse the trust.  Her husband also looking after us  very
             good.

         8.   I did some transaction on the day when  the  bank  issued  the
             statement.  Now all the money is blocked and that can only get
             back when my daughter will physically come to the  bank  along
             with her ID.

         9.   I say that there is nothing wrong in the statement as  alleged
             by the Home Office.  I was not aware that I must  not  do  any
             transactions on that day.  Honestly speaking we both were  not
             aware, otherwise my daughter would have told me not to do  any
             transactions.

         10.  The statement which I was submitted along with her application
             is genuine."

18. That statement provides a prima facie reason why the  bank  might  have
    refused to give further information and also why the  bank  might  have
    stated that the information in the statement was  not  matched  by  the
    information on their records for the same day.

19. The appellant's witness statement, produced in rebuttal of the refusal,
    stated that she had spoken to her bank and they had confirmed orally to
    her that the documents were correct and genuine.  The appellant  stated
    that the probable reason for the bank's refusal to verify  the  balance
    was that her mother used the account on the same  day,  such  that  the
    balance was different.  No further witness statement from the appellant
    or her mother was produced for the Upper Tribunal hearing and Mr Melvin
    indicated that he did not wish to  cross-examine  the  appellant.   The
    appellant's evidence therefore stands unchallenged.

Submissions

20. For the appellant, Mr Bellara submits that having regard to  RP  (proof
    of forgery)  Nigeria  and  the  requirement  for  a  clear  finding  of
    deception by the appellant in relation to her application to  the  Home
    Office, the rather qualified statement by the bank simply does not meet
    that standard nor does it raise a prima facie case  for  a  finding  of
    deception as opposed to the production of  unreliable  documents  which
    would engage the guidance in Tanveer Ahmed.  He submits therefore  that
    the proper outcome is for the appeal to be allowed in relation  to  the
    paragraph 320(7) finding only but not in relation to the  substance  of
    the appeal, the documents being accepted  to  be  at  least  apparently
    unreliable.

21. For the Secretary of State Mr Melvin prepared a skeleton  argument,  in
    which he contended that the State Bank of India's  refusal  to  confirm
    that the documents were genuine was sufficient to switch the burden  to
    the appellant and that, despite the lapse of nearly 2 years  since  the
    contested decision, she has produced no further evidence from the bank.



22. He submitted that the Upper Tribunal has sufficient material before  it
    to find that the documents were false because the DVR Report  indicated
    that the State Bank of India was  unable  to  verify  either  the  bank
    statements or the certificate of deposit.  He argued that  no  reliance
    can be placed  on  the  appellant's  witness  statement  in  which  she
    asserted that she had subsequently spoken to the State  Bank  of  India
    and that they have orally confirmed that the documents were genuine and
    correct and that the reason the account was  blocked  was  because  her
    mother used the account on the day.

23. Mr Melvin argued that the burden was on the applicant to show that  she
    meets the requirements of the Tier 4 Rules and that she  has  submitted
    documents which her own bankers  will  not  verify  as  genuine.    The
    respondent relied on Shehzad & Another v Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 615 as to the shifting burden of proof.
     The respondent is required to furnish prima facie proof  of  deception
    and that is an evidential burden.  If that burden is met, as Mr  Melvin
    contended was the case here, the burden shifts  to  the  individual  to
    provide a plausible explanation.

Rule 322(1A)

24. The terms of rule 322 (1A) of the Immigration Rules are as follows:

         "322. In addition to the grounds for refusal of extension  of  stay
         set out in Parts 2-8 of these Rules, the following provisions apply
         in relation to the refusal of an application for leave  to  remain,
         variation of leave to enter or remain or,  where  appropriate,  the
         curtailment of leave, ...

         Grounds on which leave to remain and variation of leave to enter or
         remain in the United Kingdom are to be refused

         ...  (1A) where false  representations  have  been  made  or  false
         documents or  information  have  been  submitted  (whether  or  not
         material to the application, and whether or not to the  applicant's
         knowledge), or material facts have not been disclosed, in  relation
         to the application  or  in  order  to  obtain  documents  from  the
         Secretary of State or a third party  required  in  support  of  the
         application."

25. The language of the Rule is mandatory.   In  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    Adedoyin (AA (Nigeria)), Lord Justice  Rix  (with  whom  Lord  Justices
    Longmore and Jacob agreed), said at [76]- [79]:

         "76. ... Dishonesty or deception is needed, albeit not  necessarily
         that of the applicant himself, to render a "false representation" a
         ground for mandatory refusal.

         77.   If  it  were  otherwise,  then  an  applicant   whose   false
         representation was in  no  way  dishonest  would  not  only  suffer
         mandatory refusal but would also be barred from  re-entry  for  ten
         years if he was removed or deported. That might not in itself be so
         very severe a rule, if only because the applicant  always  has  the
         option of voluntary departure. If, however, he has to  be  assisted
         at the expense of the Secretary of State, then the ban is for  five
         years. Most seriously of all, however, is the possibility,  on  the
         Secretary of State's interpretation, that an  applicant  for  entry
         clearance (not  this  case)  who  had  made  an  entirely  innocent
         misrepresentation, innocent not only so far as his personal honesty
         is concerned but also in its origins, would be barred from re-entry
         under paragraph 320(7B)(ii) for ten years, even if he left  the  UK
         voluntarily.

         78.  In any event, it would be most unfortunate if, merely  because
         of an entirely innocent  misrepresentation,  an  applicant  had  to
         leave the UK under a decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  which
         stated, as the decision in the case of Mr A has stated,  that  "you
         have used deception in this  application".  That  would  presumably
         always be an impediment to such an applicant's return, even if  not
         a mandatory bar.

         79.  It also follows that on my understanding of rule  322(1A),  no
         question of discretion arises at all. There may be  an  element  of
         assessment as to whether a minor  inaccuracy  amounts  to  a  false
         representation of any kind. However, that kind of assessment of the
         facts constantly  arises,  and  is  separate  from  a  question  of
         discretion."

26. In Shen the Upper Tribunal held inter alia that "pursuant to  paragraph
    322  of  the  Immigration  Rules  the  reference   to   "false"   means
    "dishonestly false" and

         "(1)     In terms of the approach  that  a  tribunal  should  adopt
             towards  decisions  of  the  Secretary  of  State   in   which
             dishonesty or deception is alleged against  an  applicant  for
             leave to remain, the starting point should be, as the Court of
             Appeal in Adedoyin (formerly AA (Nigeria) v SSHD) [2010]  EWCA
             Civ 773 have made clear, that pursuant to paragraph 322 of the
             Immigration   Rules,   the   reference   to   "false"    means
             "dishonestly" false.

         (2)  Where an application form etc is false in a material way, this
             may be relied on by the Secretary  of  State  as  prima  facie
             evidence establishing dishonesty. The inference of  deliberate
             deception can be  strengthened  by  other  facts:  e.g.  if  a
             criminal conviction (not disclosed in an application) occurred
             shortly before completion of the application form.  Here,  the
             conviction must have been high in the applicant's mind and any
             explanation based on oversight would carry little weight.  But
             it is always open to  an  appellant  to  proffer  an  innocent
             explanation and if that explanation meets  a  basic  level  of
             plausibility, the burden switches back  to  the  Secretary  of
             State to answer that evidence. At  the  end  of  the  day  the
             Secretary of State bears the burden of proving dishonesty.

         (3)  The internal organisational decision by the Secretary of State
             not to engage with paper appeals means  that  the  appellant's
             evidence  goes  unchallenged.  In  that  regard,  it  must  be
             remembered, that in the absence of evidence from the Secretary
             of  State  putting  the  appellant's  prima  facie   plausible
             explanation into doubt, it would be wrong to find  dishonesty.
             Thus,  in  view  of  the  possible   evidential   difficulties
             confronting a judge when deciding a paper  application,  where
             the appellant's evidence is not met (see para  (2)  above),  a
             tribunal should  be  slow  to  find  dishonesty,  particularly
             without hearing evidence and submissions on the point from the
             appellant and/or the Secretary of State.

         (4)  A finding of dishonesty can have catastrophic consequences for
             the appellant in social and economic terms and is  not  to  be
             made lightly.  Thus, in a paper case, if  a  judge  entertains
             doubts as to the appellant's account,  he  or  she  should  be
             mindful of the powers of rule 45 of the Asylum and Immigration
             Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 to give  directions  regarding
             supporting documentary evidence, or for the Secretary of State
             to respond  to  the  appellant's  evidence  as  she  considers
             appropriate."

27. Further clarification was given by the Upper  Tribunal  (Vice-President
    Ockelton and Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Davidge)  in  Begum  (false
    documents and false statements) [2015] UKUT 00041 (IAC):

         "A document which is not itself 'false' within the meaning of  A  v
         SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 773 may fall equally foul of para  320(7A)  if
         it contains a statement that is, to a relevant person's  knowledge,
         untrue."

28. In Shehzad & Another at [3], the Court of Appeal held that:

         "3.  It is common ground that for  a  decision  to  be  made  under
         paragraph 322(1A) there must be material  justifying  a  conclusion
         that the individual under consideration has  lied  or  submitted  a
         false document. It is also common  ground  that  the  Secretary  of
         State bears the initial burden of furnishing  proof  of  deception,
         and that this burden is an "evidential burden". That means that, if
         the Secretary of State provides prima facie evidence of  deception,
         the burden "shifts" onto the  individual  to  provide  a  plausible
         innocent explanation, and that if the individual does so the burden
         "shifts back" to the Secretary of State: see Shen  (paper  appeals:
         proving dishonesty) [2014] UKUT 00236 (IAC) at [22]  and  [25]  and
         Muhandiramge (section S-LTR 1.7) [2015] UKUT 675 at [10]. As to the
         standard of proof, the civil standard  of  proof  applies  to  this
         question.  ...[The]   standard   required   is   the   balance   of
         probabilities. Baroness Hale stated (at  [70])  that  "neither  the
         seriousness  of  the  allegation  nor  the   seriousness   of   the
         consequences should make any difference to the standard of proof to
         be applied in determining the facts. The inherent probabilities are
         simply something to be  taken  into  account,  where  relevant,  in
         deciding where the truth lies."

29. That is the legal context against which the  evidence  in  this  appeal
    falls to be assessed.

Discussion

30. The thrust of Mr Melvin's case was that the respondent  provided  prima
    facie evidence of deception and that the applicant's explanation is not
    potentially an innocent one.  We are not with him in that respect.  The
    evidence from the bank does not go sufficiently far to amount to  prima
    facie evidence of deception and the official  who  spoke  to  the  visa
    officer did not so state.  The evidence of the  SBI  official  is  that
    "the  details  given  in  the  balance  confirmation  letter  and  bank
    statement does not tally with their records" and that  further  details
    were refused.

31. The appellant has supplied a possible explanation as to why  the  State
    Bank of India refused to confirm the veracity of the  documents  or  to
    give any further explanation:  having realised  that  two  people  were
    operating the same account and one of them was not in the country, they
    wished to investigate the matter  further  and  it  appears  that  such
    remains the position.

32. The applicant's unchallenged evidence and that of her  mother  is  that
    the disparity in the amount in the bank can be explained by withdrawals
    made by her mother on the day when the account was compared.  They also
    state that her  mother  operated  the  account,  with  the  appellant's
    consent, to keep it open and enable her to buy shopping and so forth in
    the appellant's absence.  That may be a breach of the banking  contract
    between the appellant and the State  Bank  of  India,  but  it  is  not
    necessarily dishonesty.

33. Having said that, we must decide how to deal with the  appeal.   We  do
    not find that the appellant was dishonest or  used  documents  engaging
    section 322(1A) but we do find that it was open to  the  respondent  to
    assess her bank documents as unreliable for Tanveer Ahmed  reasons  and
    to place no weight on them, leading to a refusal to  award  the  points
    claimed for Maintenance (Funds).

34. We therefore set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    error of law applying the decision of Judge Murray and we substitute  a
    decision dismissing the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  to
    refuse to vary her leave to remain on  the  basis  that  the  documents
    which she produced are Tanveer Ahmed unreliable.

35. We make it clear in so doing that the allegation of  deception  is  not
    made out and should not therefore be  relied  upon  in  any  subsequent
    decision.

36. The appeal is dismissed.

Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

We set aside the decision.   We  re-make  the  decision  in  the  appeal  by
dismissing it.


Signed:  Judith A J C Gleeson                Date:        9 September 2016
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

