
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/39531/2014
     IA/39532/2014
     IA/39533/2014
     IA/39534/2014
     IA/39535/2014
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27th January 2016                          |On 31st March 2016            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                         mrs Ahaoma Gold Benson (1)
                         mr Benson Ahaoma Amaogu (2)
                             [N B] (a minor) (3)
                             [T B] (a minor) (4)
                             [E B] (a minor) (5)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms S Akinbolu (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants are citizens of Nigeria.  The first Appellant  was  born
    on 24th March 1976, the second Appellant is her  husband  born  on  4th
    August 1996.  The third to fifth Appellants are  their  children.   The
    first and third Appellants entered the United Kingdom on  24th  October
    2002 as visitors and thereafter remained as  overstayers.   The  second
    Appellant entered the United Kingdom with entry clearance as a  visitor
    on 12th March 2005 valid until  2nd  May  2005.   He  left  the  United
    Kingdom but returned on 16th August 2005 with the benefit of a two year
    multiple entry visit visa valid until 5th August 2007.  Since that date
    he has been  an  overstayer.   The  fourth  and  fifth  Appellants  are
    children of the first and second Appellants.  Both were born in the UK.
     The fourth Appellant was born on [ ] 2010 and the fifth Appellant on [
    ] 2006.

 2. The relevant application from which this  appeal  stems  relates  to  a
    letter of 27th March 2014 requesting the Secretary of State to consider
    the Appellants' applications under Article 8 of the European Convention
    of  Human  Rights  with  reference  to  Section  55  of  the   Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.  I  acknowledge  that  there  had
    been  previous  applications  in  April  and  May  2012.    The   first
    application was deemed invalid due to the incorrect form and the second
    application for leave to remain outside the Rules was refused  on  17th
    July 2013 with no right of appeal.

 3. The current application was refused by the  Secretary  of  State  by  a
    Notice of Refusal dated 29th September 2014.  That appeal  came  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Holmes sitting  at  Stoke-on-Trent  on
    27th January 2015.  In a  decision  and  reasons  promulgated  on  12th
    February  2015  the  Appellants'  appeals  were  dismissed  under   the
    Immigration Rules.  The first Appellant's appeal was however allowed on
    human rights grounds and the second to fifth Appellants'  appeals  were
    allowed  to  the  extent  that  they  were  dependent  upon  the  first
    Appellant's human rights claim.

 4. On 23rd February 2015 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds  of  Appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal.  On 17th April  2015  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Reid granted permission to appeal.  The grounds  argued  inter
    alia that the judge had  made  a  material  misdirection  in  law  with
    reference to Edgehill [2014] EWCA Civ 402 as the decision under  appeal
    was outside the "two month window"  and  that  the  judge  consequently
    failed to have proper regard to the public interest as set out  in  the
    Rules and failed to lawfully engage with reasonableness as required  by
    Section 117B(1) of the 2002 Act (as amended).

 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  For the purpose  of  continuity  throughout
    the appeal process the Benson family are  referred  to  herein  as  the
    Appellants  and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the  Respondent.    The
    Appellants  appear  by  their  instructed  Counsel  Ms  Akinbolu.   The
    Secretary of State appears by her Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  Mr
    Walker.

Submissions/Discussion

 6. Mr Walker states that he relies on the Grounds of Appeal.  The first of
    those grounds is that he  notes  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    considered the case of Edgehill & Anor v Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 402 and concluded that the decision  of
    the Secretary of State was not in accordance with the law as it  should
    have been decided with regard to the provisions in force prior  to  9th
    July 2012.  He contends that the position regarding applications  prior
    to the July 2012 Rule change was clarified in Singh v SSHD [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 74 where the court held that "Edgehill  only  obtained  as  regards
    decisions taken in the two  month  window  between  9th  July  and  6th
    December 2012".  He contends that the decision in this case  was  taken
    on 29th September 2014 and therefore was outside the  window  expressed
    by the Court of Appeal.  Accordingly it is submitted that Edgehill  had
    no relevance to the instant appeal and that this is  pertinent  because
    it impacted upon the First-tier Tribunal Judge's  engagement  with  the
    Rules and  the  weight  that  is  to  be  afforded  in  the  subsequent
    proportionality assessment as an  instrument  of  immigration  control.
    Secondly he refers me to paragraphs 2(a)-(j) of the Grounds  of  Appeal
    submitting that the judge has failed to  properly  address  the  public
    interest factors therein and that the  judge  has  failed  to  lawfully
    engage with the concept of reasonableness as required by  the  "second"
    limb of Section 117B(6) because the scope of assessment in that  regard
    has been through the "prism of education" which is too narrow.  Further
    the Secretary of State contends that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  has
    failed to have due regard to the public  interest  factors  that  along
    with the concept of reasonableness require an assessment  of  both  the
    interests of the children and the countervailing  factors  pursuant  to
    the public interest that are  expressed,  but  not  limited  to,  those
    factors contained in Section 117B.

 7. Ms Akinbolu submits that  any  error  of  law  was  immaterial  to  the
    outcome.  She notes at paragraph 19, Judge Holmes concluded  that  "had
    the Respondent correctly applied the Rules as  they  stood  before  9th
    July  2012,  her  conclusion  would  inevitably  have  been  that   the
    applications fell outside them".  And at paragraph 31 that Judge Holmes
    proceeded to consider whether the provisions of the  2012  Rules  would
    have been met, concluding that had the provisions of  Appendix  FM  and
    paragraph 276ADE been applicable, neither parent  would  qualify  under
    the Rules and none of the children would  qualify  under  Appendix  FM.
    However  he  found  that  the  third  Appellant  would  have  met   the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE had they been in force.

 8. Consequently, whilst  she  accepts  the  ratio  of  Edgehill  has  been
    subsequently clarified by the Court of Appeal  in  Singh,  she  submits
    that in the present case that  error  was  immaterial  and  that  Judge
    Holmes' decision was clear, applying both the principles  of  the  2012
    Rules and the provisions of Section 117A-D of the 2002  Act  which  she
    submits reflect parliament's view of  the  matters  which  fall  to  be
    regarded when considering any assessment of the weight to  be  afforded
    to the public interest in this case.

 9. So far as the public interest test is concerned, she  points  out  that
    the judge made express reference to the provisions of Section 117A-D of
    the 2002 Act and addressed the statutory considerations  applicable  to
    an assessment of the public  interest.   She  refers  me  to  the  view
    expressed in Dube (ss.117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 90 (IAC) and the  findings
    of the panel at paragraphs 25 to 27 and applying those  principles  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge set out clearly the reasons  why  he  allowed
    the Appellants' appeal, making  express  reference  to  the  wealth  of
    higher court jurisprudence in this field.

10. She points out that there have been no challenges made to the facts and
    that the eldest child [NB] has now been in the UK for eleven years  and
    is  now  aged  13  and  that  the  fourth  and  fifth  Appellants   are
    respectively aged 5 and 9 years and have  been  in  the  UK  all  their
    lives.  She reminds me that no adverse consequences can be imposed upon
    children because of decisions made by their parents and that  there  is
    no reason why the findings by the judge of financial support would  not
    continue from friends in the church.  She reminds  me  that  the  third
    Appellant had lived in the United Kingdom  for  a  significant  period,
    exceeding that considered of greater significance  for  development  as
    set out in the authorities of Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74  and  Azimi-Moayed
    [2013] UKUT 197 and that the third Appellant's education has reached  a
    critical stage such that a move  to  Nigeria  would  cause  significant
    disruption.  As the First-tier Tribunal Judge put it  "all  aspects  of
    their existence other than their emotional ties to their parents" would
    have to start afresh.  She contends that there is no material error  of
    law and asked me to dismiss the appeal.

The Law

11.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

12. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.



Findings

13. This is one of those cases which seems with  increasing  regularity  to
    come before the Tribunal, namely a case where a claim is pursued  under
    Article 8 of the European  Convention  of  Human  Rights  predominantly
    supported by the length of time that young children  have  remained  in
    this country when considered against the immigration history  of  their
    parents  and  by  direct  consequence  the  position  of  the  children
    themselves.  It is true that the immigration history of the  first  and
    second Appellants is appalling.  They  are  lengthy  overstayers.   And
    that is a factor that must be taken  into  consideration,  particularly
    when applying the public interest.  However the children are  now  aged
    respectively 13, 9 and 5.  It is accepted by  the  Secretary  of  State
    that the claims of the Appellants all rise and fall together,  i.e.  it
    would be inappropriate to  return  the  adults  without  the  children.
    Family life must continue to be maintained together.  An application by
    the third Appellant now would meet the Immigration  Rules.   The  fifth
    Appellant has been in the country all his life and is now aged  9.   He
    is already entering a formative stage of  his  education.   The  fourth
    Appellant has now started school.

14. It was against this background that Immigration  Judge  Holmes  carried
    out a very detailed analysis.  The facts of  this  matter  are  not  in
    dispute.  Even if there is an error in law in  the  way  in  which  the
    judge has applied Edgehill (and he cannot be criticised  because  Singh
    was not available for him to consider at that stage), whilst there  was
    an error of law by the judge, that has to be looked at in  the  context
    of the decision and the findings in particular at paragraphs 31  to  34
    of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  and  in  such  circumstances  I  am
    satisfied that any error of law disclosed therein is immaterial on that
    aspect.

15. So far as the consideration of the public interest  is  concerned,  the
    grounds effectively amount to little more than disagreement.  The judge
    has given very detailed consideration to the position of this family at
    paragraphs 17 to 29 including the  views  expressed  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA  Civ  834.   These  matters  are
    addressed in particular in great detail at paragraph 29 of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge's consideration.

16. Whilst I acknowledge that Section 117B sets  out  the  public  interest
    considerations applicable in all  cases  and  that  that  includes  the
    maintenance of effective immigration control, it is necessary  to  give
    detailed consideration to paragraph 117B(6), namely to the effect  that
    in the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,  the  public
    interest does not require the person's removal where (a) the person has
    a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,
    and (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.
     These factors, whilst not set out as such  within  the  determination,
    are given consideration at paragraph 36 of the judge's decision.

17. Overall this is a well thought out and well constructed decision.   The
    judge has looked at all the countervailing factors and  considered  the
    question of public interest and proportionality.  He has made a finding
    that the children could not, without excessive hardship, either  go  to
    live in Nigeria with their parents or  remain  in  this  country  while
    their parents were sent abroad.  Those were findings he was entitled to
    make.  It is against this background that the appeal is brought  and  I
    am satisfied for all the above reasons that this is a well constructed,
    well reasoned and well thought out decision which discloses no material
    errors of law and on that basis the appeal of the Secretary of State is
    dismissed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no material error of  law.
 The appeal of the Secretary of State  is  consequently  dismissed  and  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
