
IAC-AH-DN-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39410/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29th May 2015                     |On 12th June 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              HALYNA PALANYTSYA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss E Savage, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms J Norman of Counsel instructed by Sterling & Law
Associates


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Majid promulgated on 16th February 2015.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and I will refer to her as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a Ukranian citizen born 9th March  1959  who  made  two
    applications to the Secretary of State.  One  was  an  application  for
    leave to remain based upon her family and private life, and  the  other
    an application for a residence card as the  family  member  of  an  EEA
    citizen, that being her daughter-in-law.

 4. The Secretary of State issued two decisions, one  being  a  refusal  to
    issue a residence card dated 29th August 2014, and the  other  being  a
    decision to remove the Claimant from  the  United  Kingdom  dated  17th
    September 2014.

 5. The Claimant appealed against both decisions, and her appeal was  heard
    by Judge Majid (the judge) on 11th February 2015.

 6. The judge appears to have conflated the two decisions, referring in the
    first paragraph of his decision to the Secretary  of  State's  decision
    dated 17th September 2014, refusing the Claimant leave to remain in the
    United  Kingdom  under  the  Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006 (the 2006 regulations).  This decision was in fact not
    connected with the 2006 regulations, but was a decision to  remove  the
    Claimant following refusal of a human rights claim.

 7. Having heard evidence, the judge indicated at paragraph 17 that he  was
    minded to allow the appeal outside the rules, although at paragraph  27
    he records that "I am persuaded that the  Appellant  comes  within  the
    relevant immigration law, as amended."

 8. The judge then records that the appeal is allowed,  although  does  not
    state  whether  this  is  under  the  Immigration   Rules,   the   2006
    regulations, or with reference  to  Article  8  of  the  1950  European
    Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention) outside the rules.

 9. The Secretary of State applied  for  permission  to  appeal  which  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Grant-Hutchinson  in  the
    following terms;

         'It is arguable that the judge has misdirected himself  in  law  by
         failing (a) to make any findings under  the  Immigration  (European
         Economic Area) Regulations 2006 and (b) to  make  any  findings  in
         relation to the Appellant's  private  and  family  life  under  the
         Immigration Rules before proceeding to deal with Article 8 of  ECHR
         outside the Immigration Rules.'

10. Following the grant of permission, the  Claimant  did  not  submit  any
    response pursuant to Rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.

11. The Tribunal issued directions that there should be  a  hearing  before
    the Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    erred in law such that the decision should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

The Secretary of State's Submissions

12. Miss Savage relied upon the grounds contained  within  the  application
    for permission to appeal which may be summarised as follows.

13. The judge had materially erred by failing to make findings on  material
    matters.  He  had  failed  to  determine  the  Claimant's  position  in
    relation to the requirements of the 2006 regulations.

14. The judge did not consider Article 8 within the Immigration Rules.  The
    decision fails to set out the proper basis  for  allowing  the  appeal.
    The judge did not explain why he had considered Article 8  outside  the
    Immigration Rules, and did not specifically engage with  the  facts  or
    evidence before him, and reached an  unsustainable  and  unintelligible
    conclusion which was against the weight of evidence.

15. The judge failed to consider the public  interest  considerations  when
    assessing proportionality under Article 8.

The Claimant's Submissions

16. Ms Norman accepted that the judge  had  erred  in  law  by  not  making
    specific findings in relation to the 2006  regulations,  but  submitted
    that the error was not material.  This was on the basis that the  judge
    had considered all the evidence and made clear findings.

My Findings and Conclusions

17. The judge materially erred in law.   The  decision  lacks  clarity  and
    there  is  a  lack  of  adequate  reasoning.   The  Upper  Tribunal  in
    Budhathoki [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC) set out principles to be  considered
    in giving adequate reasons for a decision and for ease of  reference  I
    set out below the headnote;

         "It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for First-tier  Tribunal
         judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case.  This
         leads to judgments becoming overly long and confused and is  not  a
         proportionate  approach  to  deciding  cases.   It   is,   however,
         necessary for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts  in  the
         evidence and explain in clear and brief  terms  their  reasons,  so
         that the parties can understand why they have won or lost."

18. I do not find that the judge  complied  with  the  principles  set  out
    above.  I do not find that there has been adequate consideration of the
    issues raised so  far  as  consideration  of  the  EEA  regulations  is
    concerned.  No findings are made in relation to  the  EEA  regulations.
    The decision does not address material issues.

19. No adequate findings were made in relation to consideration of  Article
    8 under the Immigration Rules, which should be the starting  point  for
    an Article 8  consideration.   The  finding  in  paragraph  19  of  the
    decision that the best interests of a  child  must  be  considered  and
    given paramount weight as part of the assessment of proportionality  is
    in my view incorrect, as the best interests of a child  are  a  primary
    consideration not a paramount consideration, and  those  considerations
    can be outweighed by the cumulative effect of other considerations.

20. There is an inadequate assessment of Article 8 outside the  Immigration
    Rules.   The  consideration  of  proportionality  is  flawed,   as   no
    indication is given that the judge had regard to the factors set out in
    section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.   The
    Upper Tribunal in Dube [2015] UKUT 00090 (IAC)  confirmed  that  judges
    are duty bound to have regard to the specified considerations  set  out
    in section 117B.  It was also confirmed in Dube that it is not an error
    of law to fail to refer to considerations within sections 117A-117D  of
    the 2002 Act if the judge has applied the test he was supposed to apply
    according to  its  terms,  as  what  matters  is  substance  not  form.
    Unfortunately in this case there is no indication that there  has  been
    any adequate consideration of the factors set out in section 117B.

21. For the above reasons the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  set
    aside.

22.  Once  I  had  announced  that  the  decision  was  set   aside,   both
    representatives suggested that it was appropriate to remit this  appeal
    back to the First-tier Tribunal to be considered afresh.

23. I have taken into account the Senior President's Practice Statement 7.2
    which states;

         '7.2 The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to  proceed
             to remake the decision, instead of remitting the case  to  the
             First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
             that;

             (a)  the effect of the error  has  been  to  deprive  a  party
                  before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other
                  opportunity for  that  party's  case  to  be  put  to  and
                  considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

             (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact-finding  which
                  is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be
                  remade is such  that,  having  regard  to  the  overriding
                  objective in rule 2 it is appropriate to remit the case to
                  the First-tier Tribunal.'

24. In my view the requirements of paragraph 7.2 are met.  The  substantive
    issues in this appeal need to be considered by the First-tier  Tribunal
    and judicial fact-finding is required.  It is more appropriate for this
    to be undertaken by the First-tier Tribunal.

25. The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal will  take  place  at  Taylor
    House Hearing Centre.  The parties will be advised of the time and date
    of the hearing in due course.  The appeal is to be heard  by  a  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge other than Judge Majid.  The appeal is to be  heard
    afresh and there are no preserved findings.  It was indicated  that  an
    interpreter in Ukranian will be required and this will be  arranged  by
    the Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that  it
is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There has  been
no request to the Upper Tribunal for anonymity and  no  anonymity  order  is
made.



Signed   Date 1st June 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made by the Upper Tribunal.  If this is relevant, it  is  to
be considered by the First-tier Tribunal when the appeal is heard afresh.



Signed   Date 1st June 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

