
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39241/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 August 2015                     |On 20 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR FOYSAL AHMED
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Pal, a Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Shah, Solicitor


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department.
    For convenience, and to avoid confusion, I will refer to the parties as
    they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. In this appeal, the respondent appeals against a decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Sweet) allowing the appellant's appeal  against  a
    re-considered decision, made  on  16  September  2014,  to  refuse  the
    appellant's application for further  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom under paragraph 276ADE of the  Immigration  Rules  HC  395  (as
    amended) ('the Immigration Rules'). The reasons for refusal  were  that
    the respondent did not accept that there very significant obstacles  to
    the appellant's integration  in  Bangladesh.  The  respondent  did  not
    accept  that  there  were  any  exceptional  circumstances  to  warrant
    consideration of a grant of leave to remain outside of the  Immigration
    Rules. The appellant was also served with a Notice  of  a  decision  to
    remove him under s 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

 3. The respondent originally refused the application  on  7  January  2014
    with no right of appeal. Subsequently, the appellant made a  claim  for
    judicial review of the respondent's decision.  Pursuant  to  a  consent
    order dated 18 June 2014 the respondent re-considered the  application.
    The revised decision was issued on 16 September 2014  and  it  is  this
    decision that was the subject of  the  appeal  to  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Sweet.

Background Facts

 4. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who was born  on  31  December
    1995.  He came to the UK, at the age of 10,  with  his  parents  on  12
    September 2006 with  leave  to  remain  until  20  February  2007.  The
    appellant's parents returned to Bangladesh leaving the appellant in the
    care of his older brother. On 8 January 2007 the appellant applied  for
    leave  to  remain  as  a  child  of  a  settled  parent/relative.  This
    application was refused on 14 May 2007. The appellant appealed  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal against that decision. His appeal was dismissed  in
    a decision promulgated on 11 July 2007. He did not seek  permission  to
    appeal that decision.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellant appealed against the 16 December  2014  decision  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  In a determination promulgated on 2  April  2014,
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Sweet allowed the  appellant's  appeal  under
    the Immigration Rules.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The respondent sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal. On  9
    June 2015 First-tier Tribunal (Judge Cruthers) granted  the  respondent
    permission to appeal.  Thus, the appeal came before me.

Summary of the Submissions

 7. There are 3 grounds of appeal set out in the application for permission
    to appeal. The grounds can be summarised as follows:

         . 1) the judge made no overall assessment of  the  credibility  of
           the witness, in particular the judge failed  to  make  a  proper
           assessment of the evidence;

         . 2) the judge's finding  on  paragraph  276ADE  is  in  error  by
           finding that he could apply the appellant's age at the  date  of
           the application rather than the date of the  decision.  Further,
           the judge failed to set out any reasoning as to  what  were  the
           very significant obstacles to  the  appellant's  integration  in
           Bangladesh;

         . 3) the judge erred in finding that the appellant had retained  a
           right to stay in the UK.

Error of Law

 8. The jurisdiction of this tribunal on  an  appeal  from  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is limited to points of law (s 11 of the Tribunals, Courts and
    Enforcement Act 2007). Generally the Upper Tribunal will not  interfere
    with the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, if an  error  of  law  is
    found, unless that decision is material to the outcome of the appeal.

    Ground 1 - no proper assessment of the evidence

 9. There is an overlap between ground 1 and 2 with regard to the arguments
    advanced in relation to ground 2 concerning  the  judge's  findings  on
    whether it is reasonable to expect the appellant to leave  the  UK  and
    whether there are very significant  obstacles  to  his  integration  in
    Bangladesh.  I  consider  that  these  arguments  are  best  considered
    together with the complaint regarding the  judge's  assessment  of  the
    evidence.

10. Ms Pal adopted and amplified the reasons set out in  the  grounds.  Her
    submissions were that Bengali  was  spoken  at  home,  the  appellant's
    brother had given his evidence through a Bengali interpreter,  and  the
    appellant lived in Bangladesh until he was 10.

11. Mr Shah submitted that the judge did not have to give every  detail  of
    the evidence that was considered. The judge recorded in paragraphs  10-
    22 the evidence that was taken into account. Regarding language  skills
    the appellant did not assert that he could not speak Bengali, rather he
    is not fluent and certainly not  proficient  enough  to  pursue  higher
    education in Bangladesh. The judge in this case did not need to make  a
    finding of credibility, the judge set out what evidence was accepted  -
    this was sufficient. The judge  made  findings  about  the  appellant's
    parents' ill health, evidence in the form of medical records  had  been
    provided. The judge found that there was not  sufficient  accommodation
    at the appellant's parent's house in Bangladesh. The determination  was
    well-reasoned.

12. The decision of Judge Sweet is very brief. However, various factors are
    identified that led  the  judge  to  conclude  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the appellant to leave the United  Kingdom.  These
    factors are set out in paragraphs 31 and 32. They build to some  extent
    on the evidence that Judge  Sweet  set  out  earlier  in  the  decision
    including  the  oral  evidence  at  the  hearing  and  the  documentary
    evidence. The judge accepted that the appellant had been  supported  in
    the UK by his brother and sister-in-law since his arrival as a 10  year
    old child, that his parents were seriously ill and  unable  to  provide
    support to him because of their ill-health, reduced  means  and  modest
    accommodation (para 31 and 32). The appellant has 2 other brothers  who
    reside in Dhaka and Dubai, they are not able to  provide  any  support,
    the appellant has little or no contact with them. The judge found  that
    the appellant's knowledge of Bengali was limited. It is likely that the
    judge did underestimate the appellant's ability, however, as  submitted
    by Mr Shah it was not the appellant's case that he could not speak  and
    write in Bengali but was that he was not fluent.

13. I have found (see below) that the relevant paragraph of the Immigration
    Rules is 276ADE (1)(iv). The relevant requirement is,  therefore,  that
    it would not be reasonable to expect the appellant to leave the  UK.  I
    have considered the arguments advanced on this basis. I do not need  to
    consider the judge's findings in respect  of  whether  there  are  very
    significant obstacles to the appellant's integration in Bangladesh.

14. The Grounds of Compatibility with Article 8 of the ECHR:  Statement  by
    the Home Office (13 June 2012) which accompanied  the  introduction  of
    paragraph 276ADE (1) (iv) set out, at 27: 'a  period  of  7  continuous
    years spent in the UK as a child will generally establish a  sufficient
    level of integration for family and private life  to  exist  such  that
    removal would normally not be in the best interests of the child'.

15. The Immigration Directorate Instruction 'Family Migration: Appendix  FM
    Section 1.0b Family Life (as a Partner or Parent) and Private Life: 10-
    Year Routes' ("the IDI") gives the following guidance:

         11.2.4. Would it be unreasonable to expect  a  non-British  Citizen
         child to leave the UK?

         The requirement that a non-British Citizen child has lived  in  the
         UK for a continuous period of at  least  the  7  years  immediately
         preceding the  date  of  application,  recognises  that  over  time
         children start to put down roots and integrate into life in the UK,
         to  the  extent  that  being  required  to  leave  the  UK  may  be
         unreasonable. The longer the child has resided in the UK, the  more
         the balance will begin to swing in terms of it  being  unreasonable
         to expect the child to leave the UK, and  strong  reasons  will  be
         required in order to refuse a case with continuous UK residence  of
         more than 7 years. The decision maker must consider whether, in the
         specific circumstances of the  case,  it  would  be  reasonable  to
         expect the child to live in another  country.  The  decision  maker
         must consider the facts relating to each child in  the  UK  in  the
         family individually, and also consider all the  facts  relating  to
         the family as a whole. The decision maker should also  engage  with
         any specific issues explicitly raised by the family, by each  child
         or on behalf of each child (my emphasis).

16. As the guidance identifies, in the case of  a  minor  'strong  reasons'
    will be required to refuse a claim for leave to remain where there  has
    been  continuous  UK  residence  of  more  than  7  years.   The  judge
    acknowledged that the appellant is now over  18  and  is  therefore  an
    adult not needing parental support. This does not detract from the need
    for there to be strong reasons to refuse the claim. The fact  that  the
    appellant might be able to adapt to life elsewhere is a relevant factor
    (his ability to communicate in Bengali would be significant to  such  a
    finding) but it cannot be determinative. Although the judge's  findings
    were brief, given the very young age of the appellant when he  came  to
    the UK,  that  his  brother  and  sister-in-law  have  effectively  had
    parental responsibility for him since the age of  10,  he  still  lives
    with them and relies on them for support, that  his  formative  teenage
    years have been spent in the UK, he has friends in the UK, has built  a
    significant private life and has spent 6/7 years in school, that he has
    had little contact with his parents  (all  factors  from  the  evidence
    before the judge) the judge came to a reasonable conclusion in  finding
    that it would be not be reasonable to expect the appellant to leave the
    UK and therefore there was no material error of law.

    Ground 2 - the relevant date to consider the appellant's age

17. Ms Pal submitted that the judge erred in finding that the relevant date
    for consideration of the appellant's age was the date  of  application,
    if the Secretary of State is making a re-assessment some years  on  she
    cannot consider that the appellant is under  18  when  he  is  not,  it
    cannot be retrospective.  Ms  Pal  drew  a  distinction  between  entry
    clearance  cases  where  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  considers   an
    application, in those cases the fact that an applicant has reached  the
    age of 18 by the time of the decision is not relevant and an  applicant
    should be treated as still under 18. Applications for leave  to  remain
    were different, the facts at the time of the decision were to be  taken
    into account.

18. Mr Shah submitted that it  was  correct  for  the  judge  to  take  the
    appellant's age as at the date of application. However even if this was
    not correct the judge  had  also  considered  that  if  he  was  to  be
    considered as over 18 there were  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    appellant integrating in Bangladesh.

19. Neither representative was able to  provide  any  authority  for  their
    position.

20. The relevant provisions in Paragraph 276ADE are:

         Private life Requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
         remain on the grounds of private life

         276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
         remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the
         date of application, the applicant:

         (i) does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in Section S-
         LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. in Appendix FM; and

         (ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain on the
         grounds of private life in the UK; and

         ...

         (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the
         UK for at least 7 years (discounting any period of imprisonment)
         and it would not be reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the
         UK; or

         ...

         (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or above, has
         lived continuously in the UK for less than 20 years (discounting
         any period of imprisonment) but there would be very significant
         obstacles to the applicant's integration into the country to which
         he would have to go if required to leave the UK.

21. The Immigration Rules are very clear in that the requirments are  that,
    at the date of application, the applicant must be under the age  of  18
    and have lived continuously in the UK for at least 7 years. The  phrase
    'at the date of the application' is all important and directly links to
    each of the requirements in that paragraph. It would be  surprising  if
    such clear words are to be displaced. There  are  certain  requirements
    that are to be assessed against a background of  current  circumstances
    that  involve  a  subjective  and  objective  analysis  such   as   the
    requirement  in  this  rule  of  the  reasonableness  of  expecting  an
    applicant to leave the UK. This should be assessed at the time  of  the
    decision (or in some circumstances at the time of an appeal).  The  age
    at the date of an application is a purely objective factor as is the  7
    year continuous residence. It cannot be correct to say  that  the  date
    for assessing the applicant's age or 7  year  period  is  the  date  of
    decision rather than the date of the application as this  would  result
    in an  absurdity.  Applicants  would  be  treated  differently/unfairly
    depending on how long  it  took  the  Secretary  of  State  to  make  a
    decision.

22. I accept that where the Immigration  Rules  require  a  subjective  and
    factual  analysis,  such  as  the   extent   of   dependency   or   the
    reasonableness of re-locating, the date of the  decision  will  be  the
    relevant date to undertake an assessment otherwise the  subjective  and
    factual evidence and analysis could bear little or no relevance to  the
    actual circumstances of the case. An example was given in the  case  of
    SO (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2007]  EWCA
    Civ 76 at paragraph 15:

         '...Paragraph  298  is  directed  at  dependent  children.  On  his
         analysis a tribunal faced with an applicant who by the time of  the
         appeal was married, with  children  of  their  own  and  living  an
         independent life, would  have  to  ignore  reality  and  treat  the
         appellant as if he or she was  leading  the  life  of  a  dependent
         child. That cannot have been and, in my view, was not  Parliament's
         intention.  The  age,  growing  maturity  and  independence  of  an
         applicant must be relevant to the substance of a decision concerned
         with "serious and compelling reasons" as to whether  the  applicant
         should be allowed to stay as a dependent relative,...'

23. The wording of paragraph 298 does not contain any clear wording  as  to
    the relevant time that the age is to  be  considered.  In  the  instant
    case, as set out above, the judge did acknowledge  that  the  appellant
    was over 18 and no  longer  in  need  of  parental  support.  This  was
    relevant to the assessment  of  the  reasonableness  of  expecting  the
    appellant to leave the UK which should be assessed by the Secretary  of
    State at the time of the decision and  the  Tribunal  at  the  time  of
    appeal. In this case the fact that the appellant was now  over  18  was
    not sufficiently weighty to require the appellant to leave the UK  when
    balanced against all the other factors.

24. The judge was correct  in  applying  Paragraph  276ADE  (1)(iv)  -  the
    correct date is the date of application  for  determining  the  correct
    part of Paragraph 276ADE that applies. There was no material  error  of
    law.

    Ground 3 - the appellant's retained right to remain

25. With regard to the judge's finding on the retained right to  remain  in
    the UK Ms Pal submitted that the appeal rights were  exhausted  5  days
    after 11 July 2007. The appellant  did  not  apply  for  permission  to
    appeal so he became an over-stayer on 16 July 2007. Ms Pal acknowledged
    that this issue was only relevant if  the  appellant  did  not  succeed
    under the Immigration Rules.

26. Mr Shah submitted that the appellant was not  an  over-stayer.  He  had
    entered at the age of 11 (sic) on a visit visa. From the outset he  has
    been in touch with the Secretary of State. It is not unknown for a case
    to be re-considered and that is what happened. The Secretary  of  State
    had not taken any steps to remove him,  presumably  because  they  were
    aware that the case was in  progress.  The  appellant's  solicitor  had
    written on 11 August 2008 and further letters were written on  28  June
    2010 to which the UKBA replied indicating that the case was  being  re-
    considered. He suggested that a legitimate expectation  had  arisen.  I
    asked Mr Shah if this was argued before the First-tier Tribunal  judge.
    In answer Mr Shah indicated that although it does  not  appear  in  the
    determination it did come up at the  hearing.  He  submitted  that  the
    appellant was constantly in touch with the Home Office between 2010 and
    2013.

27. The appellant was did not have leave to  remain.  The  judge  erred  in
    finding that the appellant had retained a right to remain in the UK. On
    the date his appeal rights were exhausted (16 July 2007) the  appellant
    became an over-stayer with no  right  to  remain.  The  fact  that  the
    appellant's solicitors wrote to the  Home  Office  in  August  2008  is
    irrelevant. No further leave was granted. However, given my findings on
    Grounds 1 and 2 this error of law is not material.

Conclusions

28. There was no material error of law such as to  require  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision to be set aside.

29. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously. Having
    considered all the circumstances and evidence  I  do  not  consider  it
    necessary to make an anonymity direction.

Decision

30. The appeal is  dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    stands.


Signed   P M Ramshaw   Date 17 August 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw
