






Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39272/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |                                         |
|                                  |Determination Promulgated                |
|On: 18 December 2014              |                              On: 13     |
|                                  |August 2015                              |
|                                  |                                         |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                         Miss Shalini Devi Seegolam
                        (no anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Ms C M Fielden, counsel (instructed by Raj Law
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms L Kenny, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant appealed with permission to the Upper  Tribunal  against
      the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge who dismissed her appeal
      against the respondent's decision dated 24 September 2013 refusing her
      further leave to remain as a  Tier  4  student  migrant.  In  granting
      permission, it was noted that it was not clear from paragraphs 25  and
      26 of the determination whether the  Judge  actually  found  that  the
      appellant met the ten  years'  condition  at  paragraph  276B  of  the
      Immigration Rules. In the absence of a clear finding on that  relevant
      issue, there was arguably a legal error.


   2. On 18 September 2014, the Upper Tribunal set aside the decision of the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge. The respondent, who was represented  by  Mr
      Bramble at the time, accepted that the Judge had  not  been  clear  on
      whether the appellant had established ten years' lawful residence.  It
      did not appear that the Judge had actually stated whether  he  had  in
      fact made a finding  in  relation  to  ten  years'  continuous  lawful
      residence.


   3. The Tribunal found that, based on  the  application  of  s.3C  of  the
      Immigration Act 1971, the appellant had completed  ten  years'  lawful
      and continuous residence as at the date of  decision.  The  Judge  had
      made what appeared  to  be  critical  comments  regarding  the  public
      interest requirements under paragraph 276B(ii) of the Rules.


   4. In the event, the  hearing  was  adjourned  in  order  to  enable  the
      appellant to adduce  further  evidence  for  a  decision  to  be  made
      whether, having regard to the public interest, there are  any  reasons
      why it would be undesirable for her to be given  indefinite  leave  to
      remain on the grounds of  long  residence,  taking  into  account  the
      factors set out in paragraph 276B(ii)(a) to (f).


     Hearing on 18 December 2014


   5. The appellant attended the hearing and gave evidence. She has produced
      a further substantial bundle dated 5 December 2014,  prepared  by  Raj
      Law Solicitors. She referred to and adopted  two  witness  statements.
      The second statement at C1-C2 was signed at the hearing.


   6. She stated that since her arrival in the UK she  has  lived  with  her
      sister and her family, including her brother in law  and  their  young
      daughter. She has formed a close and strong bond with them. They  have
      supported her during her stay.


   7. She would have completed her studies in 2013 but was not able to do so
      as her  marriage  broke  down.  She  was  "shattered  completely"  and
      emotionally disturbed. She could not study or work. The breakdown  was
      the most devastating moment of her life, particularly because she  was
      with her former husband for almost ten years.


   8. In particular, her sister and brother in law knew what she  was  going
      through. They have assisted and supported her in overcoming her  grief
      and troubles. Her mother in fact came to the UK on two occasions  from
      Mauritius, both in July 2011 and June 2012  to  be  with  her  and  to
      provide her with emotional support during that time.


   9. When she consulted her GP, he prescribed antidepressants. She did  not
      take them however as she was advised accordingly  by  her  sister  who
      works for NHS Mental Health. She relied on her friends and family  who
      stood by her to help her overcome "the situation."


  10. She has been studying in the UK since November  2003.  She  found  the
      course at the School of Technology and  Management  too  difficult  to
      complete. She started the third year but failed  a  few  modules.  She
      then  attended  Wilson  College  for  a   degree   in   Administrative
      Management. She obtained an Advanced Diploma.  However,  that  college
      lost its Tier 4 licence and closed down. She informed the Home  Office
      about that and applied to Williams College in February 2010 for  a  BA
      in Business Management. She completed two years of her BA course.


  11. Her sister is her only sibling, her advisor and best friend. They grew
      up together. They have always been living together for  the  past  ten
      years. She is closer to her sister than anyone else in the family. Her
      parents are settled in Mauritius. She has now started to look for work
      and has received offers from different companies.


  12. The appellant has also produced a CV at pages C3-C4.


  13. In her earlier statement,  she  said  that  her  decree  absolute  was
      granted on 15 November 2013.


  14. She has never had any criminal convictions. She has never come to  the
      attention of the police.


  15. In cross examination, she was referred to  her  witness  statement  at
      B2(paragraph 8).  She  said  when  she  had  her  problems  after  the
      breakdown of her marriage, she informed the college. That was  at  the
      end of 2012. She spoke to the administration. She spoke to them at the
      college itself.


  16. She informed them that she was going through a troubled  period.  They
      informed her that she had  to  attend  college.  She  however  stopped
      attending college in 2013. She spoke to the  secretary  in  June  2013
      (she accordingly said that she did not speak to them  at  the  end  of
      2012 as originally stated but in or about June 2013).


  17. She was referred to paragraph 7 of that  statement  where  she  stated
      that she applied for her visa to be extended in May 2010. This was  in
      order to finish her course of study in  February  2013.  However,  the
      visa was only granted until June 2012. She said that she  made  a  new
      application after the visa expired in  June  2012.  When  she  stopped
      studying in 2013, she was sent a letter. However, she did  not  attend
      as she was not well. She spoke to the  administration  in  about  June
      2013. She does not have a copy of the letter from the college.


  18. She stated  that  she  has  looked  for  the  prescription  concerning
      antidepressants, but she has not been able to find  it.  She  did  not
      provide any evidence to the college from a doctor.


  19. The college has not followed up about her attendance. They  have  lost
      their licence. She tried to contact them to obtain evidence concerning
      her dealings with them, but she phoned a few times, checked online and
      discovered that their licence had been suspended. This  was  in  about
      August 2013.


  20. She was asked what she plans to do. She wants to pursue her course  in
      Human Resources and find a job in  that  area.  She  is  feeling  much
      better now. She is not on medication. She is not  in  a  relationship.
      She lives with her sister, brother in law and niece.


  21. She will try to  finish  the  same  course  and  also  study  a  human
      resources course. She plans to continue living with her sister.


  22. She said that she regards the UK as her home. She has all her  friends
      and relatives here. She has a strong bond with her sister. She is  her
      best friend. She wants to be with them here.


  23. Her parents are in Mauritius. She has Skype  contact.  This  is  about
      every two weeks. She last visited Mauritius in 2012.


  24. She stated that she is close to her friends.  She  referred  to  B55/6
      containing a letter from Mr Prithviraj Sajadah dated 9 March 2014.  He
      confirmed that he has known the appellant for years.  They  have  been
      close friends since she has been in the  UK.  He  has  encouraged  and
      supported her during her difficult times. He will continue to do so.


  25. He is a British citizen  and  works  for  the  NHS  at  Kings  College
      Hospital.


  26. She said that she met him  in  the  UK.  She  knew  him  already  from
      Mauritius. When she  had  her  marriage  breakdown  he  supported  her
      emotionally. He has known Ms McArthur for nine  years.  They  used  to
      work together in William Hill.


  27. At C5, she produced a letter from Kervin Gungih. He currently works as
      a manager at MacDonalds Restaurant. He confirms that they were  unable
      to offer her a job as she does not meet the minimum requirement  of  a
      six month valid visa as per company recruitment policy. In  fact  this
      is her brother in law. He said she does not mind working at MacDonalds
      pending the obtaining of a qualification after which she would wish to
      obtain appropriate employment.


  28. I have had regard to various other documents and letters  produced  in
      the bundles.


Submissions


  29. Ms  Kenny  submitted  with  regard  to  the  appellant's  strength  of
      connections in the UK that she has her  sister,  brother  in  law  and
      friends here. However, these relationships developed in the  knowledge
      that she may  not  be  able  to  stay  here.  Her  parents  remain  in
      Mauritius. It is not denied by the respondent that the appellant has a
      close relationship with her sister. However, that  relationship  could
      be maintained from Mauritius.


  30. The appellant has in fact exceeded the maximum  five  year  period  of
      study allowed. Although  this  has  been  explained  by  the  marriage
      breakdown, she has continued to pursue courses.


  31. There is however no contention  that  she  has  breached  any  of  the
      conditions relating to her visas in the UK.


  32. Ms Kenny said she had no submissions with regard  to  the  appellant's
      domestic   circumstances.   With   regard   to   the    "compassionate
      circumstances", Ms Kenny submitted that there is scant evidence of her
      depression. Aside from vague evidence of those who support her,  there
      is no medical evidence produced. She informed the college that she was
      suffering from problems  and  stopped  attending  for  those  reasons.
      However, there is nothing produced from the college in that regard.


  33. On behalf of the appellant, Ms Fielden referred to her short  skeleton
      argument. She submitted that the "checklist" at paragraph 276B(ii) (a)
      to (f) has to do with identifying whether it was undesirable  for  the
      appellant to be granted indefinite leave  to  remain.  The  respondent
      would have to show that she is "undesirable",  having  regard  to  the
      circumstances identified. Accordingly, circumstances such as  offences
      having been committed, or that she  has  been  associating  with  "bad
      people" or that she has been receiving public  benefits,  or  anything
      adverse from her past history would have to be shown.


  34. Even then, the appellant is capable  of  "redeeming"  herself.  Regard
      must be had  to  the  circumstances  including  the  strength  of  her
      connections and the compassionate basis.


  35. She has not been shown to have any adverse factors that count  against
      her for the purpose of the rule.


  36. The fact that the college's licence was lost was not her fault. Nor is
      this a case about her relationship  with  her  mother  or  parents  in
      Mauritius,  or  her  connections  there,  but  the  strength  of   her
      connections in the UK. She has those here.


  37. Ms Fielden referred to various letters at A15,  A33,  B26,  B35,  B55.
      These are letters of  support  from  various  relatives  and  friends,
      including her sister, Ms Gungiah, who confirms that she has  a  strong
      and  supportive  relationship  with  the  appellant.  This  has   also
      benefited her daughter, who is three years  old.  She  refers  to  the
      breakdown of the appellant's marriage in 2012. This has resulted in  a
      "very hard phase" for the appellant. There has  been  a  very  painful
      psychological process for her.  She  has  received  support  from  the
      family and parents all the way through.


  38. The other letters in a similar vein are from her  aunt,  Ms  Padaruth,
      and her parents, who continue to support her indefinitely.


  39.  She  has  attempted  to  obtain  corroborative  evidence   from   her
      colleagues. However, the licence was revoked and the college was  shut
      down.


     Assessment


  40. I found the evidence of the appellant to be credible.  In  any  event,
      there has been no significant challenge to her evidence. There  is  no
      suggestion  that  her  marriage  did  not  break  down   causing   her
      considerable emotional hurt resulting in  her  inability  to  continue
      with her course.


  41. I have also had  regard  to  the  various  supporting  statements  and
      letters produced.


  42. I am accordingly satisfied that the appellant has  strong  connections
      in the UK. I am also satisfied that there is nothing in her character,
      conduct or associations that in any  way  suggest  that  it  would  be
      undesirable for her to be granted indefinite leave to remain.


  43. I have had regard to her  domestic  circumstances  which  are  not  in
      issue, as well as the  compassionate  circumstances  which  have  been
      fully set out. I am also satisfied that she has no convictions in  the
      UK. She has not been in breach of immigration laws.


  44. I have an exercisable discretion as to whether or not indefinite leave
      on long residence grounds should be refused for the reasons set out in
      paragraph 275B. There is no suggestion in this case, as there  was  in
      the decision of MU ("statement of additional grounds" - long residence
      - discretion) Bangladesh [2010] UKUT 442 (IAC) that the appellant  has
      practised deception as was practised in MU.


  45. I find that the appellant came here as a  student,  intending  at  the
      time to return there at the end of her studies. In  fact  her  husband
      remained in Mauritius.


  46. I accept the submission that the breakdown of her marriage,  resulting
      in divorce, constituted a substantial emotional event in her life. She
      did not rely on antidepressants.


  47. She has however relied on support from her  family  here  as  well  as
      friends.


  48. The First-tier Tribunal Judge referred  to  the  appellant's  apparent
      determination to stay in the UK. However, that was in the context that
      the appellant's life had substantially altered following the breakdown
      of her marriage and divorce.


  49. Having regard to the evidence as a whole, I find that there is nothing
      to suggest that her presence in the UK would be undesirable for any of
      the reasons referred to in paragraph 276B.


         Notice of Decision


         The appeal is allowed under the immigration rules


         No anonymity direction is made.





                                                                      Signed
     Date:  29/12/2014


         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer







