
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39951/2014
                                                               IA/39921/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at UT(IAC) Bennett House       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th October 2015                  |On 7th October 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                        MANAZEER ASHAN MOHAMED NAWAZ
                              MOHAMMED THOWFEEK
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Kannangara, counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The First-tier Tribunal judge found, contrary to  the  respondent's
         decision, that the appellants had submitted financial documentation
         and advertising documentation that  met  the  requirements  of  the
         Immigration Rules under the heading Attributes.

      2. In paragraphs 26 to 30 the First-tier Tribunal judge sets  out  the
         evidence in the contracts regarding  the  services  the  appellants
         were to provide. In particular she refers to  the  heading  in  the
         contracts headed 'compensation' which

             "... is clearly about what compensation the  programmer  would
             be entitled to for performing tasks and duties related to  the
             scope of work. It then lists 7 types of work. There is  in  my
             view no reasonable way of interpreting this section that could
             lead to the conclusion that this is the section that sets  out
             what services are to be  provided  by  the  business  to  that
             particular company.

             28.  A  careful  reading  of  the  contract  at  section  3  -
             Programming services, shows that  there  should  have  been  a
             document "Annex A" which sets out the services to be provided.
             When asked about this the appellants confirmed that  they  had
             not submitted Annex A with any of the contracts  sent  to  the
             Home Office. .....They said that Annex A did  exist,  and  was
             different for each customer but they accepted  that  they  had
             not submitted it that it was not contained in the  appellant's
             bundles either.  They  wished  to  rely  on  the  compensation
             section at 4.1.

             29. ... I am unable to find that the  contract  submitted  did
             set out the services to be offered to the client as this would
             not be a reasonable interpretation  of  the  contract.  It  is
             clear that these were to be set out in a document called Annex
             A which was not sent to the Home Office. This is not a  matter
             that can be remedied as this document had to be submitted with
             the application and it was not.

      3. In granting permission to appeal, UTJ Lindsley found  that  it  was
         arguable that the First-tier  Tribunal  judge  failed  to  consider
         whether the Evidential flexibility policy as incorporated into  the
         Immigration Rules (paragraph 245AA) applied and if so find that the
         First-tier Tribunal judge should have found that  the  respondent's
         decision was not in accordance with the law and  thus  allowed  the
         appeal and remitted it back to the respondent for a lawful decision
         to be taken.

      4. The appellants also sought permission to appeal on the ground  that
         Appendix A of the Immigration Rules did not provide for a  contract
         to be in any particular form and that the contract provided by  the
         appellants was the form in which they had  chosen  to  comply  with
         paragraph 41SD(e)(iv)(1)(b), such that they had shown the nature of
         the services provided within the contract submitted.  UTJ  Lindsley
         refused to grant permission on that ground. Mr Kannangara sought to
         persuade me to  reconsider  that  ground  on  the  basis  that  UTJ
         Lindsley had misunderstood the ground  as  pleaded.  Mr  Kannangara
         could not direct me to any provision which permitted this but  even
         if I had re-considered that ground, I would have refused permission
         - the First-tier Tribunal judge considered the evidence before  her
         and was plainly entitled to reach the conclusion that the  contract
         as provided by the appellants to the respondent did not set out the
         services they intended to provide. The appellants did not meet  the
         requirements of the Rules.

      5. The document missing from the application that was submitted to the
         respondent was identified as "Attachment A" in paragraph 3.1 of the
         contract which states:

             "Company hereby engages  Programmer,  and  Programmer  accepts
             such engagement, subject to the terms and conditions contained
             herein, to perform  for  Company  the  services  described  in
             Attachment A (the "Services")."

      6. Attachment A was not attached to any of the three  contracts  which
         the appellants had submitted with their application. The First-tier
         Tribunal accepted that the failure to submit Attachment A to any of
         the three  contracts  was  an  "honest  oversight".  Mr  Kannangara
         submitted that the missing Attachment A was a missing  document  as
         described by paragraph 245AA (b) namely it was the last page of the
         contract and came at the end of the contract  and  thus  should  be
         seen as a missing sequential document.  He submitted that the First-
         tier Tribunal judge had considered Attachment A to  be  a  separate
         document whereas it was not. He also submitted that it was  a  part
         of the contract and not separate from it.

      7. Ms Johnstone submitted that the the issue of evidential flexibility
         had not been raised before the First-tier Tribunal  judge  and  the
         judge could not have erred in law in failing to deal with something
         which had not been raised before her. Mr Kannanagara's response  to
         that was that the judge should have applied the  law  even  if  not
         raised directly by the appellants, who were not legally represented
         although they had a McKenzie friend  who,  if  she  were  providing
         legal assistance on that basis could have been expected  to  ensure
         that the appellants raised that issue.

      8. Ms Johnstone further submitted  that  Attachment  A  could  not  be
         considered to be a sequential document as provided for in 245AA; it
         was specifically referred to in the contracts that  were  submitted
         with the application; the appellants  had,  before  the  First-tier
         Tribunal, relied upon the contracts  themselves  as  providing  any
         necessary information as to the services  provided;  Mr  Kannangara
         had provided no evidence  hat Attachment A had  at  any  time  been
         attached to the contracts either as the last page or as a  separate
         document. She submitted that had the respondent  requested  that  a
         copy of Attachment  A  it  would  have  been  akin  to  a  'fishing
         expedition' because there was nothing to  indicate  that  it  would
         provide the information required to enable the respondent to take a
         decision that the appellants met the requirements of the Rules.

      9. Included in the documents before me (but it appears not before  the
         First-tier Tribunal) was a copy of Attachment A which states that

             "...works and/or services that has to be provided as  per  the
             agreement is the same as mentioned in paragraph 4.1 for  which
             the compensation is entitled and detailed in the main contract
             document."

     10. This was not before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  had  not  been
         submitted to the respondent. If  as  Mr  Kannangara  submits,  this
         attachment was a part of the contract it is difficult to see how it
         could  have  been  missed  out  of  all  the  contracts  that  were
         submitted. If it is the last page of the contract, it  does  little
         to define the services to be provided other than in general terms -
         the work to be done by the appellants would appear, from a  reading
         of the contract and the Attachment together to  be  of  such  open-
         ended nature that the organisation with which the contract had been
         signed would not be able to identify how much or  how  little  work
         they were agreeing to bind themselves to pay for.

     11. Although it could be said in some circumstances that  an  annex  or
         attachment to a contract was a sequential document that was missing
         - for example if the contract pages were numbered 1 of 10 or page 5
         was missing but page 4 and 6 were present. In this  case,  although
         there is reference to an attachment, there is no indication that it
         was the last page or an integral part of the contract.

     12. In any event, it is not possible to  argue  successfully  that  the
         missing attachment would have made a difference to  the  outcome  -
         the attachment does no more than in essence repeat what is  in  the
         contract which, as I have said above, does not enable  the  parties
         to know to what they are committing themselves.

     13. Even if the appellants had argued before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         that paragraph  245AA  applied  and  even  if  the  respondent  had
         requested the missing Attachment, the  Attachment  itself  did  not
         provide any further information to the respondent such that it  was
         likely that the application would have been granted. The First-tier
         Tribunal judge had concluded that the information in  the  contract
         did not suffice to meet the burden upon the appellants to show  the
         services they were claiming to provide.

     14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an  error
         of law such that the decision is set aside to be remade.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set aside the decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


[pic]
     Date 6th October 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
