









UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA393092014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated         |
|on 24 February 2016               |On 13 June 2016                          |
|                                  |                                         |


                                   Before

                          THE HONOURABLE LORD BURNS
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Miss Ruth Sasil Gerong
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Blake, Counsel (instructed by Blakewells)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. We shall refer to the appellant as the secretary of state and  to  the
      respondent as "the claimant."


   2. The secretary of state appeals with permission against the decision of
      the First-tier Tribunal Judge  who  dismissed  the  claimant's  appeal
      under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 ("the 2006  Regulations")
      but allowed it on human rights grounds [38-39].


   3. The claimant made an application for a derivative residence card under
      the 2006 Regulations on the basis that she is the primary carer of her
      two British children. The secretary of state refused  her  application
      under the 2006 Regulations, but  did  not  consider  her  private  and
      family life.


   4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge concluded on the basis of  the  evidence
      before her that the claimant has not been able to establish  that  the
      children would have to leave the EEA if the claimant were required  to
      do so [25]. The claimant has not sought to appeal that finding to  the
      Upper Tribunal.


   5. The First-tier Judge  however  went  on  to  consider  the  claimant's
      further grounds of appeal which asserted that the decision constituted
      a disproportionate interference with her  Article  8  rights  and,  as
      already noted, allowed the appeal on human rights grounds.


   6. On 4 January 2016,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lambert  granted  the
      secretary of state permission to appeal that decision. He  found  that
      there was an arguable error of law disclosed by  the  application  for
      permission. The grounds seeking permission noted the  absence  of  any
      s.120 notice or removal direction in this case. The secretary of state
      relied on the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Amirteymour and Others
      [2015] UKUT 00466 in maintaining that the  First-tier  Judge  was  not
      entitled to consider a human rights challenge in an appeal  under  the
      2006 Regulations.


   7. Mr Blake in an attractive argument  contended  that  the  decision  in
      Amirteymour was incorrectly decided as the Tribunal did  not  consider
      several Court of Appeal authorities including dicta from Lord  Justice
      Sedley in Anwar and Adjo v SSHD [2010] EWCA  Civ  1275.  The  Tribunal
      also failed to have regard to the decision of the Court of  Appeal  in
      Lamichhane v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 260. He also sought  to  rely  on  a
      decision of the Supreme Court in Carter v Ahsan [2005] EWCA Civ 990.


   8. However, in the recent decision of the Court  of  Appeal  in  TY  (Sri
      Lanka) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 1233, (which  was  not  referred  to  by
      either party at the hearing before us), Lord  Justice  Jackson  stated
      that he reached a similar decision on the issues before the  Court  of
      Appeal in  that  case  as  that  reached  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
      Amirteymour.


   9. The Upper Tribunal  had  in  Amirteymour  distinguished  JM  (Liberia)
      [2006] EWCA Civ 1402 on a different basis from that which Lord Justice
      Jackson identified. He went on to state that "Nevertheless, in the end
      the Upper Tribunal has come to the same decision as myself". He  noted
      that the Upper Tribunal in  Amirteymour  had  analysed  the  statutory
      provisions and the authorities "in formidable detail" [36].


  10. In applying Amirteymour, we find that where, as in the  appeal  before
      us, no notice under s.120 of the 2002 Act has been served and where no
      EEA decision to remove has been made,  the  claimant  cannot  bring  a
      human rights challenge to removal in an  appeal  under  the  2006  EEA
      Regulations [75].


  11. We accordingly find that there the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  have
      jurisdiction to consider a human rights challenge in the appeal.


Notice of decision


     The decision of the first-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
error on a point of    law.


     We accordingly set it aside and re-make the  decision,  dismissing  the
claimant's    appeal.


      No anonymity direction is made.














      Signed                             Date 4 March 2016


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

