
IAC-TH-CP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39143/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 27 January 2015                         | On 3 February 2015            |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                          Mrs Helen Omotayo Lashore
                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. C. Bexson, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr. N. Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on  7  March  1945.   On  24
    November 2012 she applied for indefinite leave to  remain  outside  the
    Immigration Rules on the basis that she is  a  parent,  grandparent  or
    other dependent relative of a person present and settled in the  United
    Kingdom.  The respondent refused her application in  a  refusal  letter
    dated 3 September 2013 on the grounds that the appellant did  not  meet
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended) as  there
    were no provisions for dependant  applications.   The  application  was
    therefore refused on grounds that variation of leave to remain had been
    sought  for  reasons  not  covered  by  the  Immigration  Rules.    The
    appellant's application was considered and refused in  accordance  with
    paragraph D-LTRPT.1.3 with reference to R-LTRPT.1.1 of the  Immigration
    Rules.  The respondent considered the application  in  accordance  with
    paragraph 277C of Appendix FM and noted that the appellant had  entered
    the United Kingdom on 3 July 2011 and that she had returned to  Nigeria
    on three occasions since  that  date.   She  last  entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 25 April 2012.  The respondent found the appellant  had  not
    met the requirements of paragraph  276ADE.   Notwithstanding  this  the
    appellant's application was considered on compassionate and  compelling
    factors.  The  appellant's  application  was  refused  under  paragraph
    322(7).

 2. The appellant appealed against that decision and her appeal  was  heard
    by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Samimi,  who  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 3 October 2014 dismissed the appellant's appeal.

 3. On 17 November  2014  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Kelly  gave
    permission to appeal.  In so doing his reasons were:-

         "1.  The appellant seeks permission to appeal, in time,  against  a
             decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Samini,  promulgated  on
             the 3rd October  2014,  to  dismiss  her  appeal  against  the
             respondent's refusal of  her  application  (made  outside  the
             Immigration Rules) for leave to remain as the  parent  of  her
             British sons.

         2.    The  Tribunal  considered  whether  there  were   exceptional
             circumstances, insufficiently recognised  by  the  Immigration
             Rules,   which   would   render   the   appellant's    removal
             unjustifiably harsh.  It concluded that  there  were  no  such
             circumstances  in  the  appellant's  case,  and  it  therefore
             dismissed the appeal.  That approach was in line with  Gulshan
             (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013]  UKUT  00640
             (IAC).  It is however arguable, as the  application  contends,
             that the Tribunal ought to have undertaken a  full  assessment
             under Article 8.  Although not cited in the  application,  the
             appellant's contention is arguable supported by the  dicta  of
             Atkins LJ in MM & Ors, R (On the Application Of)  v  Secretary
             of State for the Home Department [2014]  EWCA  Civ  985  (with
             particular reference to paragraph 135).  It is also  arguable,
             that had the  Tribunal  undertaken  a  full  assessment  under
             Article 8, it may have reached a different conclusion."

 4. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 5. Ms  Bexson  relied  on  the  grounds  supporting  the  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   She  contended  that  the
    judge had failed to make a proper assessment of the appellant's Article
    8 claim and had wrongly relied on "exceptional circumstances".   In  so
    doing the judge had not considered the totality of the evidence and had
    failed to give sufficient  reasons  for  her  findings  on  exceptional
    circumstances and whether it would be  disproportionately  harsh  or  a
    fair balance between the interests of the community and the appellant's
    family to expect the appellant to return to Nigeria and apply for entry
    clearance taking into account her fragile medical condition.

 6. Mr Bramble, in opposing the application,  argued  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge directed herself appropriately and that it was open  for
    her to follow the Tribunal authority of Gulshan  (Article 8 - new Rules
    - correct approach) Pakistan  [2013]  UKUT  640  (IAC).   Further  that
    albeit the judge had not, on the face of the decision,  carried  out  a
    balancing exercise in accordance with Huang [2007] UKHL 11 and  Razgar,
    R (on the Application of) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2004] UKHL 27 the judge had nonetheless  dealt  with  all  the  issues
    thoroughly taking into account  the  evidence  and  making  appropriate
    findings.

 7. Case law in relation to Article 8 has developed since  Gulshan.   In  R
    (on the application of Esther Ebun Oludoyi and Others) v SSHD  (Article
    8 - MM (Lebanon) and Nagre) IJR [2014] UKUT 539 (IAC) it was held  that
    there was nothing in R (Nagre) v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin),  Gulshan
    (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach)  Pakistan  [2013]  UKUT  640
    (IAC) or Shahzad (Article 8: legitimate aim) [2014] UKUT 85 (IAC)  that
    suggested that a threshold test  was  being  suggested  as  opposed  to
    making it clear that there was a need to look at the evidence to see if
    there was anything which had not already been adequately considered  in
    the context of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  which  would  lead  to  a
    successful Article 8 claim.  These authorities  must  not  be  read  as
    seeking to qualify or fetter the assessment of  Article  8.   This  was
    consistent with paragraph 128 of MM and Others, R (on  the  application
    of) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 985 that there was no utility in imposing  a
    further intermediate test as a preliminary to  a  consideration  of  an
    Article 8 claim beyond the relevant criterion-based Rule.  As  is  held
    in Ganesabalan, R (on the application  of)  v  SSHD  [2014]  EWHC  2712
    (Admin), there was  no  prior  threshold  which  dictates  whether  the
    exercise of discretion should be considered; rather the nature  of  the
    assessment and the reasoning which were called  for  were  informed  by
    threshold considerations.  In Aliyu and Another v R (on the application
    of) v SSHD [2014] EWHC 3919 (Admin) the claimants, Nigerian  nationals,
    sought judicial review of the Secretary of State's  decisions  refusing
    them leave to  remain.   The  Administrative  Court,  in  allowing  the
    application, held that the Secretary of State had been required to give
    separate consideration to Article 8 of the ECHR in  her  decisions  and
    that  there  had  been  no  adequate  assessments  made   outside   the
    Immigration Rules resulting in unlawful decisions.  The errors were not
    material, as it could not be concluded with any  degree  of  confidence
    that the claimants' claims would necessarily fail.

Notice of Decision

 8. In light of these authorities and for all the reasons  put  forward  in
    the grounds seeking permission to appeal I find that the making of  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.  The decision is set aside.  The appeal is remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal,  by  consent,  to  be  dealt  with  afresh  in
    relation to the Article 8 claim only.  Both parties accepted that  this
    was an appellant who could not meet the requirements of the Immigration
    Rules.  This  remittal  is  pursuant  to  Section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and  Enforcement  Act  2007  and  Practice  Statement
    7.2(b), before any judge aside from Judge Samimi.

 9. No anonymity order has been made hitherto in these proceedings  and  no
    reason was put before me why such an order should now be made.



Signed        Date 2 February 2015.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

                                 DIRECTIONS


 1. This appeal will be heard at the Hatton Cross hearing centre on a  date
    to be fixed.

 2. The time estimate is two hours.

 3. Any additional evidence from either party to be  filed  and  served  no
    later than five working days prior to the substantive hearing.



Signed        Date 2 February 2015.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

