
[pic]
st

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39099/2014
                                                               IA/39101/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At Field House                       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 29th October 2015                 |On 21st December 2015                 |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between
                                  MS A.A.A
                                 MISS B.C.C.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S. Iqbal, Counsel, instructed by Davjunnel
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr. C. Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer.

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I  make  an  anonymity  order.  This  is  because  the  second
appellant is  a  child.  Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a  Court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
direction applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any  failure  to  comply
with this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. Although it is the respondent who is appealing for convenience  I  will
    continue to refer to  the  parties  as  they  were  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 2. The first appellant, A, was born in September 1983. She is  the  mother
    of the second appellant B, born on 14 November 2007. Both are nationals
    of Nigeria.

 3. On 4 July 2012 application was  made  on  their  behalf  for  leave  to
    remain. This was refused on 27 February 2014 with no right  of  appeal.
    Following the issue  of  judicial  review  proceedings  the  respondent
    agreed to reconsider the decision. This took place on 21 September 2014
    with the refusal being maintained. The appellants were granted a  right
    of appeal which they exercised.

 4. The first appellant claimed she came to the United Kingdom in 1994 when
    she was 11 years old. Her mother and stepfather were  already  here.  A
    few months later she was joined by her younger brother and  sister,  AD
    and OA.

 5. In refusing the applications the respondent did not  accept  the  first
    appellant had been in the  United  Kingdom  since  1994.  The  earliest
    record of her presence was in 2003. They did not meet the  requirements
    of 276 ADE or of appendix FM and the respondent  concluded,  consistent
    with  their  article  8  rights,  that  there   were   no   exceptional
    circumstances which would mean their removal was inappropriate.

The First-tier Tribunal

 6. Their appeal was heard at Taylor House before First-tier  Judge  Miller
    on 13 May 2015. In a decision promulgated on 3 June 2015 their  appeals
    were dismissed under the immigration rules and allowed on  freestanding
    article 8  grounds.  A  month  before  the  appeal  hearing  the  first
    appellant gave birth to her second child. He was not  a  party  to  the
    proceedings.

 7. In submissions the appellants' representative had conceded that neither
    of them could succeed under the immigration rules.

 8. First-tier Judge Miller at paragraph 36 stated there  was  very  little
    available evidence to support the first appellant's claim that she  had
    been in the United Kingdom since 1984. Her mother  had  given  evidence
    and said that out of fear she never sent her daughter to school nor did
    she register her with a doctor. The judge accepted  this.  Despite  the
    lack of evidence the judge found as a fact the first appellant had been
    in the United Kingdom for 21 years at the time of hearing.  The  reason
    advanced was the success on appeal in 2011 of her two siblings, AD  and
    OA, and the acceptance they arrived in 1984.Judge Miller  accepted  the
    first appellant's claim that she was not a party to  these  proceedings
    because she could not afford it and concluded had she been  joined  she
    to would have succeeded.

 9. At paragraph 35 the judge concluded the link with the  earlier  appeals
    and the consequent finding the first appellant had been here  21  years
    amounted to an  exceptional  situation  and  justified  the  article  8
    consideration. The judge stated  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    appellants to go to Nigeria: the first appellant had not  been  Nigeria
    for 21 years and her daughter has never  been  there.  Furthermore,  if
    removed the second appellant would not have the regular contact she has
    with her grandmother, aunts and uncles.  The judge  also  stated  there
    had been little effort made to remove the appellants or  other  members
    of her family. The final sentence of  the  decision  records  that  the
    judge took  into  account  the  public  interest  considerations  under
    section 117 B without identifying these.

The Upper Tribunal.

10. The respondent contended that the immigration judge  erred  in  law  in
    carry out the freestanding article  8.  The  assessment  did  not  have
    regard to the fact they could not meet the immigration  rules  and  the
    public interest consideration was cursory. It was also  contended  that
    the immigration judge erred in law in concluding  the  first  appellant
    had lived here 21 years bearing in mind the lack of evidence.

11. Mr Avery relied upon the grounds stated. Ms Iqbal  submitted  that  the
    judge did consider the high threshold involved and referred me  to  the
    decision of Dube (ss117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 00090 and that it was not an
    error of law to fail to refer to section  117  considerations  provided
    the substance of the section had been applied.

Conclusions.

12. Judge Miller stated there was very little evidence the first  appellant
    had lived in the United Kingdom since 1984. The evidence of presence in
    United Kingdom was primarily from the birth of her daughter, the second
    appellant. The judge however,  accepted  the  first  appellant's  claim
    based on the appeals of her two siblings being allowed.

13. The decision of First-tier Judge Ranagaratnam dated 13 April 2011 is in
    the appeal bundle. The judge accepted those  two  appellants  had  been
    here since 1994. I cannot see anything in the decision to  support  the
    first appellant's contention  she  was  here  then.  Her  statement  at
    paragraph 4 is that she has five full blood siblings and a  stepbrother
    and stepsister born to  her  mother  in  the  United  Kingdom.  In  the
    decision relating to her two siblings the judge records at paragraph  4
    their evidence was they came  to  the  United  Kingdom  to  join  their
    mother, their stepfather and stepbrother and stepsister.  There  is  no
    reference to the first appellant. Paragraph 6 records the  evidence  of
    the first appellant's mother, who also makes no reference to the  first
    appellant. The judge accepted the explanation given as to why the first
    appellant did not join her siblings in their appeal and the explanation
    for the lack of documentation, including school  and  medical  records.
    The judge does not give any further reasons as to the lack of proof.  I
    find Judge Miller has not indicated adequately the evidential basis and
    reasons for making this material finding.

14. Furthermore, the judge  does  not  set  out  as  a  yardstick  how  the
    immigration rules are not met. An article 8 consideration  outside  the
    rules must be informed by the greater specificity in the rules and  the
    importance the Secretary of State attaches to the public interest.

15. Judge Miller does not set out adequately why the appellants  could  not
    go to  Nigeria.  There  is  no  evaluation  of  family  support  there;
    employment prospects; education; health care and so forth.  No  special
    needs are identified.

16. The decision of Dube (ss117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 00090  makes  the  point
    that is not necessarily an error of law to fail to recite  section  117
    provided the decision demonstrates the relevant consideration has  been
    given. In the present decision. There is reference to section  117  but
    nowhere are the relevant considerations set out. There is no  reference
    to the fact any private life the first appellant established  was  when
    she was here illegally nor is there  reference  to  her  employment  or
    finances.

Conclusion

17. The decision of Judge Miller contains material errors of law. There has
    been inadequate reasoning behind the finding that the  first  appellant
    had been in the United Kingdom for 21 years. Furthermore, the  decision
    does not adequately reflect the public interest.  There  is  inadequate
    consideration of fact the immigration rules are not met. The judge  has
    not demonstrated that the factors in section  117  have  been  factored
    into the decision.  There  is  no  reference  to  the  fact  the  first
    appellant has been here illegally and no details are given  as  to  her
    financial standing. The judge also appears to criticise the  respondent
    for delay yet there is no foundation for this. It is my conclusion that
    the decision cannot stand but has to be remade de novo.

Decision.

The decision of immigration judge Miller, allowing the appeal is  materially
errs in law and cannot stand. That decision is set aside.

The appeals are remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de  novo  hearing;
none of the facts found being preserved.


                                        Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly


                                 DIRECTIONS


 1. Relist for a de novo hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, excluding
    First-tier Judge Miller.

 2. Bundles should be exchanged mutually no latter than four weeks before
    the indicated date of hearing.

 3. The first appellant's representative should focus in particular upon
    the proofs in support of the long residence claim.


                                        Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly

