
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39078/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 14 December 2018                      |On 17th January 2019              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

                                   Mrs i S
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr N Paramjorthy, Counsel.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant in this case is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department. However, for the sake of clarity, I shall use the titles by
    which the parties were known before the First-Tier  Tribunal  with  the
    Secretary of State referred to as "the Respondent" and  Mrs  I  S  "the
    Appellant".

 2. The Appellant is a  citizen  of  Sri  Lanka  who  sought  international
    protection. It was refused and she appealed. In a decision  promulgated
    on 2 October 2018 Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Timothy  Thorne
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal on refugee and humanitarian protection
    grounds but  allowed  it  under  Articles  3  and  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.

 3. The Respondent  sought  permission  to  appeal.  That  application  was
    considered by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Povey, who  granted  it.
    The Judge's reasons were: -

         "1. The Respondent seeks permission to appeal against a Decision of
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Thorne who, in  a  Decision  and  Reasons
         promulgated on 2 October 2018,  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal
         against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse her application
         for asylum and humanitarian protection but allowed her appeal under
         Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR.


         2. The grounds allege  that  the  Judge  failed  to  give  adequate
         reasons for his conclusion under  Article  3,  failed  to  properly
         weigh the medical evidence and erred in law in his assessment under
         Article 8.


         3. The  Judge  refused  the  Appellant's  asylum  and  humanitarian
         protection appeals, making  findings  regarding  her  circumstances
         which are not challenged. At [78], he found  that  the  Appellant's
         mental health and her circumstances on return  to  Sri  Lanka  were
         such that she would not be able to reasonably access any  treatment
         which may be available to her. That finding was reasoned and clear.
         However, the Judge arguably erred in failing to explain how and why
         he afforded weight to the Appellant's expert medical report,  given
         the criticisms raised by the Respondent as to its age and the  lack
         of up to date medical evidence. The medical report was material  to
         his assessment under Article 3 and the conclusions reached.


         4. It was also arguable that the Judge failed to undertake a lawful
         assessment under Article 8. It  was  not  clear  what  separate  or
         additional factual element (over and above the  Appellant's  mental
         health) brought the case within the Article 8 paradigm nor  was  it
         clear how the Judge had weighed the competing factors  within  that
         assessment.


         5. As such,  the  application  for  permission  disclosed  arguable
         errors of law and permission to appeal is granted. All grounds  may
         be argued."


 4. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 5. At the outset Mr Jarvis handed up the Authorities of  AM  (Zimbabwe)  v
    SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 64 and SL (St Lucia) v SSHD [2018] ECWA Civ 1894.

 6. Mr Jarvis submitted that this is a case which  centres  on  the  mental
    health issues that the Appellant presents and that the Judge has failed
    to engage with the potential risk of the suicide issue  when  analysing
    the expert medical evidence of Dr Raj Persaud at paragraphs 77  and  78
    of his decision. He submitted that as the law  currently  stands  there
    can only be a breach of Appellant's  Article  3  rights  in  "deathbed"
    situations.

 7. He referred me to the authority of Paposhvili v Belgium [2017]  Imm  AR
    867 and asserted that at paragraph 37 onward The  Court  of  Appeal  is
    effectively dealing with cases  of  procedural  argument  for  stay  of
    removal where the only outcome might be for a stay or adjournment.  The
    authority of N v SSHD [2005] UKHL 31 remains binding.  In  this  appeal
    the way forward may have been for the Judge to adjourn it  pending  the
    Supreme Court giving consideration to Paposhvili. Hence, the Judge  has
    erred at paragraph 78 of his decision in concluding  that  there  is  a
    real risk of the Appellant  being  exposed  to  a  serious,  rapid  and
    irreversible decline in  her  state  of  health  resulting  in  intense
    suffering and that she would be in no  fit  state  to  access  suitable
    treatment constituting a breach of Article 3 of the ECHR. Given that  N
    is binding this is a conclusion that the  Judge  was  not  entitled  to
    make. In applying Paposhvili the Judge has ignored precedent and should
    have dismissed the appeal under Article 3.

 8. Beyond that the Judge  has  failed  to  engage  with  the  Respondent's
    supplementary refusal letter.

 9. I was then referred to paragraphs 27 and 28 of  SL  (see  above).  They
    state:-

         "27. However, I am entirely unpersuaded that Paposhvili has any
         impact on the approach to article 8 claims. As I have described, it
         concerns the threshold of severity for article 3 claims; and, at
         least to an extent, as accepted in AM (Zimbabwe), it appears to
         have altered the European test for such threshold. However, there
         is no reason in logic or practice why that should affect the
         threshold for, or otherwise the approach to, article 8 claims in
         which the relevant individual has a medical condition. As I have
         indicated and as GS (India) emphasises, article 8 claims have a
         different focus and are based upon entirely different criteria. In
         particular, article 8 is not article 3 with merely a lower
         threshold: it does not provide some sort of safety net where a
         medical case fails to satisfy the article 3 criteria. An absence of
         medical treatment in the country of return will not in itself
         engage article 8. The only relevance to article 8 of such an
         absence will be where that is an additional factor in the balance
         with other factors which themselves engage article 8 (see (MM
         (Zimbabwe) at [23] per Sales LJ). Where an individual has a medical
         condition for which he has the benefit of treatment in this
         country, but such treatment may not be available in the country to
         which he may be removed, where (as here) article 3 is not engaged,
         then the position is as it was before Paposhvili, i.e. the fact
         that a person is receiving treatment here which is not available in
         the country of return may be a factor in the proportionality
         balancing exercise but that factor cannot by itself give rise to a
         breach of article 8. Indeed, it has been said that, in striking
         that balance, only the most compelling humanitarian considerations
         are likely to prevail over legitimate aims of immigration control
         (see Razgar at [59] per Baroness Hale).


         28.  Therefore, in my firm view, the approach set out in MM
         (Zimbabwe) and GS (India) is unaltered by Paposhvili; and is still
         appropriate. I do not consider the contrary is arguable."


10. Mr Jarvis submitted that consequently, the appeal should also have been
    dismissed under Article 8. The Judge has failed to lawfully engage with
    the significant obstacles assessment within the Immigration Rules.

11. Further, the Judge has given no adequate explanation as to why the same
    arguments which failed under Article 3 should succeed under Article  8.
    There is a lack of identification of factors  outside  of  the  alleged
    difficulty  of  accessing  treatment  to  show  why   the   Article   8
    consideration is based on factors different to those under  Article  3.
    Finally, there is a failure to  conduct  a  proper  balancing  exercise
    having failed to show that Section 117B in all of  its  provisions  has
    been properly applied with the appropriate weight given, as mandated by
    statute, including but not confined to the limits to weight to be given
    to private and family life  established  by  those  with  a  precarious
    status.

12. Mr Paramjorthy accepted that this was a complicated appeal with unusual
    features. He submitted that the  Judge  has  considered  detailed  oral
    evidence in regard to the Appellant's mental health. A  lack  of  funds
    prevented  the  Tribunal  benefitting   from   up-to-date   psychiatric
    evidence. However, the Judge has applied a  holistic  approach  finding
    the Appellant plausible in aspects of her evidence including  that  her
    son returned to Sri Lanka and has not been heard of  since.  The  Judge
    has found  that  the  Appellant's  children,  and  in  all  probability
    herself, were and remain on a watch list but not a stop list and it was
    open for the Judge to come to a conclusion  that  the  Appellant  would
    suffer a rapid deterioration in her health were  she  to  be  returned.
    Adequate reasons have been  given  and  there  is  nothing  within  the
    decision to suggest the Judge failed to engage  with  the  Respondent's
    supplementary refusal letter.

13. The Judge concludes at paragraph 78  of  his  decision  that  there  is
    inadequate evidence to  establish  that  suitable  medical  psychiatric
    treatment is not available in the Appellant's  country  of  origin.  He
    then goes on to find that given her vulnerability she would not be in a
    fit state  to  access  such  treatment.  However,  in  coming  to  this
    conclusion the Judge has failed to engage with the issues raised within
    the Respondent's supplemental refusal letter and particularly in  light
    of the adverse comment in  relation  to  the  age  of  the  Appellant's
    medical evidence. Further the Judge has erred in  not  finding  himself
    bound by the above-mentioned authority of N. Beyond that he has  failed
    to adequately reason why the arguments which  failed  under  Article  3
    would be successful under Article 8 and no identified  factors  outside
    of the alleged difficulties to access available treatment to  show  why
    the Article 8 consideration is based  on  factors  different  to  those
    under Article 3 can be gleaned from his decision.  These  factors  have
    impacted upon the balancing exercise required with particular reference
    to the  weight  that  should  be  given  to  private  and  family  life
    established by an Appellant with precarious status.

14.  For  those  reasons  the  Judge  has  materially   erred.   In   these
    circumstances further fact finding is required.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Direction 7(b) before any Judge aside from Judge Thorne.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                                     Date  8   January
2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard


