
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39436/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 October 2016                   |On 28 October 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           HEMANT NANJIBHAI PATEL
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J. Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Not represented


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Stewart, promulgated on 2 February  2016,  in
    which he allowed Mr. Patel's appeal against the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to refuse to grant  further  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student.


 2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to the Secretary of State  as
    the Respondent and to Mr. Patel  as  the  Appellant,  reflecting  their
    positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:

         "The Judge arguably erred in law in concluding that  the  '60  day'
         policy  applied  when  the  CAS  was  withdrawn  by   the   sponsor
         institution for non-payment of fees rather than the situation where
         the CAS was invalid because  (as  had  not  happened)  a  sponsor's
         licence  is  revoked  by  the  respondent.   The  former  situation
         arguably does not fall within  the  policy  or  give  rise  to  any
         unfairness by the respondent (see, EK (Ivory Coast) v  SSHD  [2014]
         EWCA Civ 1517 and Kaur v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 13)".

The hearing

 4.  The  Appellant  did  not  attend  the  hearing.   He  is  not  legally
    represented.  The file showed that notice of the date and time  of  the
    appeal had been sent to the Appellant at his  last  known  address,  37
    [~], Wembley.  However it had been returned  to  the  Tribunal  as  the
    Appellant was no longer living at that address.  There was no  evidence
    in the file that the Appellant  had  informed  the  Tribunal  that  his
    address had changed since the hearing in the First-tier  Tribunal.   Ms
    Isherwood confirmed that the only address  for  the  Appellant  on  the
    Respondent's file was that which he had last notified to the  Tribunal,
    37 [~], Wembley.  There was no evidence before me  that  the  Appellant
    had notified either the Tribunal or the Respondent  of  any  change  of
    address.  In accordance with rule 38 of The Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008, I considered that reasonable steps had been taken
    to notify the Appellant of the hearing and that it was in the interests
    of justice to proceed with the hearing in his absence.


 5. Ms Isherwood made brief  submissions  following  which  I  reserved  my
    decision.  She provided me with copies of the cases of EK (Ivory Coast)
    and Kaur.


Submissions


 6. Ms Isherwood relied on  the  grounds  of  appeal.   The  CAS  had  been
    withdrawn by the sponsor college,  and  the  judge  had  presumed  that
    therefore 60 days should be given  to  the  Appellant  to  find  a  new
    college.  However this only applied where the  responsibility  for  the
    CAS being withdrawn lay with the Respondent.  In this case the CAS  had
    been withdrawn by the college, which had not had  its  sponsor  licence
    revoked by the Respondent.  The fairness principle  did  not  have  the
    same applicability in this situation.

Error of law


 7. The Appellant did not provide a valid CAS with his  application.   This
    was not in dispute.  The appeal was  allowed  on  the  basis  that  the
    Appellant should have been given a further period of  60  days  by  the
    Respondent in accordance with her policy so that he could  find  a  new
    college.


 8. I have considered the case law referred to in the grant  of  permission
    to appeal, in particular paragraphs 38 and 59  of  EK.   Paragraph  38,
    insofar as it is relevant, states:

         " It has been held that where the Secretary of State has withdrawn
         authorisation  from  a  college  to  issue  CAS  letters,  fairness
         requires that she should give  foreign  students  enrolled  at  the
         college a reasonable  opportunity  to  find  a  substitute  college
         before removing  them: Patel  (revocation  of  sponsor  licence  -
         fairness) India [2011] UKUT 00211 (IAC); Thakur (PBS  Decision  -
         Common Law  Fairness)  Bangladesh [2011]  UKUT  00151  (IAC);  and
         see Alam at para. [44]. But that requirement was found  to  arise
         where there had been a change of position of which the Secretary of
         State was aware,  and  indeed  which  she  had  brought  about,  in
         circumstances in which the students were not themselves at fault in
         any way, but had been caught out by action taken by  the  Secretary
         of State in relation to  which  they  had  had  no  opportunity  to
         protect themselves. In the present case, by contrast, the Secretary
         had no means of knowing why the Appellant's  CAS  letter  had  been
         withdrawn and was not responsible for its withdrawal, and the  fair
         balance between the public interest in the due operation of the PBS
         regime and the individual interest of the Appellant was  in  favour
         of simple operation of the regime without further ado."

 9. Paragraph 59 states:

         "Secondly, like Sales LJ, I  consider  that  a  fairness  principle
         which would lead to success for the applicant in the  present  case
         would make too great an inroad into the simplicity,  predictability
         and relative speed of the PBS process, contrary to  the  thrust  of
         the PBS regime as laid down by the Immigration Rules,  particularly
         in a situation such as the present, where the  Secretary  of  State
         bears no responsibility at all for the  mistake,  or  the  lack  of
         communication of it, which  led  to  the  unfair  outcome  for  the
         applicant."

10. In the Appellant's case his CAS was withdrawn by the college  following
    a dispute about fees.  It was not withdrawn because the Respondent  had
    revoked the college's sponsor licence.  It was not withdrawn due to any
    action taken by the Respondent, and she was  not  responsible  for  its
    withdrawal.  Following the case law, I find that the requirement for  a
    "60 day letter" only arises where the reason  that  the  CAS  has  been
    withdrawn is due to action taken  by  the  Respondent,  not  where  the
    withdrawal arises due to actions taken by a sponsor college.


11. In paragraph 8 of the decision the judge states:

         "The refusal of the combined application was not in accordance with
         the law, because the policy in place at the time was not followed."



12. I find that the policy only applies where the Respondent is responsible
    for the CAS being withdrawn.  In the Appellant's case,  the  Respondent
    was not responsible for the CAS being withdrawn.  I therefore find that
    it was an error of law to allow  the  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
    Respondent did not follow her policy.   The Appellant did not provide a
    valid CAS with his application, and therefore his application  fell  to
    be refused for failure to provide a valid CAS.  The Respondent's policy
    of granting a further 60 days did not apply.



Notice of Decision


13. The decision involves the making of a material error of law, and I  set
    the decision aside.


14. I remake the decision, dismissing the Appellant's appeal.


15. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 27 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 27 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain


