



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/39935/2013,

                                                          IA/39937/2013,

                                                          IA/39941/2013,


             IA/39946/2013
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 8th April 2014                               |On 6th May 2014            |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

                mr osama mohamed benmansour - first Appellant
             mrs salma abduljalil elgharyani - second appellant
                  miss boshra benmansour - third appellant
                master mohamed benmansour - fourth appellant
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Davison, Representative for Ison Harrison


For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Libya. The first and  second  Appellants
    are husband and wife. The third and fourth Appellants are  their  minor
    children.  The  second,  third  and  fourth  Appellants'  appeals   are
    dependent upon that of the first Appellant.

 2. The first Appellant entered the United Kingdom on 7th January  2007  in
    possession of a student visa. The other three Appellants followed him a
    month later, entering as  his  dependents.  Leave  to  remain  for  all
    Appellants was extended, for various reasons, until 31st July 2013.

 3. On 30th July 2013 the Appellants made application for leave  to  remain
    outside the Immigration Rules. Those applications were refused  by  the
    Respondent and the subsequent appeals to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge
    Hague) were dismissed in a determination promulgated on  31st  December
    2013.

 4. The Appellants now appeal with permission to the Upper Tribunal.  Judge
    Hague in making his decision noted that the Appellants could  not  meet
    the Immigration Rules. This was always accepted by the  Appellants  who
    argued that the Respondent's  decision  infringed  their  rights  to  a
    private/family under Article 8 ECHR.

 5. The Judge having set out somewhat briefly the jurisprudence  in  Razgar
    went on to  hear  oral  evidence  from  the  first  Appellant  and  his
    children. Having taken evidence, the Judge concluded his  determination
    in this way.

         "The family would be removed as a unit and so family  life  between
         them would not be disturbed. Private life is of  little  weight  in
         this case as they have always been in the  United  Kingdom  knowing
         that they would ultimately return to Libya and so  they  cannot  be
         perceived as having put down roots. I find that Article  8  is  not
         engaged".

 6. The grounds seeking permission rely on two main strands.

      i) Failure to find that Article 8 is engaged (see paragraph 13 of  the
         determination).

     ii) Failure to carry out an Article 8 balancing exercise.

 7. Mrs Pettersen on behalf of  the  Respondent  served  a  short  Rule  24
    response;  but  when  pressed  to  defend  the  determination  sensibly
    accepted that the Judge's reasoning was deficient when he had concluded
    as he did in paragraph 13 "private life is of  little  weight  in  this
    case". She also agreed that although Article 3 had been raised  in  the
    grounds of appeal, the Judge had made  no  reference  to  that  in  any
    assessment on risk on return.

 8. In the circumstances I informed Mr Davison that I did not need to  hear
    from him.

Has the Judge Erred?

 9.  I find that Judge  Hague  has  reached  a  conclusion  as  he  did  in
    paragraph 13 of his determination, which is flawed. He  has  based  his
    assessment on an incomplete and possibly inaccurate factual matrix.  He
    has found that the Appellants' case does not pass the second stage test
    by indicating that Article 8 is not even engaged. Since the  Appellants
    have been in the United Kingdom for a period of  seven  years  and  the
    children are now aged 12 and 11 years respectively, there needs  to  be
    substantial and sustainable reasons given why Article 8 is not engaged.
    I find no such reasons in the determination.

10. Likewise if Article 8 is engaged the appropriate balancing exercise  is
    required to be carried out; this the Judge has failed  to  do.  Finally
    the grounds of appeal did raise Article 3 ECHR. The  Judge  appears  to
    have ignored that altogether. Bringing all  those  strands  together  I
    find that the decision of Judge Hague unsustainable. Because there is a
    lack of fact finding on the core issues, it is necessary to  set  aside
    the First-tier Tribunal decision and for the case  to  be  heard  again
    afresh and for new findings to be made. I consider  that  it  would  be
    more appropriate, in the light of the quantity of oral and  documentary
    evidence to be considered, for the decision to be remade in the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  and  direct  that  it  is  remitted  to  that  Tribunal
    accordingly.

DECISION

11. The determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  is  dated  31st
    December 2013 is set aside. I direct that the appeal be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal to remake the decision (not Judge Hague).

No anonymity direction is made


Signature                                             Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


