
IAC-TH-WYL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39285/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 May 2015                       |On 4 June 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                               MRS HUMA IQBAL
                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. No  application  for  anonymity  has  previously  been  made  in  these
    proceedings and there is no such application before me today.  There is
    nothing within the  material  that  suggests  that  such  an  order  is
    appropriate and none is therefore made.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 7  July  1963.   She  is
    married to Mr Shamsul Silam Khan.  The appellant applied for  leave  as
    his dependant.  The respondent concluded that the appellant  failed  to
    meet the requirements of paragraph 319C(i) of the Immigration Rules  HC
    395 (as amended) and refused her application.

 3. She appealed and following consideration on papers Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Agnew, in a decision  promulgated  on  23  January  2015,
    dismissed the appellant's appeal under both the Immigration  Rules  and
    on human rights grounds.

 4. Permission to appeal was sought and granted on 19 March 2015.  Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal P J M Hollingworth gave the  following  reasons
    for the grant:-

         "1.  The case was decided on papers.  An arguable error of law  has
             arisen in relation to the extent of the information  available
             to the judge and the application of the criteria in  paragraph
             319."

    Thus the appeal came before me today.

 5. Before me today were both the appellant and her husband.  The appellant
    was assisted by an Urdu interpreter and I ensured at the outset of  the
    hearing that they fully understood each other.

 6. Having considered the decision Mr Walker, quite properly  in  my  view,
    accepted that the  judge  had  failed  to  particularise  the  evidence
    considered which enabled him to come to the conclusions  that  he  did.
    That procedural error amounted to unfairness and is a material error of
    law.  I share that analysis.

 7. Both parties invited me to remit this appeal to a  hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal on the basis that  one,  the  appellant,  had  been
    deprived of a fair hearing.

 8. For these reasons I  find  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    contains errors of law and has to be set aside in its entirety.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law.  The decision is set aside.   The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Statement 7 of 2(b) before any judge aside from Judge Agnew.



Signed   Dated: 1 June 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
