
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39248/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         | Decision & Reasons           |
|                                             |Promulgated                   |
|On 11 September 2015                         | On 30 September 2015         |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER tribunal JUDGE monson

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                            MR Mudassar SHAFIQUE
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Khan, Counsel, St Paul's Chambers

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Amin sitting at  Hatton  Cross  on  2
    January 2015) allowing the claimant's appeal under  the  Rules  against
    the decision of the Secretary of State to refuse  his  application  for
    leave to remain in the UK as a Tier 1 Entrepreneur  Migrant  under  the
    points-based system.  The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity
    direction, and I do not consider  that  the  claimant  requires  to  be
    accorded anonymity for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The claimant made his application on 28 July 2014, and it  was  refused
    on 22 September 2014 on the ground that he had not provided  sufficient
    evidence of his application, as  specified  under  Appendix  A  of  the
    Immigration Rules, to be awarded points for attributes.

 3. The claimant had provided a bank letter in the name of the third  party
    funder, the  third  party  declaration,  and  a  letter  from  a  legal
    representative.  But the third party  declaration  was  not  acceptable
    because it did not contain both his signature and the signature of  his
    entrepreneurial team partner, as well as that of the third  party.   He
    had submitted a separate document which contained  both  his  signature
    and that of his entrepreneurial  team  partner.   But  as  this  was  a
    separate document to the third party declaration, it was not acceptable
    evidence.

 4. It was also not shown that since before 11 July 2014 and up to the date
    of his application, he had been continuously working in  an  occupation
    which  appeared  on  the  list  of  occupations  skilled  to   national
    qualifications framework level 4 or above, as stated in  the  codes  of
    practice at Appendix J, and had  provided  the  specified  evidence  in
    paragraph 41-SD.  Although he had provided a job title that was  listed
    in Appendix J, the only evidence he had submitted to  demonstrate  that
    he was active in that occupation as  part  of  his  business  were  two
    contact agreements, online marketing and advertisements from  facebook,
    twitter, free ads, and scoot; and company stationery which  showed  his
    company's website address.  The evidence he had submitted  in  relation
    to marketing material and advertising material was not acceptable as it
    did not cover a continuous period commencing before 11 July 2014 up  to
    no earlier than three months before the date of his application.  There
    were no dates  shown  on  any  of  the  online  advertisements  he  had
    submitted.  Checks on the  domain  checking  website  showed  that  the
    website was registered on 7 July 2014, but did not show the name of the
    individual who had registered the website.

The Hearing before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 5. Both parties were legally represented before Judge Amin.  Mr Khan of St
    Paul's Chambers Solicitors appeared on behalf of the claimant.

 6. In his  subsequent  decision,  the  judge  set  out  his  findings  and
    conclusions at paragraphs 30  onwards.   At  paragraphs  30  to  32  he
    addressed the question of whether the third party declaration was valid
    and in accordance with the Rules.  At paragraphs 33 to  38,  the  judge
    addressed  the  question  of  whether  the  marketing  material  showed
    continuous advertising before 11 July 2014.  As there is no issue about
    the judge's findings and conclusions on  the  topic  of  the  marketing
    material, I only set out below the judge's findings on the third  party
    declaration:

         30.  I  find  that  the  Appellant  has  met  the  requirements  of
             Paragraph 41 SD (b) (i).  It was accepted by both parties that
             the declaration at A1, page 4 did not contain  the  signatures
             of the Appellant and his  entrepreneurial  partner.   However,
             these signatures were contained in a separate  document  drawn
             up by solicitors in the UK (A1, p3).  Paragraph 245AA (b) (iv)
             gives the SSHD a discretion to contact the Appellant  where  a
             document does not contain all the information required.

         31.  In this appeal the Appellant had a letter from the Home Office
             in August informing him the timescale in which his application
             would be decided and that if any documents or information  was
             missing the Home Office would contact him.  There was  thus  a
             legitimate expectation that the SSHD would, before making  her
             decision, contact the Appellant.  She  failed  to  do  so  and
             therefore her decision in this regard  is  not  in  accordance
             with the law.

         32.  Alternatively, I find that the missing  information  from  the
             specified document submitted was clearly verifiable from other
             documents (see Paragraph 245(d)) of  the  Immigration  Rules).
             The letter  at  page  3,  A1  clearly  sets  out  the  missing
             information and hence this was easily verifiable by the  SSHD.
             For  these  reasons,  I  find  that  the  SSHD  refusal  under
             Paragraph 41 SD  (b)  (i)  in  relation  to  the  third  party
             declaration was not in accordance with the law.

 7. The judge went on to allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

 8. A member of the Specialist Appeals  Team  settled  an  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  He argued that  the  judge
    had erred in law in allowing the appeal under  the  Rules.   Evidential
    flexibility did not apply  in  this  case.   The  Court  of  Appeal  in
    Secretary of State for the Home Department v Rodriguez [2014] EWCA  Civ
    2 found the evidential flexibility policy was not designed to  give  an
    applicant the opportunity first to remedy any defect or  inadequacy  in
    the  application  or  supporting  documentation  so  as  to  save   the
    application from refusal after substantive  consideration.   The  judge
    had also misdirected himself at paragraph 8 where he said that  he  was
    not prevented from having regard to postdecision evidence provided that
    it related to the facts at the date of decision and cast light on  what
    the position was at that date.

The Grant of Permission

 9. On 20 April 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Colyer granted the Secretary
    of State permission to appeal, holding that both asserted errors of law
    were arguable.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

10. At the hearing before me, I received extensive submissions from both Mr
    Kandola and Mr Khan on the application of paragraph 245AA to the  third
    party declaration, in the light of  the  unchallenged  finding  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge that the other requirement put  in  issue  by
    the refusal letter had in fact been met.  Mr Khan agreed that the judge
    had been wrong to allow the appeal outright, and so the question  which
    arose on re-making was whether the appeal  should  be  allowed  on  the
    ground that the decision was  not  in  accordance  with  the  law.   Mr
    Kandola said he would leave this to my discretion, and  I  reserved  my
    decision on this question.



Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

11. On any view, the judge was wrong to allow  the  appeal  outright.   The
    third party declaration did not meet the requirements of the Rules, and
    so the claimant could only succeed in his appeal on the ground that the
    refusal decision was not in accordance with the law.  To this end,  the
    claimant needed to establish that the Secretary of State had been wrong
    to make a decision on his application without giving him an opportunity
    to rectify the defect  in  the  third  party  declaration,  or  without
    otherwise  exercising  evidential  flexibility   in   accordance   with
    paragraph 245AA of the Rules.

12. The judge also misdirected himself on the issue of the admissibility of
    evidence at paragraph 8.  As this was a point-based system  appeal,  he
    could only take into account the evidence that had been  provided  with
    the application.

13. The general rule is that the Tribunal may consider any  evidence  which
    it thinks is  relevant  to  the  substance  of  the  decision  appealed
    against, including evidence which concerns a matter arising  after  the
    date of decision: Section 85(4) of the Act.  But  pursuant  to  Section
    85A(3) of the Act, this general rule does not apply if-

    b)  the  immigration  decision  concerned  an  application  of  a  kind
       identified in the immigration rules as requiring  to  be  considered
       under a "Points Based System"; and

    c) the appeal relies wholly or partly on grounds specified  in  section
       84(1)(a), (e) or (f).

14. The above is known as Exception 2, and where Exception  2  applies  the
    Tribunal may consider evidence adduced by the appellant only if it-

      i) was submitted in support  of,  and  at  the  time  of  making,  the
         application to which the immigration decision related, [or]

     ii) relates to the appeal in so far as it relies on grounds other  than
         those specified in subsection (3)(c), [or]

    iii) is adduced to prove that a document is genuine or valid.

The Re-Making of the Decision

15. I do not consider this is a wrong format case.  The  problem  with  the
    third party declaration was not that it was in the  wrong  format,  but
    that it did not contain a vital ingredient, namely  the  signatures  of
    the entrepreneurial team members as well as the signature of the  third
    party funder.  Looking at the matter through  the  prism  of  paragraph
    245AA, it would be more accurate to describe the defect in the document
    as being one where not all the specified information has been provided.

16. I consider  it  was  reasonable  for  the  case  worker  assessing  the
    application not to give the claimant the opportunity to provide  a  new
    third party declaration which met all the requirements.  There  was  no
    reason to suppose that such  a  declaration  existed  at  the  date  of
    application.  For, if it had existed, the claimant would have  provided
    it  with  his  application,  rather  than  providing  a   third   party
    declaration which did not contain all the specified  information.   The
    claimant could rely on a new third party declaration in  support  of  a
    new application, but he could not rely on a newly generated third party
    declaration in support of his existing application.

17. If the judge had upheld the  case  worker's  other  objections  to  the
    specified documents provided with the application, this would have been
    the end of the road for the claimant.  But  as  the  judge  found  that
    these other objections were ill-founded, the claimant was in retrospect
    deprived of the benefit of the case worker giving consideration  as  to
    whether to exercise discretion under  sub-paragraph  (d)  of  paragraph
    245AA. As Mr Kandola accepted, the case worker does not appear to  have
    considered whether the missing specified  information  from  the  third
    party declaration was verifiable from  other  documents;  and,  if  so,
    whether discretion should exceptionally be exercised in the applicant's
    favour.   Accordingly,   I   allow   the   appeal   on   this   ground.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  following  decision  is
substituted: the claim in this appeal is allowed  on  the  ground  that  the
decision was not in accordance with the law, and a lawful  decision  on  the
claimant's application is awaited.

I make no anonymity direction.






Signed                                  Date


Judge Monson

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal







