
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39746/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 25th July 2014                               |On 12th August 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                             mr Jasminder Singh
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Imamovic (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Freer promulgated on 23rd April  2014,  following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham on 17th April 2014.  In the determination, the judge allowed
    the appeal on human rights grounds of Jasminder Singh.  The  Respondent
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of India, who was born in 1982.   He
    appealed against the decision of  the  Respondent  Secretary  of  State
    dated 25th July 2013 to refuse his application to live  in  the  United
    Kingdom with his wife Miss Sonia Sandhu, alias Sonia Ayub, a person  of
    Muslim faith.  The Appellant himself is a person of  Sikh  faith.   The
    applicable provisions are paragraph 276ADE of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim essentially is that his marriage is most  unusual
    in that it is a marriage between a Sikh man  and  a  Muslim  woman,  of
    Pakistani origin.  The parties have been living together as long ago as
    2007 and got married on 8th May 2010, almost  four  years  ago.   Their
    marriage was genuine  and  subsisting.   They  resided  together.   The
    Appellant's wife, a person who had previously been married  with  three
    children, no longer had contact with her previous family.

 4. However, there had been threats to them from their family members.  She
    did not want to go and live in India (paragraph 21).  Their  respective
    families were hostile and she would not be welcomed in India.

The Judge's Findings

 5. The judge had regard to the fact that the Appellant's wife,

         "Has assimilated to a considerable degree into the Sikh  faith  and
         community.  It is a case with the Sikh faith, like the Jewish, that
         it tends to fall strongly into ethnic lines, although converts  are
         known in both instances" (paragraph 44).

 6. The judge recognised that there  had  been  threats  to  the  wife  but
    recorded that "his  wife  has  not  been  threatened  for  many  years"
    (Paragraph 47).

 7. He went on to observe that,

         "The evidence before me is not only that the Appellant and his wife
         lack support from their respective families but, worse  than  that,
         they are actively hostile and the police were called  in  2007  and
         2008.  No bridges have been mended since then.  Taking  account  of
         all the evidence in the round, I find that there is an  exceptional
         case here which begs consideration under Article 8  jurisprudence".
         (Paragraph 57)

 8. The judge then went on to consider the  Article  8  jurisprudence.   He
    observed that the marriage was subsisting and had lasted for many years
    and that by contemporary standards "it is long enough to be counted  as
    a well-established and successful relationship.  It is  a  strong  bond
    ... I heard detailed evidence from both husband and wife.  As  evidence
    of this strong devotion, they are trying to have children and there  is
    medical advice to try in vitro fertilisation" (paragraph 59).

 9. The judge concluded that the decision maker  had  not  taken  important
    matters into account.  This was because,

         "The wife is  a  British  citizen.   It  is  not  proportionate  to
         interfere with her right to have children or her right to reside in
         the country of which she is a national.  She has never  resided  in
         India or been  a  national  of  India.   She  will  not  go  there.
         Separating them even for a short  time  is  clearly  a  significant
         breach ..." (Paragraph 59).

Grounds of Application

10. The grounds of application place reliance upon the case of Nagre [2013]
    EWHC 720 where Sales J had referred to the fact that the new Rules  are
    a complete code and that if one is to consider freestanding  Article  8
    jurisprudence it has to be  demonstrated  that  "there  are  compelling
    circumstances not  sufficiently  recognised  under  the  new  Rules  to
    require the grant of such leave" (see paragraph 29).

11. On 23rd May 2014, permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

12. At the hearing before me on 25th July 2014, Mr Neville Smart, appearing
    on behalf of the Respondent Secretary  of  State,  submitted  that  the
    decision was perverse because the judge had referred  to  the  case  of
    Hayat extensively in his determination (see Hyatt  [2011]  UKUT  0044),
    but this was a decision which was overruled by the Court of Appeal, and
    yet the judge was drawing heavily in his citations  from  the  Tribunal
    judgment in Hayat.

13. At paragraph 58 of the determination,  Judge  Freer  was  referring  to
    "proportionality" in terms that had been described in Hayat, which  had
    been overruled subsequently in the case of Treebhowan in the  Court  of
    Appeal subsequently.

14. Further, the judge referred to the case of Zhang [2013] EWHC  891,  but
    that was a case where the Appellant had been in the  country  lawfully,
    and in this  case  the  instant  Appellant  has  been  in  the  country
    unlawfully, so the same considerations cannot apply.

15. For her part, Ms Imamovic submitted that the  judge  had  given  proper
    regard to all the relevant cases on Article 8, and  the  way  in  which
    this was to be interpreted in relation to the Immigration Rules.

16. The judge had referred to the existence of "exceptional  circumstances"
    because this was a case of a wife, who was not of the same faith as the
    Appellant, and who was refusing to go to India  to  live  there,  as  a
    person of Pakistani origin, such that the marriage would be split up.



No Error of Law

17. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the  judge  does  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside this decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  There are two reasons for this.

18. First, the judge has set out his recognition of the  established  cases
    when looking at, what he describes as a "fast moving" area of  the  law
    as far as Article 8 jurisprudence  is  concerned  (see  paragraph  50).
    Consideration is given to MF (Nigeria) and to Nagre and to Gulshan  and
    to Shahzad (see paragraph 50).

19. The judge then recognises that if the Appellant is returned  to  India,
    his British citizen wife, Sonia Sandhu, will not go with him.  This  is
    because "she has never resided in India or been a national  of  India".
    He concludes that there would be a "significant breach" of their  right
    to family life (paragraph 59).

20. These were exceptional circumstances to which the judge turned to after
    considering the case law in Zhang and Chikwamba (at paragraph  56)  and
    his findings of fact are designed thereafter to show  that  exceptional
    circumstances exist.  This is simply a disagreement with  the  findings
    of the judge and I can accordingly only conclude that there is no error
    of law here.

Decision

21. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

22. No anonymity order is made.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 9th August 2014


