
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39340/2014
                                                               IA/39334/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 3 September 2015                  |On 8 September 2015                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               VIKTORIA VOROS
                                 MUSFER BUTT
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr L Doyle Trainee Solicitor with M & K Solicitors




                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  a  determination
       of First-tier Tribunal Judge Metzer promulgated on the 8th  May  2015
       in which the Judge allowed the appeal  under  the  Immigration  (EEA)
       Regulations 2006.

Discussion


    2. The appellants  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  are  nationals  of
       Hungary and Pakistan born on the 12  May  1995  and  12  August  1989
       respectively.

    3. On 18 October 2014 the  respondent  refused  the  second  appellant's
       application for a Residence  Card  as  confirmation  of  a  right  of
       residence under European Community  law  as  the  spouse  of  an  EEA
       national exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom on the  basis
       the marriage is a 'sham marriage'.

    4. The Judge, having considered the evidence found that the Secretary of
       State had failed to establish  to  the  relevant  standard  that  the
       marriage was one of convenience and allowed the  appeal  against  the
       Regulation 2 refusal.

    5. The basis of the challenge is that the refusal was  on  two  grounds,
       the first relating to the 'sham marriage point'  (Regulation  2)  and
       the second that the  appellants  had  failed  to  provide  sufficient
       evidence to demonstrate that the EEA national (the  first  appellant)
       was exercising treaty rights in the United  Kingdom  (Regulation  6).
       The refusal was therefore by reference to both Regulations 2 and 6.

    6. It is conceded before the Upper Tribunal that Judge Metzer has  erred
       in law in not making a finding as to whether the first appellant  was
       a qualified person under Regulation 6.

    7. The issue was therefore one of the materiality of this error.  Within
       the bundle was evidence of the EEA  national's  engagement  with  the
       labour market in the United Kingdom including at  pages  185  to  216
       evidence of employment. The second appellant in his witness statement
       refers to a job at the KFC being lost by the EEA national as a result
       of an inability to undertake the work, but material made available on
       the day of the hearing does establish that the  first  appellant  has
       remained engaged in the labour market and in employment and has  been
       exercising  treaty  rights  in  accordance  with  the  Free  Movement
       Directive. Accordingly Regulation 6  has  been  shown  to  have  been
       satisfied.

    8. I find no legal error material to the decision to  allow  the  appeal
       has been made out. The determination shall stand.

Decision

    9. There is no material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.

       The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005. I make no such order  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
       Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 7 September 2015

