
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA394742013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 31 July 2017                          |On 30 August 2017                 |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                        mrs Marquinha Antonio Cassule
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not represented
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is the appeal of Mrs  Cassule  against  the  Secretary's  decision
    refusing  to  issue  a  derivative  residence  card.   The  matter  was
    considered as long ago as 2015 before a panel of the Tribunal including
    me in which it was decided in relation to the judge's decision that  he
    erred in law under the EEA Regulations but there was an  error  of  law
    about the Article 8 issue.  Thereafter the appeal was adjourned because
    the point had been raised by the Presenting Officer that there  was  an
    argument being put forward on behalf of the Home Office that there  was
    no power for a First-tier or Upper Tribunal Judge to make a decision on
    Article 8 human rights in the case where there was an EEA  decision  of
    this kind in play.  There was then a decision by the Upper Tribunal  in
    a case Mr Jarvis has referred to called Amiteymour which  decided  that
    there was no Article 8 right of appeal in a case such as this and  that
    decision as he has also said was upheld by the Court of Appeal  in  May
    of this year.  So as a matter of law the judge erred in raising Article
    8 issues and as a matter of law I cannot consider Article 8 issues  but
    as Mr Jarvis has also said the reason for that  is  because  there  has
    been no removal decision and so the appellant is entirely free to  make
    an application to the Home Office on human rights grounds when she  can
    raise matters such as the health problems and any other issues  and  if
    there is a decision made against her then she has  a  right  of  appeal
    against that.  So she has not actually lost anything.  All I am  saying
    is that the human rights appeal cannot be brought  in  connection  with
    the EEA rights claim which she brought but  it  can  be  brought  as  a
    separate free-standing challenge to a  further  decision  of  the  Home
    Office in light of any representations she makes.  If she can get legal
    advice then obviously I would encourage her to do so.  But in any event
    she should make an application to the Home Office based on an Article 8
    human rights claim.  She should see what  that  decision  is  and  that
    decision will tell her about appeal rights.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]


Signed                                  Date 3 August 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen






TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



[pic]

Signed                                  Date: 29/08/2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen






