

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)         Appeal Number:  IA/39626/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House                                 Decision and Reasons
On 17 June 2014  Promulgated  on 02 December 2014


                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                                Monika Basra
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                   Respondent
Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr. P. Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr. Z. Arai of ARA Immigration Services Ltd.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Y.
      J. Jones promulgated on 28  March  2014  allowing  Ms  Basra's  appeal
      against the Secretary of State's decision dated 27 September  2013  to
      refuse to vary leave to remain and to remove her from the UK.


   2. Although before me the Secretary of State  is  the  appellant  and  Ms
      Basra is  the  respondent,  for  the  sake  of  consistency  with  the
      proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter refer  to
      Ms  Basra  as  the  Appellant  and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
      Respondent.




Background

   3. The Appellant is a national of India born on 19 July 1989.


   4. The Appellant's  biological  father  separated  from  the  Appellant's
      mother in 1995, and the Appellant has had no direct contact  with  him
      since 2000, although it was not until May 2010, that  the  Appellant's
      parents were formally divorced. The Appellant lived  with  her  mother
      and two younger brothers until she came to the UK, arriving on 21 July
      2010 and entering pursuant to a Tier 4 student  visa  valid  until  30
      August 2013.


   5. The Appellant's mother had formed a new relationship with  Mr  Jagdish
      Lal, a British citizen  (having  become  naturalised  on  10  December
      2001): they met in India in October 2009  and  became  engaged  on  30
      October 2009; they were married in India on 13 October  2010.  Mr  Lal
      began to provide financial support for the Appellant's mother and  her
      family from the time of their  engagement.  On  1  November  2011  the
      Appellant's mother and brothers  entered  the  UK  pursuant  to  entry
      clearances for the purposes of settlement obtained on the basis of the
      Appellant's mother's marital relationship with Mr Lal. In due  course,
      on 4 and 5 March  2014,  the  Appellant's  mother  and  brothers  were
      granted indefinite leave to remain. It is said that the family home in
      India has been sold.


   6. The Appellant has resided in the UK with her mother and siblings,  and
      her stepfather since her mother's entry to the UK.



   7. The Appellant attended to her studies pursuant to  the  basis  of  her
      entry clearance and was awarded a BA in Business Management  from  the
      University of Sunderland in September 2013 (having pursued a course at
      the  university's  London  campus).  The  Appellant  was   financially
      supported through her studies by her stepfather.


   8. On 27 August 2013 the Appellant applied for leave to remain in the  UK
      relying on Article 8 of the ECHR with reference to the presence of her
      mother, brothers and stepfather in the UK: at that time they  had  not
      obtained indefinite leave to remain but their intention to  seek  such
      leave was asserted. (See representatives' letter  in  support  of  the
      application dated 27 August 2013.)


   9. The Appellant's application was refused  for  reasons  set  out  in  a
      'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated 27 September 2013,  and  a
      decision to refuse variation of leave to  remain  and  to  remove  the
      Appellant in consequence was made by way of a  Notice  of  Immigration
      Decision also dated 27 September 2013. The Respondent's  decision  was
      taken with reference to paragraph 276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules;
      surprisingly, given the nature of the application,  no  reference  was
      made in the RFRL to the circumstance of the  Appellant  residing  with
      her family in the UK.


  10. The Appellant appealed to  the  IAC.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      allowed the Appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules for reasons
      set out in his determination. Having  allowed  the  appeal  under  the
      Rules the Judge considered it unnecessary to consider Article 8 of the
      ECHR (determination at paragraph 32).


  11. The Respondent sought permission to appeal which was granted by First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Frankish on 8 May 2014.


Consideration: Error of Law

  12. In circumstances where the Appellant did not meet variously  the  time
      or age requirements of paragraphs  276ADE(iii),  (iv),  and  (v),  the
      First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  correctly   identified   that   paragraph
      276ADE(vi) was in issue: (see determination at paragraphs 25-26).


  13. Pursuant  to  paragraph  276ADE(vi)  the  Appellant  was  required  to
      demonstrate that at the date of application, whilst being both over 18
      years of age and having lived continuously in the UK for less than  20
      years, she "has no ties (including social, cultural  or  family)  with
      the country to which she would have to go if  required  to  leave  the
      UK". The relevant country being the destination of removal  and  being
      the country of the Appellant's nationality, is India.


  14. The meaning of 'no ties' has been the subject of consideration by  the
      Upper Tribunal. In Ogundimu (Article 8 -  new  rules)  Nigeria  [2013]
      UKUT 00060 (IAC) the UT considered paragraph 399A of the  Rules  where
      the same wording - "no ties (including  social,  cultural  or  family)
      with the country to which he would have to go" - appears. Paragraph  4
      of headnote is in these terms:

"The natural and ordinary meaning of the word 'ties' in  paragraph  399A  of
      the Immigration Rules imports a concept involving something more  than
      merely remote or abstract links to the country of proposed deportation
      or removal. It involves there being  a  connection  to  life  in  that
      country. Consideration of whether a person has 'no  ties'  to  such  a
      country must involve a rounded  assessment  of  all  of  the  relevant
      circumstances and is not  to  be  limited  to  'social,  cultural  and
      family' circumstances".


  15. See further in this context paragraphs 119-25 of Ogundimu. The use  of
      the same wording  in  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Rules  is  expressly
      recognised in Ogundimu: see paragraph 122. I note  in  particular  the
      following passages from paragraphs 123 and 125:

"The natural and ordinary meaning of the word 'ties' imports,  we  think,  a
      concept involving something more than merely remote and abstract links
      to the country of proposed deportation or removal. It  involves  there
      being a continued connection to life in that country;  something  that
      ties a claimant to his or her country of origin. If this were not  the
      case then it would appear that a person's nationality of  the  country
      of proposed deportation could of itself lead to a failure to meet  the
      requirements of the rule. This would render  the  application  of  the
      rule,  given  the  context  within   which   it   operates,   entirely
      meaningless." And -

"Whilst each case turns on its own  facts,  circumstances  relevant  to  the
      assessment of whether a person has ties to the country to  which  they
      would have to go if they were required to  leave  the  United  Kingdom
      must include, but are not limited to: the length of time a person  has
      spent in the country to which he would have to go if he were  required
      to leave the United  Kingdom,  the  age  that  the  person  left  that
      country, the exposure that person has had to  the  cultural  norms  of
      that country, whether that person speaks the language of the  country,
      the extent of the family and friends that person has in the country to
      which he  is  being  deported  or  removed  and  the  quality  of  the
      relationships that person has with those friends and family members."


  16. The First-tier Tribunal Judge made no reference  to  the  decision  in
      Ogundimu, and his determination does not otherwise suggest that he had
      regard to it, far less applied  its  guiding  principles.  Indeed  the
      Judge's consideration  appears  to  be  confined  to  the  Appellant's
      proximity or otherwise to family members still residing in India:  see
      paragraph 29. It is not apparent how the Judge's conclusion in respect
      of the unavailability of accommodation with  extended  family  members
      informed his conclusion - stated at paragraph 30 and  31  -  that  the
      Appellant had no social or cultural ties with India.
  17. Very fairly and properly, Mr Arain recognised  and  acknowledged  this
      error on the part of the First-tier Tribunal, and indeed  acknowledged
      that the Appellant was  in  difficulties  in  demonstrating  that  she
      satisfied the  Rules  in  this  regard.  It  could  not  seriously  be
      maintained following an absence of only some  four  years,  and  where
      family members continued to live in India (albeit not reasonably being
      in a position to provide the Appellant with accommodation),  that  the
      Appellant  had  no  social  or  cultural  ties  with  her  country  of
      nationality. The relocation of her siblings, and mother did not act to
      sever such ties as the Appellant had in  a  personal  capacity  having
      lived and interacted in India from her birth up until she entered  the
      UK at the age of 21.


  18. Accordingly, it was common ground that the Judge had materially  erred
      in law in misdirecting himself as to the meaning  of  the  Immigration
      Rules and that his decision required to be set aside. I  endorse  this
      common position, and set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
      accordingly.


Re-making the decision

  19. As noted above, Mr Arain conceded that the Appellant could not succeed
      under paragraph 276ADE(vi). It was not contended that  there  was  any
      other provision under  the  Rules  that  could  avail  the  Appellant.
      Accordingly, it was the Appellant's position that the only live  issue
      for consideration in the remaking of the decision in  the  appeal  was
      the  Appellant's  reliance  on   Article   8   of   the   ECHR.   Both
      representatives were content that this was a  matter  suitable  to  be
      considered  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  without  receiving   further
      evidence, on the basis of the findings of primary  fact  made  by  the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge, and their further oral submissions.  (Those
      submissions have been noted in my record of proceedings  which  is  on
      file.)


  20. As noted above, it is common ground before me that the Appellant  does
      not meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE in  respect  of  private
      life, or Appendix FM in respect of family life.


  21. Whilst the Rules are intended to be Article 8 compliant  and  to  give
      expression to the  Executive's  view  on  where  the  balance  between
      individual rights and public interest is to be struck, they are not  a
      complete code. In Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules -  correct  approach)
      [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) and Nagre [2013] EWHC  720  (Admin),  guidance
      was given to the effect that where an  Appellant  does  not  meet  the
      requirements of the Rules the Tribunal  must  turn  its  mind  to  the
      question whether there is good reason to  give  consideration  to  the
      case beyond the express wording of the Rules, mindful that  if  so  it
      will  be  necessary  to  explore   whether   there   are   exceptional
      circumstances which would result in unjustifiably  harsh  consequences
      if the Appellant were removed from the UK. Whilst some disapproval  of
      the 'intermediate step' referred to in Nagre has now been expressed in
      MM (Lebanon) [2014] EWCA Civ 985 (paragraph 128), recent  case  law  -
      including Nagre and Shahzad [2014] UKUT 85  (IAC)  (which  effectively
      followed Gulshan) - is not disapproved (paragraphs 87, 88,  and  131).
      The necessity remains "to identify other non-standard  and  particular
      features of the case of a compelling nature to show that removal would
      be unjustifiably harsh".


  22. Mr Duffy essentially argued that there was nothing in the  Appellant's
      circumstances not adequately recognised and accounted  for  under  the
      Rules that warranted taking an exceptional approach to relax the usual
      requirements of immigration control. He emphasised that the  Appellant
      was now 25 years old, and as such was no longer a child, that she  had
      come to the UK without her mother and siblings as a  student  and  had
      been able to relocate, and adapt - she had demonstrated resourceful us
      in this regard. She could, in his submission, 'stand on  her  own  two
      feet' as indeed many people of her age did. Her mother's  decision  to
      relocate to the UK with the Appellant's  siblings  was  essentially  a
      matter of family  choice.  The  Appellant's  removal  in  all  of  the
      circumstances would not be a disproportionate interference with either
      private or family life.


  23. Mr Arain emphasised that the Appellant belonged to a close knit family
      - the mother having looked after the children on her  own  since  1995
      when the Appellant's father had left, exercising  sole  responsibility
      for the children and pursuing two jobs in  the  absence  of  financial
      support from the children's father. Although the Appellant was now  25
      she was entirely dependent on the family now living as a unit  in  the
      UK. She wished to continue with further studies and  required  ongoing
      support both financially and emotionally. In contrast, she  could  not
      access such support from family members in India: the extended  family
      had not supported the Appellant's mother when she was bringing up  the
      children on her own and it was unlikely that they would  now  seek  to
      support the Appellant; in effect the Appellant had nobody to  turn  to
      in India for financial support or for any other help.  Whilst  it  was
      accepted that in a modern India  some  young  women,  particularly  in
      large urban centres, lived independently  of  their  families  and  on
      their own, it was more than  likely  given  the  Appellant's  age  and
      relative lack of experience  that  she  would  struggle  to  establish
      herself  independently  without  at  the  very  least  a   period   of
      transitional support from her family. The period  for  which  she  had
      been in the UK without her mother was relatively limited and  she  had
      in any event, during that period had the support of her stepfather.


  24. The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  made  a  primary  finding  of  fact,
      unchallenged before me, that the Appellant is still dependent upon her
      mother  and  stepfather  for  accommodation  and   financial   support
      (determination at paragraph 29).  In  my  judgement  this  finding  is
      entirely consistent with the submission made  by  Mr  Arian  that  the
      family history, is such that the Appellant remains  emotionally  close
      to her mother and  siblings,  and  notwithstanding  her  age  and  her
      pursuit of studies is still very much a child of the family. This is a
      significant aspect of both the Appellant's family and private life.


  25. Further, in this context and generally,  I  consider  the  Appellant's
      family's relocation to the UK and her residing with them  since  their
      arrival - thereby resuming and continuing the family unit  as  it  had
      previously existed in India - and the Appellant's particular emotional
      and financial dependence on the family  unit,  are  not  circumstances
      accorded any particular  weight  under  the  provisions  of  paragraph
      276ADE.


  26. In respect of the five Razgar questions, there is no real  issue  that
      the first and second questions are to be answered in  the  Appellant's
      favour. She has established both a family and private life in  the  UK
      and her removal would represent a significant interference  therewith.
      Further, there is no issue between the parties in respect of the third
      and fourth Razgar questions.


  27. As regards the fifth question, proportionality, I  take  into  account
      the public  interest  in  maintaining  effective  immigration  control
      through the consistent application of published  Rules.  Although  the
      hearing  in  this  appeal  predates  the  coming  into  force  of  the
      amendments  to  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
      introduced by the Immigration Act 2014, I have noted and had regard to
      the public interest considerations pursuant to sections 117A-117D, and
      specifically section 117B. It is not disputed that the  Appellant  can
      speak English, and indeed she  has  obtained  a  BA  degree  (IIi)  in
      Business Management from the  University  of  Sunderland.  It  is  not
      disputed that the Appellant has been financially  independent  through
      her studies and has the continuing  support  by  way  of  finance  and
      accommodation from her family in the UK.  The  Appellant  has  at  all
      material times complied with the requirements of immigration  controls
      and has at no point been unlawfully present in  the  UK.  Although  it
      might be said that there has been a degree of  precariousness  in  her
      immigration position, by virtue of being subjected to  limited  leave,
      ultimately in the overall context of this case I do not consider  that
      this so significantly undermines the weight  to  be  accorded  to  her
      family and private life  that  it  tips  the  proportionality  balance
      against her.


  28. In my judgement there are otherwise no countervailing factors in  this
      particular appeal that are adverse to the Appellant  by  reference  to
      her  conduct,  the  conduct  of  her  family,  or  the  imperative  of
      maintaining effective control.


  29. Balancing the  public  interest  against  the  Appellant's  particular
      circumstances - and indeed the respective associated private /  family
      lives of  her  mother  and  siblings  (and  to  a  lesser  extent  her
      stepfather) - I find that relocation of the Appellant's family to  the
      UK from India and her resding with them in the UK in  continuation  of
      the family life she has known throughout her  life  up  to  coming  to
      study here, is a non-standard and particular feature not recognised in
      the Rules and is of a compelling nature such that the  impact  on  the
      private life established by the Appellant would be unduly harsh if she
      were to be removed in consequence of the  Respondent's  decision.  The
      proportionality balance favours the Appellant.


  30. Accordingly I find that the removal of the Appellant in consequence of
      the Respondent's decision would involve a disproportionate  breach  of
      her Article 8 rights.


Notice of Decision

  31. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contained  an  error  of
      law and is set aside. I re-make the decision in the appeal.


  32. The appeal is allowed.


Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     30 November 2014
