
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39342/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 July 2015                      |On 31 July 2015                      |
|Delivered orally                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE COLLINS
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          LIONEL KSETCHAKEU NDAMEUN
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble-Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No Representative


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Agnew given on 26  January  2015  whereby  he
    allowed the respondent's appeal, as he now is, against a refusal by the
    Secretary of State of his application for leave to remain on the  basis
    of a Tier 4 continuation of study.  The refusal was on this basis:

         "You have previously been granted leave to study courses at  degree
         level or above for  two  years  and  eleven  months.  Your  current
         application is to study  access  to  computing  leading  to  a  BSc
         computing an NQF level 6 course until 9 December 2016. A  grant  of
         leave to study this course would result in your having  spent  more
         than five years in the UK as a Tier 4  (General)  Student  studying
         courses that consist of degree level study or above.  And therefore
         you fail to meet the requirements of  paragraph  245ZX(ha)  of  the
         Immigration Rules."

    Paragraph ZX(ha) does indeed provide, that the course at  degree  level
    or above the grant of leave to remain, must not lead to  the  applicant
    having spent more than five years in the  UK  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student studying courses at degree level or above.

2.   In his notice of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal,  the  appellant  as
    then was, indicated that it transpired that the course which he was  to
    undertake at the college, came to an end and therefore he  was  changed
    to a lower level course and he says the college did not inform the Home
    Office about this change as it is not required to if a student  changes
    courses with the same sponsor, given that the current leave covers  the
    length of the new course.   Accordingly,  he  did  not  therefore  fall
    within paragraph 245ZX(ha), because it was not a  course  that  was  at
    degree level any more. But he also went on to  say,  that  he  was  now
    studying at the University of Buckingham and wanted time to complete  a
    postgraduate course thereafter and  he  said  that  he  should  not  be
    penalised for his previous sponsor's actions and should  be  given  the
    chance to pursue his educational goals and he had accepted  the  course
    at the University of Buckingham which he had started and was finding it
    a good course and hoped he would be successful.

3.   Unfortunately, no one in the Home Office apparently spotted the  effect
    of this, because albeit it would seem to overcome the objection  relied
    on, namely the breach of the five year requirement of 245ZX(ha) but had
    it been properly considered, it would have been  appreciated,  assuming
    whoever it was, could follow these incredibly complicated  Rules,  that
    by 245ZW(c)(iv) it was provided that one of the  conditions  which  was
    material, was that there should be no study except under (i), paragraph
    2:

         "A new course at a  lower  level  than  the  course  of  which  the
         Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies was  assigned  or  the  visa
         letter was issued provided that the requirements and conditions  of
         the migrant's grant of leave as at the date of the commencement  of
         the new course are the same requirements and  conditions  to  which
         the migrant's  leave  would  have  been  subject  had  he  made  an
         application to study at that lower level under the Rules  in  force
         at the time of the commencement of the new course"

4.   One goes on to part 245ZX(h) which states, that if the course is  below
    degree level, the grant of leave to remain the  applicant  is  seeking,
    must not lead to the applicant having spent more than  three  years  in
    the UK as a Tier 4 Migrant since the age of 18  studying  courses  that
    did not consist of degree level study.  So one goes back to that, as it
    happens, his new course at the University  of  Buckingham,  that  is  a
    degree course and therefore he is not caught  now  by  the  three  year
    Rule. Nonetheless he is still caught by the five year, or would  be  if
    that were taken into account.

5.   However none of this was raised before the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.
    So far as he was concerned, it was the case on behalf of the  Secretary
    of State, that there was a failure to meet 245ZX(ha) and that  was  the
    decision against which the appeal was brought.

6.   The matters relied on in the grounds of appeal were, as we  say,  first
    of all that 245ZW(c)(iv) was not taken into account and  therefore  the
    appellant as he then was, could not succeed.  Whether on the facts  now
    that is right is another matter.

7.   But this was a decision reached on the  papers.  The  Home  Office  had
    every opportunity because it is not as if any  of  the  material  facts
    were concealed by the respondent.  He set them out quite clearly in his
    grounds of appeal and they were referred to and were before the  First-
    tier Judge.  Mr Bramble has very  sensibly  recognised,  correctly  so,
    that he is in difficulty in relying on the matters which ought to  have
    been put before the First-tier Tribunal Judge and was not when,  as  we
    say, the only ground of appeal that was material, so far as the  First-
    tier Judge was aware, was that arising under 245ZX(ha).

8.   There may  be  circumstances  where  there  is  an  obligation  upon  a
    Tribunal judge to consider other matters or other grounds  for  refusal
    if, but only if those are matters which clearly arise on  the  material
    produced.  No judge can  be  expected  to  be  familiar  with  all  the
    detailed requirements, particularly these points  based  Rules.   Apart
    from anything else, they change with monotonous regularity and they are
    far too complicated in any event, and we cannot in any  way  blame  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge for not going into those matters. It  is  not
    his job to trawl through the relevant Rules as the Secretary  of  State
    considers they should exist at any particular moment in time. That  was
    a matter for her and the Home Office to raise and  they  did  not.   In
    those circumstances this appeal is dismissed.

9.   In our view, in all the circumstances, unless there is  any  reason  to
    doubt that the respondent is doing well and studying  properly  at  his
    course, in all the circumstances I think it would be wrong not to allow
    him to continue to the end of it

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law material to the outcome of the  appeal.
We therefore do not set aside the decision.

The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date 29 July 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein
For and on behalf of Mr Justice Collins
