



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39675/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 20th May 2015                                |On 5th June 2015           |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                       Mrs Iranganie Rathnahalu gedera
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Hussain, of Counsel

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Secretary of State  with
    permission, against the determination of a First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Cox) in which it allowed the Respondent's appeal against the  Secretary
    of State's decision  to  refuse  to  vary  her  leave  to  remain.  The
    Appellant had applied for leave as  the  dependent  spouse  of  a  Work
    Permit Holder who has now been granted indefinite leave  to  remain  in
    the UK.

 2. For the sake of continuity I  shall  refer  in  this  decision  to  the
    Secretary  of  State  as  "the  Respondent"  and  Mrs  Gedera  as  "the
    Appellant", which reflects their respective positions before the FtT.

 3. The Secretary of State's grounds argue that  the  FtT  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for its findings on material matters. It is  submitted
    that the Tribunal erred in its approach to Article 8 ECHR by failing to
    take into account Appendix FM when  allowing  the  appeal  outside  the
    Rules under Article 8.

Background

 4. The Appellant entered the UK with leave as  the  dependent  of  a  Work
    Permit Holder - valid until February 2014. Her husband entered  at  the
    same time in  order  to  work  as  a  chef  for  the  Aagrah  chain  of
    restaurants.

 5. On 4th February 2014 both the Appellant and  her  husband  applied  for
    settlement. Her husband was granted indefinite leave to remain but  the
    Appellant's application was refused and a decision was made  to  remove
    her under Section 47 of the Immigration Asylum Nationality Act 2006.

 6. There was one reason why the Appellant's application was  refused:  the
    Respondent considered Section 196D of the Immigration Rules  and  found
    she was not satisfied that the Appellant  had  demonstrated  sufficient
    knowledge of the English language and sufficient knowledge  about  life
    in the UK, in accordance with Appendix KOLL.

 7. When the appeal against that  refusal  came  before  the  FtT,  it  was
    accepted by the Appellant's representative that she could not meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules. The Judge properly dismissed the
    appeal under the Immigration Rules and  rightly  went  on  to  consider
    whether the Appellant's Article 8 rights were infringed.

 8. The grounds point out that the Judge failed, to take into consideration
    Appendix FM when carrying out that assessment and thus fell into error.



Error of Law

 9. I am satisfied that the decision of the FtT needs to be set  aside  for
    legal error. Despite Mr Hussain's attempt to persuade me otherwise,  it
    is clear on a full reading of the  determination,  the  Judge  has  not
    focussed on whether there is evidence  identifying  any  compelling  or
    exceptional circumstances not covered by the Rules, such  as  to  allow
    the Appellant being granted leave outside the  Rules.  Instead  he  has
    focussed to a great extent on what might be the detrimental  effect  on
    the business which employs the  Appellant's husband should he  have  to
    return to Sri Lanka with the Appellant.  This  has  led  the  Judge  to
    overlook the relevant issues  of  what  difficulties  it  is  said  the
    Appellant would face should she return to Sri Lanka.  What  has  to  be
    shown is that those difficulties are such that they would merit a grant
    of leave outside the Rules and that it  would  be  disproportionate  to
    return the Appellant to Sri Lanka. Mr Hussain did argue that the  Judge
    had considered the Appellant's exceptional circumstances in  detail  at
    paragraphs [34] to [38]. I disagree with Mr Hussain's analysis.

10. In the circumstances I consider it the appropriate course  is  for  the
    decision to be set aside and remitted  to  the  FtT.   I  did  consider
    whether there might any merit in returning the  matter  to  Judge  Cox.
    This was urged upon me by Mr Hussain on  the  basis  that  the  Judge's
    decision was capable of remedy simply by  asking  him  to  revisit  his
    decision taking into account Appendix FM.  However  in  my  judgment  a
    fresh rehearing is the appropriate course  with  no  findings  of  fact
    being preserved.

Decision

11.  For the foregoing reasons the decision of the FtT  is  set  aside  for
    legal error. The matter is remitted to the FtT (not Judge  Cox)  for  a
    full re- hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signature     C E Roberts                                      Dated 4  June
2015
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


