
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/39225/2014
     IA/39226/2014
     IA/39227/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 July 2016                        |On 26 July 2016                      |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                               kanwaldeep kaur
                                lakhvir singh
                                    [d s]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr P Skinner of Counsel, instructed by ATM Law
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Monaghan promulgated  on  17  December  2015.   Judge  Monaghan's
    decision refused the appellant's appeal  against  the  refusal  by  the
    Secretary of State for further leave as a Tier 4 Migrant.

 2. The thrust of Judge Monaghan's findings  were  that  he  accepted  that
    subsequent to the respondent's decision of 7 August 2014 refusing leave
    it  was  found  in  judicial  review  that  the  respondent  had  acted
    unlawfully in failing to provide the appellant with  her  passport.  He
    went on to find that this was not something of  material  relevance  to
    the decision before the First-tier  Tribunal  which  concerned  matters
    prior to the decision of 7 August 2014, however. The  appellant's  case
    on events prior to 7 August 2014 was explained at [38] to [40]  of  the
    decision, as follows:

         "38. In her  said  letter  dated  28/05/2014  the  First  Appellant
             explained she had taken her B2 level 2 English test with  City
             and Guilds on 22/04/2014 and had been  expecting  the  results
             within four weeks.  However she had received only  one  result
             namely Speaking and had been  told  the  other  three  results
             would come within the next four weeks.  As she did not want to
             overstay, her visa had been due to expire  on  31/05/2014  she
             had completed and was submitting her Tier  4  application  and
             attaching the one result in her possession.   She  accordingly
             asked the respondent to hold her application and said that she
             would send a valid CAS with B2 results in a  few  weeks  time.
             She did not request a return of her passport so that she might
             take another test.

         39.  The First Appellant then wrote to the respondent again  whilst
             her application was pending.  The letter was dated 18/07/2014.
              She was writing to advise that since the removal of  approved
             English language tests by the respondent there had been a very
             long waiting queue to sit an acceptable English language test.
              She said that she had taken the English language test by City
             and Guilds.  She had passed all components except the Speaking
             test.  She has undertaken the Speaking exam  as  well  and  is
             awaiting the results which had been delayed by City and Guilds
             due to heavy workload.  She was expecting her second child  on
             10/08/2014.   She  requested  the  respondent  to   hold   her
             application for 28 days and she  would  definitely  provide  a
             valid CAS.  Once again she did not request the return  of  her
             passport.

         40.  The respondent made her  decision  on  the  First  Appellant's
             application on 07/08/2014."

 3. The appellant seeks to argue that the respondent acted unfairly in  not
    delaying a decision for a longer period in order to allow the applicant
    to obtain her language test results and so obtain  a  CAS.  She  argues
    that the delay was the respondent's  responsibility  as  many  language
    test providers were no longer registered. She objects to the respondent
    failing to reply to her letters of 28 May 2014 and 18 July 2014.  Judge
    Monaghan found against her on these arguments.

 4. Certainly, the evidence shows that prior to the decision  on  7  August
    2014 which refused the application for loss of a CAS the appellant  had
    twice informed the respondent that she wanted more time as her  English
    language test results had been delayed.

 5. That did not entitle her to a longer period to obtain those  documents.
    The  Immigration  Rules  required  a  CAS  to  be  provided  with   the
    application so when the appellant did not have one  at  that  time  her
    application already fell to be refused. She was  not  entitled  to  any
    further time to obtain a CAS.

 6. In her letters to the respondent the appellant did  not  indicate  that
    the organisation with whom she had  taken  the  language  test,  Harrow
    International Business School  had  at  any  time  been  found  by  the
    respondent not to be a valid provider of English language tests  so  as
    to explain any delay  there.  In  fact  Harrow  International  Business
    School provided a letter dated 7 May 2014 stating  that  they  expected
    the results within 28 days of the appellant taking the test on 22 April
    2014.  There was nothing further from  them  either  to  indicate  that
    there was a problem that the Secretary of State could  have  or  should
    have taken into account.

 7. The applicant also did not provide the respondent or the Tribunal  with
    any information showing that the college was in difficulty in providing
    her with her course results because of any action by the respondent  as
    regards other English language test providers, making it very difficult
    for Harrow International Business School to cope  with  the  number  of
    students seeking to take English language tests.

 8. It is not my view that common law fairness required the  respondent  to
    delay her decision at all. She did not  make  a  decision  for  some  2
    months and 7 days after the application for further leave. No  CAS  had
    been provided by that time. The respondent was entitled to  refuse  the
    application.

 9. No reason other than delay in obtaining a language test result was  put
    forward. The information about that  was  confused,  the  first  letter
    stating that the speaking element had been passed but the  others  not,
    the second stating that the others had been passed  and  only  speaking
    had not. The difficulty in obtaining a language  test  result  was  not
    stated to be because of the  test  provider  being  unregistered  or  a
    general  problem  with  numbers  within  the  system.  Nothing  in  the
    materials from before 7  August  2014  indicated  that  the  delay  had
    anything to do with failure to provide a passport.  The  appeal  before
    Judge Monaghan rightly failed, therefore.

10. For those reasons, I do not find an error of law in the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an  error  on
the point of law and shall stand.


Signed   [pic]                               Date 25 July 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt



