
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/39361/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26th October 2015                 |On 17th December 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Mr Michael Juan Jr Davis
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Khalid of Kings Court Chambers


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State but nonetheless I  shall  refer  to  the  parties  as  they  were
    described before the First-tier Tribunal,  that  is  Mr  Davis  as  the
    appellant and the Secretary of State as the respondent.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of St. Kitts born on 2nd July  1987  and  he
    made an application on 16th October 2012 for leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom on the basis of his private life.  His  application  was
    considered in relation to paragraph 276ADE.  A One-Stop Warning  Notice
    had been served and the appellant responded with  a  notice  of  appeal
    citing both his family and private life.  Indeed in a letter dated  1st
    October 2012, which accompanied his application, it was submitted  that
    the appellant had clearly established a private and family life in  the
    UK.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Adio heard the appeal on 10th September 2014,
    dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules but allowed the appeal
    in a decision promulgated on 25th September 2014.

Application for Permission to Appeal

 4. An application for permission to  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State
    asserted that there  had  been  a  material  misdirection  of  law  and
    particularly  with  reference  to  Section  117  of  the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum  Act.   The  judge  concluded  that  the  public
    interest in the case was 'limited'  and  that  the  appellant's  family
    circumstances outweighed it.

 5. It was submitted that the judge had failed to  take  into  account  and
    lawfully engage with the evidence available in the appeal.  At [19]  of
    his decision the judge found that  the  appellant  had  'no  meaningful
    ties' and no means of supporting himself but  this  conclusion  ignored
    the evidence that the appellant had uncles and friends in St. Kitts who
    could offer him interim support whilst he established himself.   Whilst
    he may not have had much in the way of interaction with family  members
    and friends it remained open to him to strengthen  those  relationships
    upon his return and to seek their aid.

 6.  Furthermore  the  appellant  would  be  unable  to  gain  the  precise
    employment he currently undertook, that is in McDonald's  and  KFC  but
    the Secretary of State submitted that the skills he had obtained during
    this employment could be utilised in other comparable restaurants in St
    Kitts.

 7. Furthermore the judge concluded that the appellant's private life would
    be adversely impacted and this was a significant aspect of the  instant
    appeal.  The Secretary of State submitted that the judge had failed  to
    disclose the substance of this private  life  and  irrespectively  only
    limited weight should be afforded to it.

 8. The appellant arrived in the UK as a student and sought an extension of
    stay under the Tier 1 provisions as a post-study worker and  then  made
    the present application on Article 8 grounds on the basis of a  private
    life.  The Secretary of State submitted that at all times the appellant
    had been aware of the precariousness of his stay in the UK and  it  was
    fundamentally temporary owing to the fact that he had been aware of and
    complied with the expiration dates attached to his leave.

 9. The appellant could have no legitimate  expectation  that  any  private
    life accrued could be continued in the UK  and  nor  could  his  family
    members.  The appellant could maintain contact with his UK family  from
    St. Kitts through modern communicational methods/visits.

10. Further the judge was misdirected in asserting that the public interest
    in the appeal was limited in nature.  There was a clear public interest
    in maintaining a firm and coherent system of immigration control.

11. Permission to appeal was initially refused by Judge Pooler, who  stated
    that the grounds overlooked the fact that the appellant enjoyed  family
    life in the UK and had not lived an independent life.

12. Upper Tribunal Judge Blum, however, granted permission to appeal on the
    basis that when assessing proportionality of  the  decision  the  judge
    took account of the fact that the appellant had  no  meaningful  family
    ties and no means of supporting himself in St. Kitts but given that the
    respondent accepted in his evidence that he had a few close aunties and
    uncles and had obtained a bachelors degree in  business  administration
    and had no medical conditions, in the light of the fact that he was  27
    years old at the date of the decision it was arguable  that  the  judge
    failed to take account of these relevant considerations in his  overall
    proportionality assessment.

The Hearing

13. At the hearing Mr Melvin submitted that the judge had  failed  to  take
    into account relevant factors in relation to the private life regarding
    return to St. Kitts.  The appellant had family members in St. Kitts and
    their support was not taken into account.  He would be able to use  his
    skills to re-establish himself in St. Kitts.  The judge had  failed  to
    take into account the fact that he was a healthy adult of 27 years old.
     He had no legitimate expectation  of  further  leave  in  relation  to
    private life.  There was a reference to the delay factor which was  not
    relevant.

14. Further there was a suggestion that the public  interest  was  limited,
    which it was not.  There was little in way of private life  submissions
    or compelling circumstances to outweigh immigration control.  Mr Melvin
    cited Singh

15. Mr Davis was not emotionally or financially attached to his parents and
    they were important areas which lacked finding.  The  decision  reached
    the level of perversity and irrationality.

16. Mr Khalid submitted that both parties had agreed before the  First-tier
    Tribunal that Article 8 issues were outside the  Rules  and  the  judge
    considered proportionality assessment in relation to both  private  and
    family life.  The  judge  was  aware  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    submission was the maintenance of immigration control which was in  the
    public interest.

17. In relation to delay the judge had not mentioned this.  At the date  of
    the application the appellant was 25 years and 3 months and  the  judge
    had identified the compassionate circumstances  at  paragraph  14.   In
    particular he identified that the appellant had always been a  part  of
    the family unit. There was nothing in the paragraphs of  24  to  26  of
    Singh & Anor [2015] EWCA Civ 630  which  contradicted  Ghising  (family
    life - adults - Gurkha policy) [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC).

18. This was a single young man living with his parents and he  had  always
    lived with them apart from one year when he lived with his sister.

19. Overall the judge found that the removal was disproportionate.

20. Mr Melvin submitted that the dependency of a young  adult  finished  at
    the age of 21 or when they finished  education  although  I  find  that
    there was no authority  submitted  for  that  proposition.   Mr  Melvin
    submitted that Kugathas v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2003] EWCA Civ 31 was still good law.

Conclusions

21. Much of the criticism of and challenge to the judge's decision  was  in
    relation to the appellant's private life and the failure to  take  into
    account evidence of the appellant's ties and resources in St Kitts.  It
    was the contention that the appellant had relatives in  St  Kitts,  had
    the prospect of employment and  in  the  meantime  could  turn  to  the
    relatives for support whilst being settled.

22. As indicated above the appellant made his application on the  basis  of
    both his family as well as his private life in the United  Kingdom.  In
    relation to private life under Paragraph 276ADE  the  judge  noted  the
    refusal of the respondent and indeed refused the matter  himself  under
    this Immigration Rule.  (He  also  gave  reasons  for  considering  the
    matter outside the Immigration Rules).  He did however  find  that  the
    appellant had established family life with his parents  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

23. The judge applied, with respect to family life, Ghising (family life  -
    adults - Gurkha policy) [2012] UKUT  00160  (IAC)  which  explores  the
    concepts in relation to  Article  8  and  set  out  the  principles  in
    relation to family life and adult children.  This  confirms,  following
    Kugathas, that in the context of immigration control there is no  legal
    or factual presumption as to the existence or absence  of  family  life
    for the purposes of Article 8 and it all depended on facts and that  "a
    young adult living with his parents  or  siblings  will  normally  have
    family life to be respected under Article 8".  Clearly  the  judge  was
    well aware that the appellant was at the date of the hearing  27  years
    old and was well-qualified because this was recorded  in  the  decision
    and he specifically referred  to  the  qualifications  by  adopting  Ms
    Revill's (the appellant's representative at  the  First-tier  Tribunal)
    submissions on compassionate grounds  and  also  noted  the  degree  at
    paragraph 17 of his findings.

24. It was clear that there was no factual presumption for the purposes  of
    Article  8  and  the  judge  had  based  his  conclusions  on  relevant
    considerations and looked at the personal circumstances.  He noted that
    the appellant had a degree at paragraph  17.   Although  he  identified
    that he might have  an  aunt  or  uncle  in  St.  Kitts  there  was  no
    suggestion that they were physically or emotionally close and hence the
    reference to a lack of 'meaningful  ties'.   He  had  not  skimmed  the
    surface but had gone further and considered the interests of his family
    in the UK.  His father was a diabetic.

25. In Kugathas, at [14], Sedley LJ cited with  approval  the  Commission's
    observation in S v United Kingdom [1984} 40 DR 196:

    "Generally the protection of  family  life  under  Article  8  involves
         cohabiting dependents, such as parents and their  dependent,  minor
         children. Whether it extends to other relationships depends on  the
         circumstances of the particular case. Relationships between adults,
         a mother and her 33 year old son in the  present  case,  would  not
         necessarily acquire the protection of Article 8 of  the  Convention
         without evidence of further elements of dependency, involving  more
         than the normal emotional ties."

HJ Sedley recorded in Kugathas that

    "support"  in  the  personal  sense,  and  if  one  adds,  echoing  the
         Strasbourg jurisprudence, "real" or "committed" or  "effective"  to
         the word "support", then it represents in my view  the  irreducible
         minimum of what family life implies."...

         'Such factors include identifying who are the near relatives of the
             appellant, the nature  of  the  links  between  them  and  the
             appellant, the age of the appellant, where and  with  whom  he
             has resided in the past, and  the  forms  of  contact  he  has
             maintained with the other members of the family with  whom  he
             claims to have a family life'.

26. Mr Melvin submitted Singh & Anor [2015] EWCA Civ 630 and made  note  of
    paragraphs 24 and 25 of that decision.

         "24.     I do not think that the judgments to which I have referred
             lead to any difficulty in determining the correct approach  to
             Article 8 in cases involving adult children.  In the  case  of
             adults, in the context of immigration  control,  there  is  no
             legal or factual presumption as to the existence or absence of
             family life for the purposes of Article 8.  I point  out  that
             the approach of the European Commission for Human Rights cited
             approvingly in Kugathas did not  include  any  requirement  of
             exceptionality.  It all depends on the facts.   The  love  and
             affection between an adult and his parents  or  siblings  will
             not of itself justify a finding of a family life. There has to
             be something more.  A young adult living with his  parents  or
             siblings will normally have a  family  life  to  be  respected
             under Article 8.  A child enjoying  a  family  life  with  his
             parents does not suddenly cease  to  have  a  family  life  at
             midnight as he turns 18 years of age.  On the  other  hand,  a
             young adult living independently of his parents may  well  not
             have a family life for the purposes of Article 8.

         25.      However, the debate as to the whether an applicant has  or
             has not a family life for the purposes of Article 8 is  liable
             to be arid and academic.  In the present  case,  in  agreement
             with Sullivan LJ's comment when refusing permission to appeal,
             the issue is indeed academic, and clearly so.  As the European
             Court of Human Rights pointed out in AA, in a judgment which I
             have found most helpful, the factors to be examined  in  order
             to assess proportionality are the same regardless  of  whether
             family or private life  is  engaged.   The  question  for  the
             Secretary of State, the Tribunal  and  the  Court  is  whether
             those  factors  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  it  would  be
             disproportionate to  remove  the  applicant  from  the  United
             Kingdom.  I  reject  Mr  Malik's  submission  that  the  Upper
             Tribunal Judge's  assessment  of  proportionality  was  flawed
             because she, on his case wrongly, based it on the  Appellants'
             private life rather than their family and private life. In  my
             judgment, she took all relevant factors into account, and  her
             conclusion  on  proportionality  is  not  open  to  challenge.
             Indeed, I would go further.  In  my  judgment,  no  reasonable
             Tribunal, on the facts found, could properly have  come  to  a
             different conclusion."

27. The above lends support to the judge's approach.   At  [14]  the  judge
    accepted the submissions  made  by  Ms  Revill  as  to  the  compelling
    circumstances argued and accepted that the appellant did  not  live  an
    independent life here but that he lived as part of a  family  unit  and
    that a family life did not end at the age of  18.  The  judge  accepted
    that there was strong emotional dependence between  the  appellant  and
    his parents and found that the appellant's mother was a British citizen
    settled in employment and it was not reasonable for her to relocate and
    there would be a loss of day-to-day contact as it was now.   The  judge
    accepted that the appellant had always lived with his family.

28. In particular he noted at paragraph 14 that:

         "The appellant has been part of his family, i.e. his parents,  with
         the exception of one year when he lived  with  his  sister  in  St.
         Kitts before coming to the UK.   When  he  arrived  in  the  UK  he
         continued living with his father and mother.   The  fact  that  the
         appellant has always been part of his parents'  family  unit  is  a
         compelling circumstance in my judgment.  I also accept there  is  a
         closeness of relationship between the family."

29. The judge went on to note at paragraph 15 that the appellant was  still
    single had only lived away from his parents for one year and  this  was
    when he had lived with his elder sister.  That said, for  the  rest  of
    his life the appellant  had  always  lived  under  the  roof  with  his
    parents.  At [16]the judge made a clear finding that the appellant  had
    a family life with his parents

           "... the appellant does not have an independent family unit  and
           he enjoys close emotional ties with his  parents  and  the  fact
           that he is still part of the family unit means that there is  no
           break in the family life."

30. The judge  also  found  that  the  appellant's  removal  would  have  a
    significantly detrimental impact on his parents and cause the appellant
    himself great hardship.  It is quite clear  that  the  appellant  would
    lose his employment in the UK and also recorded at [17] that  his  lack
    of progression at work because of his precarious immigration status had
    placed a cap on  his  earnings  and  made  his  family's  accommodation
    situation very stressful.  This indicated  that  the  family  was  also
    dependent on the appellant's earnings.  This aspect was another  factor
    taken into account but the judge did not allow this appeal on the basis
    of private life.

31. There may have been only an oblique reference to the relatives  of  the
    appellant in St Kitts but the judge referred to the 'lack of meaningful
    family ties' in the context of  the  close  family  life  that  he  had
    developed in the UK with his parents.  As I have  indicated  above  the
    judge cited the age, qualifications and employment  experience  of  the
    appellant but nonetheless found continuing family life.   I  find  that
    the judge was aware  of  the  relevant  factors  and,  on  reading  the
    decision as a whole, it  is  clear  he  did  take  these  factors  into
    account.

32. It is perhaps unfortunate that the judge states at the  very  close  of
    his decision

         "I find that the appellant's  family  circumstances  outweighs  the
         limited public interests in  his  removal  and  that  the  decision
         consequently breaches Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention"

33. This however is inelegant expression rather than a  misapprehension  or
    misdirection of the law.  The judge was  aware  when  applying  Section
    117B(1) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  that
    maintenance  of  effective  immigration  control  was  in  the   public
    interest.  He cites Section 117B at paragraph  [17]  and  [18]  of  the
    decision.  He does not indicate that he  finds  it  'limited'  at  this
    stage and not until the close of his decision does he  'find  that  the
    appellant's family circumstance outweighs the limited public interest".
    I accept the submission made by Mr  Khalid  that  in  fact  the  public
    interest was limited as a result of the factors considered by the judge
    in the final analysis and that it was limited  as  a  result  of  those
    factors rather than being limited with factors be weighed  against  the
    public interest.  The  judge  accorded  the  public  interest  the  due
    weight.  He took into account the immigration rules and I  accept  that
    the use of the  word  'limited'  in  this  context  did  not  denote  a
    presumption that the public interest was limited at  the  outset,  more
    that it was outweighed by other relevant factors.

34. Finally on this point, the judge stated that he accepted the submission
    of Ms Revill, who stated "limited weight should be placed on the public
    interest as it was outweighed by the right  to  live  with  his  family
    members which was a breach of Article 8".  This would suggest that  the
    conclusion of the judge,  and  his  use  of  words,  derived  from  the
    submissions of Ms Revill which were recorded at [12].

35. Section 117B of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  reads
    as follows:

    '117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases

         (1)      The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
             the public interest.

         (2)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-

             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-

             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)      Little weight should be given to-

             (a) a private life, or

             (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,  that  is
                  established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in
                  the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)       Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a   private   life
             established  by  a  person  at  a  time  when   the   person's
             immigration status is precarious.'

36. Section 117B does not insist that little weight should be  given  to  a
    family life

37. Section 117B(5) states that little weight should be  given  to  private
    life established by a person at a time when  the  person's  immigration
    status is precarious.  The judge noted that the appellant had continued
    his family life and  private  life  and  it  was  not  a  case  of  re-
    establishing it, as it  had  continued  to  develop  in  the  UK.   The
    appellant's private life with his parents was  established  at  a  time
    when his  status  was  not  precarious;  and  his  lack  of  legitimate
    expectation in relation to his private life are factors which are given
    statutory force as regarding the weight to be attached to private  life
    but not family life.

38. The judge was well aware of the age and qualifications  and  employment
    situation of  the  appellant  and  took  evidence  that  the  appellant
    concluded he would not get a job in St Kitts in the  establishments  in
    which he has been working.  There was no  evidence  produced  regarding
    employment or comparable restaurants in St Kitts.  It was open  to  the
    judge to find that  the  appellant  would  have  no  means  to  support
    himself.  There was no cross examination recorded regarding the support
    that could be offered from his relatives in St Kitts and  this  appears
    to have been now raised as a point of disagreement with  the  decision.
    The judge found correctly at [18] that there was "no presumption as  to
    the weight to be attached to appellant's family life with  his  parents
    and brother under Section  117  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002".  Indeed the judge factored in that there would  be  a
    significantly detrimental effect on the parents and  his  decision  was
    concentrated on the strength of  family  life  in  the  United  Kingdom
    rather than private life.

39. I find that overall there are cogent  reasons  given  for  the  judge's
    findings that the appellant enjoyed family life here and that, in these
    particular circumstances, this outweighed the position of the Secretary
    of State.

Notice of Decision

I find that there is no material error of law in First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Adio's decision and the decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed      Date 4th December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

