
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA396432014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th May 2016                       |On 15th June 2016                    |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     kb
                         (ANONIMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss Aspinall, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
Appellant


                            DECISION ON DISPOSAL

 1. KB is a national of Libya.  In the light of the  circumstances  of  the
    recent claim I make an anonymity order. Pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008  unless  and  until  a
    Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant   is   granted
    anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly
    identify her.  This direction applies both to the Appellant and to  the
    Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal, who in a  determination  promulgated  on  11th
    February 2015 allowed her appeal  on  humanitarian  protection  grounds
    (Article 15(c)).

 3. Whilst the Secretary of State is the Appellant, I intend  to  refer  to
    the parties as they were before the First-tier  Tribunal  for  ease  of
    reference.

 4. Ina determination promulgated on the  24th  May  2016,  I  reached  the
    conclusion that the determination of the First-tier Tribunal  disclosed
    an error of law and that it should be set aside.  I  made  a  direction
    that the parties were to provide any submissions they wish to  make  as
    to whether the appeal is to be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  or
    to be re-made by the Upper Tribunal within 14 days of  receiving  these
    directions.

 5. I have received submissions on behalf of the  appellant  but  have  not
    received any from the  Secretary  of  State.  Having  considered  those
    submissions and in the light of the  reasons  that  I  have  given  for
    reaching the conclusion that the decision should be  set  aside,  I  am
    satisfied that the appropriate course is for the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal to be set aside and to determine the appeal with a  fresh
    oral hearing by way of remittal to the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. Therefore having given particular regard to the overriding objective of
    the efficient disposal of appeals and that there  are  issues  of  fact
    that require determination I therefore remit the appeal.  The  case  is
    to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal in  accordance  with  Section
    12(2) (b) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  and  paragraph
    7.2 of the Practice Statement of 10th February 2010 (as amended).

 7. Consequently for those reasons, I set aside the  decision  relating  to
    the issue of humanitarian protection under Article 15(c).  The decision
    to dismiss the appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State to
    refuse to vary leave on Article 8 grounds has not been the  subject  of
    any challenge and thus that part of  the  decision  stands  as  do  the
    findings made at paragraphs [59 to 71].

 8. In terms of further directions,

      i) The Secretary of State is to file and serve any  country  materials
         relied upon no later than seven days before any further hearing and
         provide a skeleton argument setting out their  position,  attaching
         to it any legal authorities relied upon.

     ii) The appellant's solicitors shall serve  on  the  Tribunal  and  the
         Secretary of State any further documentary evidence upon  which  it
         is intended to rely at that hearing no later than  14  days  before
         the hearing.

    iii) The Appellant's solicitors shall  also  file  an  updated  skeleton
         argument relevant to the issue  of  humanitarian  protection  under
         Article 15(c).

     iv) To assist  in  the  onward  listing  the  parties  are  to  provide
         advocates availability within  14  days  of  the  directions  being
         received

      v) The appellant has permission to rely upon  the  bundle  of  country
         materials already filed with the Upper Tribunal  on  the  16th  May
         2016.

Notice of Decision

 9. The judge made an error of law in allowing the appeal  on  humanitarian
    protection grounds and that part of the decision  is  set  aside.   The
    findings of fact set out at paragraphs [59 to 71] and the decision made
    on Article 8 remain.

10. The Appellant's appeal relating  to  humanitarian  protection  will  be
    determined afresh by the First-tier Tribunal.

11. The First-tier Tribunal made an error of law and the  decision  is  set
    aside.  The appeal is to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a
    hearing in accordance with Section 12(2) (b) of the  Tribunals,  Courts
    and Enforcement Act and paragraph 7.2 of the Practice Statement of 10th
    February 2010 (as amended).







Signed                                       Date 13/6/2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
