
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39548/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 22 December 2016                       |On 25 January 2017                |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                              abida kausar dar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Jagadesham, instructed by Silverdale Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Abida Kausar Dar, is a female citizen  of  Pakistan  was
    born on 28 November 1967.  By a decision dated 26  September  2013,  an
    application for further leave to remain  outside  the  Rules  on  human
    rights grounds had been refused by the respondent.  She had appealed to
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Bruce), which had dismissed her  appeal.
    A subsequent appeal to the Upper Tribunal (Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Lever) had been dismissed in a determination promulgated on 13 November
    2014.  Thereafter, the appellant had applied for permission  to  appeal
    to the Court of Appeal which had been granted following an oral hearing
    by Floyd LJ on 25 February 2016.  By consent order dated  27  September
    2016, the Court of Appeal had ordered that the appeal  be  allowed  and
    that the decision of Judge Lever be quashed and the matter remitted  to
    the Upper Tribunal for re-determination.

 2. It is apparent from the statement of reasons submitted to the Court  of
    Appeal with the  consent  order  that  both  parties  accept  that  the
    decision of Judge Bruce was flawed by legal error.  In particular,  the
    respondent had agreed that,  "the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  made  a
    material error of law and her approach to the evidence  by  relying  on
    issues which had not previously been raised which were never put to the
    appellant or her witnesses for them to address ..."  In  the  light  of
    that statement of the position of the Secretary of State, this Tribunal
    has no option but to set aside the decision of Judge Bruce and to remit
    the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for that Tribunal to re-make  the
    decision.

 3. The Upper Tribunal will not make formal directions for the new  hearing
    in the First-tier Tribunal but I do observe that the last  hearing  was
    lengthy (taking the greater part of one whole day); there will need  to
    be an Urdu interpreter and  there  may  also   the  requirement  of  an
    interpreter in British Sign Language  (BSL).   Those  are  all  matters
    which may be addressed at a Case Management Review (CMR) which it would
    be appropriate for the First-tier Tribunal to arrange before the matter
    is re-listed for substantive hearing.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal promulgated on  25  March  2014  is  set
aside.  None of the findings of fact shall stand.  The  appeal  is  remitted
to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge Bruce; Judge Lever) for that  Tribunal
to re-make the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 20 January 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
