
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39886/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         | Decision & Reasons           |
|                                             |Promulgated                   |
|On 25 September 2015                         | On 30 September 2015         |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                        Mrs annaliza bongon trinidad
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Sowerby, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr D S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against a decision  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       O'Garro  promulgated on 27th March 2015,  in  which  she  allowed  an
       appeal against the decision of the respondent of 10th October 2014 to
       refuse an application for leave to remain  as  an  Overseas  Domestic
       Worker in a private household.


    2. The appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home  Department  and
       the Respondent to this  appeal,  is  Mrs.  Annaliza  Bongo  Trinidad.
       However for ease of reference, in the course of this determination  I
       shall adopt the parties' status  as  it  was  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal.  I shall in this  determination,  refer  to  Mrs.  Annaliza
       Bongo Trinidad as the Appellant and the Secretary  of  State  as  the
       Respondent.


    3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Holmes
       on 15th May 2015.  The matter comes before me to consider whether  or
       not the determination by First-tier Tribunal Judge  O'Garro  involved
       the making of a material error of law,  and  if  so,  to  remake  the
       decision.


    Background


    4. The appellant originally entered the United Kingdom  as  an  Overseas
       Domestic Worker in a private household on 9th September 2011  with  a
       visa valid until 11th February 2012.  The leave to remain granted  to
       her was subsequently extended to 6th August 2014.  On 20th July  2014
       she again applied for further leave to remain as an Overseas Domestic
       Worker in a private household and that  application  was  refused  on
       10th October 2014.  That refusal was the subject of the appeal before
       First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro.


    5. The reasons for refusal dated 10th October  2014  make  reference  to
       paragraphs 159F and 159EA of the immigration rules that set  out  the
       requirements for leave to remain as an overseas domestic worker.  The
       respondent was not satisfied that the appellant met the  requirements
       of paragraph 159EA(iii) and (iv), and the application  was  therefore
       refused  under  paragraph  159F  of  the  Immigration   Rules.    The
       respondent concluded from the evidence submitted in  support  of  the
       application, that the evidence established that the Appellant  worked
       for Natalie Abrahams rather than Annmiek Sala-Barents.








The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal


    6. First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro heard evidence from  the  appellant
       and her current employer, Annemiek Barrents.   The  evidence  of  the
       appellant and her employer is set out at paragraphs [7]  to  [15]  of
       the decision and it serves no purpose to repeat that evidence here.


    7. In reaching her decision, First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro found  as
       follows;


         "21. The only  contentious  issue  is  to  be  satisfied  that  the
         appellant does not intend to take employment except as  a  domestic
         worker in the private household of the employer. The respondent was
         not satisfied that the appellant met this requirement of the  rules
         because there is evidence that she had worked for a friend  of  her
         employer when she should only  have  been  in  the  employ  of  her
         employer Ms Barrents.


         22.  I find that the appellant has given a credible explanation why
         she had taken up the part-time temporary work which ended  in  June
         2014, when her employer found out that the appellant should only be
         working in her household.


         ...


         24.  I found both the appellant and her employer to be witnesses of
         truth and for this reason I accept that the appellant  was  unaware
         that she could not work outside her employer household and that she
         does  not  intend  to  take  employment  outside  of  her  employer
         household in the future.


         25.  On the totality of the evidence before me, I am satisfied that
         the appellant made a genuine mistake when she went to work  for  Ms
         Abrahams. I  find  that  the  appellant  intends  to  work  in  her
         employer's household as a domestic worker and has no  intention  of
         working in any other household. I therefore find that the appellant
         meets the requirements of Paragraph 159EA".





The Grounds of appeal


    8. The grounds  of  appeal  are  succinct.   The  respondent  refers  to
       paragraph 159EA(v)[1]  of the immigration rules, which provides  that
       one of the requirements to be met for  an  extension  of  stay  as  a
       domestic worker in a private household is that  the  applicant  "does
       not intend to take employment except as  a  domestic  worker  in  the
       private household  of the employer.." .   The  respondent  refers  to
       the observation made at paragraph [21] of the decision that there  is
       evidence that the Appellant had worked for a friend of  her  employer
       when she should only have been in the  employ  of  her  employer,  Ms
       Barrents.  The respondent contends that  at  paragraph  [24]  of  the
       decision, the Judge accepts that the appellant was unaware  that  she
       should not work outside her  employers  household,  and  that  having
       found that the appellant  was  a  credible  witness  and  had  worked
       outside the employers household, the judge should have dismissed  the
       appeal.


DISCUSSION


    9.  The respondent does not challenge the findings  made  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge O'Garro that I have referred to at paragraph 7  above.
       That is unsurprising, because, as Mr Walker rightly  conceded,  those
       were plainly findings that were open to the Judge  who  had  had  the
       benefit of hearing from the appellant and her witness, and to form  a
       view as to their credibility.


   10. When read together, paragraphs 159EA(iii) and (iv) of the immigration
       rules require inter alia that an applicant must establish that he  or
       she continues to be required for employment for  the  period  of  the
       extension  sought  as  a  full-time  domestic  worker  in  a  private
       household under the same roof as the employer, and that the applicant
       does not intend to take employment except  as  a  full-time  domestic
       worker  in  the  private  household  referred  to  in   sub-paragraph
       159EA(iii).  The use of the  words  "continues  to  be  required  for
       employment for the period of the extension sought ..."  in  paragraph
       159EA(iii) are important, because in assessing the  application,  the
       focus is upon what is to happen in the future.


   11.  In  determining  whether  an  applicant  does  not  intend  to  take
       employment except as a  full-time  domestic  worker  in  the  private
       household referred to in sub-paragraph 159EA(iii), the respondent and
       the Tribunal is entitled to take into account what  has  happened  in
       the past.  Where the evidence is that the applicant has  taken  other
       employment outside of the employment as a full-time  domestic  worker
       in the past, that might weigh heavily against an  applicant  and  may
       properly lead to a conclusion or finding  that  an  applicant  cannot
       meet the requirements of paragraph 159EA(iv).  However, it  does  not
       necessarily  follow  that  where  the  applicant  has   taken   other
       employment outside of the employment as a full-time  domestic  worker
       in the past, the requirements of paragraph 159EA(iv) cannot  be  met.
       Each case will turn upon the evidence before the decision maker.


   12. In this case,  having heard the evidence,  the Judge expressly  found
       at paragraphs [24] and [25] of her decision that the appellant made a
       genuine mistake when she went to work  for  Ms  Abrahams.  The  Judge
       found that the appellant intends to work in her employer's  household
       as a domestic worker and has no intention of  working  in  any  other
       household.  Those were findings that were open to the Judge  and  are
       not challenged in the appeal before me.


   13. It was therefore open to the Judge to find, as she did  at  paragraph
       [25] of her decision that the appellant  meets  the  requirements  of
       paragraph 159EA of the immigration rules, and to allow the appeal.


   14. In those circumstances, there is no material  error  of  law  in  the
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


Notice of Decision


   15. The appeal is dismissed.


   16. No anonymity direction is applied for and none is made.

Signed                                  Date






       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

FEE AWARD


   17. The First-tier Tribunal made no fee award.





Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
-----------------------
[1] This is erroneously referred to as rule 159EA(v).  The Respondent sets
out the relevant requirement of the rule, which is at 159EA(iv).

