
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/39913/2014
                                                               IA/39914/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 January 2016                   |On 29 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD


                                   Between

                    MRS AGAMPODI VIDYANGANI LAKMALI SILVA
                        MR SANJAYA KUMARA UDAHAGE DON
                       (anonymity direction nOT mADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No Attendance
For the Respondent:    Mr Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION ON ERROR LAW

      1. The Appellants had appealed  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Clapham whereby he  had  dismissed  the  Appellants'
         appeals against the Respondent's decisions to refuse their  Tier  4
         (General) Student applications.

      2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Mark
         Davies.

      3. The Tribunal had served notice of the hearing date which was listed
         for today. That notice of hearing was served on the  Appellants  at
         their address provided in Leicester, but also on  their  solicitors
         (Messrs Jade Law Solicitors).

      4. The case was called on at 10am at the hearing before me, but  there
         was no attendance either by the Appellants or their solicitors.

      5. I took the precaution of putting the case  back  in  my  list,  but
         despite doing so and after completing all other  cases,  there  was
         still no attendance by or on behalf of the Appellants.

      6. I satisfied myself from the Tribunal's file  that  there  had  been
         proper service of the notice of hearing.

      7. Mr Richards submitted that the matter ought to proceed. I canvassed
         with him the fact that serious allegations were being made  against
         the Appellants by the Respondent and he indicated that it  was  for
         the Appellants to respond to such matters which they had failed  to
         do.

      8. Having considered the grounds of appeal and the matters  raised,  I
         come to the clear view that  there  is  no  error  of  law  in  the
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

      9. The original decision of the Respondent made it quite clear that  a
         bank verification letter was said to be  false.  Despite  that  the
         Appellants instead  of  providing  evidence  to  contradict  or  to
         explain that document, sought consideration of their  case  on  the
         papers.

     10. As the First-Tier Tribunal noted, the Bank of Ceylon made it  clear
         that the document produced by the Appellants was not  genuine.  The
         Judge  noted  that  the  position  was  therefore  clear  that  the
         Appellants did not meet the financial requirements in the Rules.

     11. As for the grounds of appeal against the Judge's findings, they are
         long but in reality do no more than seek an extension of  time  for
         the grounds and then set out a long extracts of case law, including
         the Court of Appeal's decision in AA (Nigeria) v Secretary of State
         for  the  Home  Department  [2010]  EWCA  Civ  773  and  the  Upper
         Tribunal's decision in FW.

     12.  I  have  carefully  considered  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
         decision alongside the grounds of appeal and more generally.

     13. In my judgment there is no material error law. The Judge did  apply
         the correct standard of proof. He had made it clear that it was for
         the Appellants to address the concerns raised by the  Secretary  of
         State. He said this at paragraph 5 and then again at paragraph 7 of
         his decision.

     14. The Judge did not have to cite authority that  proof  of  fraud  or
         deception has to come from the Secretary of State. Especially since
         the Secretary of State had provided that proof in the form  of  the
         verification report. This was not a case in which a bare  assertion
         of fraud was raised by the Respondent  because  specific  disclosed
         evidence had been provided  to  the  Appellants.  The  verification
         report was the Respondent's evidence.

     15. The reality of the situation is that even  if  there  had  been  an
         error by the Judge's failure to specifically state that it was  for
         the Secretary of State to prove fraud or deception, the  Appellants
         had wholly  failed  to  provide  any  evidence  to  contradict  the
         allegations made and the evidence relied upon  by  the  Respondent.
         Therefore even if there was an error of law, it was not a  material
         error of law because there has never been any  sufficient  evidence
         from the Appellants about  the  dubious  documents  that  they  had
         relied upon when seeking leave to remain and which documents  their
         own claimed bank had said were not genuine.

     16. The failure of the Appellants to provide a proper response  to  the
         matters raised against the Appellants was therefore fatal to  their
         case.

Notice of Decision

     17. The original appeal did not involve the making of a material  error
         of law. Therefore the decision stands and  the  Appellants  appeals
         remain dismissed.

    There is no anonymity order made.


Signed      Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood
