
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39819/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |                Decision & Reasons   |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 16 September 2015                   |                On 5 November 2015   |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge conway

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             Mr prince Frimpong
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Bramble
For the Respondent:    No appearance

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Mr Frimpong is a citizen of Ghana born in 1967.  He appealed against  a
    decision of the Secretary of State made on 15 August 2014 to refuse his
    application for a residence card  pursuant  to  Regulation  17  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.  He  claimed  to
    be the partner of Ms Susuana Manu, a citizen of the Netherlands and, as
    such, the "extended family member" of an EEA national.   The  Secretary
    of State, however, concluded that Mr Frimpong had not demonstrated that
    he is in a durable relationship with an EEA national, also that Ms Manu
    is a "qualified person" under Regulation 6(2).

 2. He appealed.

 3. Following a hearing at Birmingham on 2 March 2015 Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Jessica Pacey allowed the appeal.

 4. The judge, having noted agreement that the only live issue  before  her
    was whether Mr Frimpong and Ms Manu were  in  a  durable  relationship,
    made her findings at paragraphs [15] to [29] of the determination.  She
    concluded (at [31]) that Mr Frimpong and  Ms  Manu  are  in  a  durable
    relationship.

 5. The judge, under "Notice of  Decision"  allowed  Mr  Frimpong's  appeal
    under the EEA Regulations.

 6. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal which was granted on
    5 May 2015.

 7. At the error of law hearing before me there was no appearance by or  on
    behalf of Mr Frimpong.  However, a Rule 24 response had been  submitted
    not opposing the Secretary of State's appeal.

 8. In that response, and at the hearing from Mr  Bramble,  the  point  was
    made that the issue of a residence card to an "extended family  member"
    is at the discretion of the Secretary of State and as such the  matter,
    on the facts found by the judge, should have been referred back to  the
    Secretary of State for reconsideration.

 9. I agreed and set aside the decision to be remade.

10. Regulation 17(4) provides;

         "The Secretary of State may issue a residence card to  an  extended
         family member not falling within Regulation 7(3) who is not an  EEA
         national on application if -

         (a)  the relevant EEA national in relation to the  extended  family
             member is a  qualified  person  or  an  EEA  national  with  a
             permanent right of residence under Regulation 15; and

         (b)  in all the circumstances it appears to the Secretary of  State
             appropriate to issue the residence card."

11. The headnote in Ihemedu (OFMs -  meaning)  Nigeria  [2011]  UKUT  00340
    (IAC) clarifies this further:


         "iii) Regulation 17(4) makes the issue of a residence  card  to  an
         OFM/extended family member  a  matter  of  discretion.   Where  the
         Secretary of State has not yet exercised that discretion  the  most
         an Immigration Judge is entitled to do is to allow  the  appeal  as
         being not in accordance with the law leaving the matter of  whether
         to exercise this discretion in the appellant's  favour  or  not  to
         the Secretary of State."

12. As the Secretary of State has  not  yet  considered  the  matter  under
    Regulation 17(4) the judge erred in allowing the appeal outright.   The
    decision she  should  have  reached  on  the  facts  found,  which  are
    unchallenged, was that the Secretary of State's  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law.

Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision contains an error on a point of  law  and
it is set aside.

It is remade as follows:

The appeal is allowed to the extent that the decision was not in  accordance
with the law. The application for an EEA residence card remains  outstanding
before the Secretary of State.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Conway



