

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/39428/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester             |                                        |
|                                |Determination Promulgated               |
|On 5 August 2015                |                                  On 14 |
|                                |August 2015                             |
|                                |                                        |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     IA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Bloomer (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnstone (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  I
make an anonymity order.  Unless the Tribunal or a Court directs  otherwise,
no report of these proceedings or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall
directly or indirectly identify  the  original  appellant.   This  direction
applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any failure to  comply  with  this
direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

       1. The appellant is a citizen  of  Lithuania  and  therefore  an  EEA
          citizen.  I have anonymised this decision  because  it  refers  to
          private medical issues.
       2. The issue before the First-tier Tribunal was whether  or  not  the
          appellant's marriage is one of convenience.  It was agreed  before
          the First-tier Tribunal and before me that the  relevant  question
          to be asked is as set out in Papjorgji (EEA spouse -  marriage  of
          convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT  00038  (IAC):  "n  light  of  the
          totality of the information before me,  including  the  assessment
          of the claimant's answers and any information  provided,  [is  it]
          more probable than not this is a  marriage  of  convenience?"   As
          recognised in Miah (interviewer's comments: disclosure:  fairness)
          [2014] UKUT 515 (IAC) at [12]:


                 "...an assessment that the marriage was one of  convenience
                 is a matter of some moment. It is tantamount to a  decision
                 that the marriage  was  undertaken  for  improper  motives,
                 designed to secure, dishonestly, a  status  and  associated
                 advantages to which the affected  person  was  not  legally
                 entitled. This will be a significant blot on  the  person's
                 immigration history and could operate to his  detriment  in
                 the future."


       3. In a decision dated 2 March 2015 Judge  Fisher  decided  that  the
          appellant's marriage is  one  of  convenience  and  dismissed  her
          appeal.  I must decide whether that decision contains an error  of
          law.

Hearing

       4. Mr Bloomer asked me to find that  the  decision  when  read  as  a
          whole is unclear and insufficiently reasoned.  It is difficult  to
          see what weight the Judge attached to the  fresh  evidence  before
          him  and   why   such   evidence   was   considered   insufficient
          notwithstanding the concerns raised by the appellant's  interview.
           Ms Johnstone asked me to find that the decision sufficiently  set
          out why the Judge was so concerned about the interview and why  in
          these circumstances the appeal was dismissed.

Findings

       5. The question before me is whether or not the  Judge  has  provided
          sufficient reasoning  for  the  appellant  to  understand  why  he
          reached his decision that it is more probable than  not  that  her
          marriage is one of convenience.  I accept that  the  reasons  need
          not be elaborate, and need not deal with every argument  presented
          or piece of evidence relied upon.


       6. Judge Fisher properly reminded himself that the findings of  Judge
          Heynes in  his  decision  dated  23  October  2013  regarding  the
          appellant's husband's appeal should be used as  a  starting  point
          for his own findings [20].  Judge Heynes highlighted a  number  of
          concerns emerging from the interview conducted with the  appellant
          and dismissed the husband's appeal.  Judge Fisher then  summarised
          the fresh evidence relied upon by the  appellant  to  support  her
          claim that her marriage is  a  genuine  one.   He  described  this
          evidence in these terms: "These are useful and some weight  should
          be given to these" [22].

       7. Judge Fisher then considered  the  evidence  relied  upon  by  the
          respondent,  which  remained  solely  the   interview   that   was
          available to Judge Heynes.   He  described  this  as  "strong  and
          powerful evidence, which supports the assertions  [the  SSHD  has]
          made" [23].

       8. The next paragraph [24] contains the key to the Judge's  reasoning
          in dismissing the appeal.  Unfortunately, the paragraph is  poorly
          drafted  and  contains  a  number  of  confusing  and   incomplete
          sentences.  I set it out in full.

                 "In coming to my conclusion relating to the appeal  I  have
                 found that there were discrepancies which go to the core of
                 the appellant's credibility.  The  previous  Judge  rightly
                 found that it was a  marriage  of  convenience  previously.
                 Evidence that the appellant has  been  pregnant  twice  but
                 unfortunately has miscarried on both occasions We  have  no
                 evidence of that the appellant's husband is the father  and
                 whilst this is new evidence some weight must  be  given  to
                 it.  This does not convince me that this is anything  other
                 than a marriage of convenience.  We have evidence that they
                 have lived together from the utility bills but  this  could
                 be an attempt to deceive the authorities by living together
                 and there is no proof of a  subsisting  relationship  again
                 evidence can  be  produced.   Mr  Baig  gave  evidence  and
                 believes that they are in a  genuine  relationship  however
                 there is insufficient evidence to persuade me that applying
                 In Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage of convenience) Greece
                 [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC) The Tribunal in Papjorgji  made  it
                 clear at paragraph 33 that they did not accept there was  a
                 burden as such on the Appellant and at paragraph 39  stated
                 "In summary, our understanding is that where the  issue  is
                 raised in an  appeal,  the  question  for  the  judge  will
                 therefore be 'in light of the totality of  the  information
                 before me,  including  the  assessment  of  the  claimant's
                 answers and any information provided, am I  satisfied  that
                 it is  more  probable  than  not  this  is  a  marriage  of
                 convenience?'".


       9.  Judge  Fisher  clearly  attached  considerable  weight   to   the
          appellant's answers at her interview and  Judge  Heynes'  findings
          in relation to that.  Having done so Judge Fisher was  obliged  to
          make clear factual  findings  concerning  the  evidence  that  had
          become available and  covered  the  two  intervening  years  since
          Judge Heynes' decision.  Judge Fisher regarded  that  evidence  as
          useful and said that some weight should be attached to  the  fresh
          evidence [22].  The first concern is that  this  is  difficult  to
          reconcile with  the  Judge's  unexplained  comment  at  [24]  that
          "...there is no proof of a subsisting relationship again  evidence
          can be produced.".  There  was  of  course  considerable  evidence
          post-dating Judge Heynes' decision directly  relevant  to  seeking
          to establish a subsisting relationship between the parties.   This
          included a letter written by a  homeopathic  consultant  explained
          the affection and support offered by the husband to the  appellant
          over a number of appointments  and  the  appellant's  pregnancies.
          Judge Fisher's reasoning simply fails to  explain  why  the  fresh
          evidence viewed cumulatively  was  insufficient  to  outweigh  the
          concerns arsing from the interview.  It is clear that he  regarded
          the evidence as insufficient but it has not been explained why  he
          regarded it as such, when he  described  it  as  useful  and  that
          weight should be attached to it.


      10. Secondly,  there  was  detailed  evidence  that  the  parties  had
          resided together over an extended period of time and at  a  number
          of different addresses.  This evidence  is  directly  relevant  to
          whether the marriage is a  credible  one.   The  evidence  is  not
          determinative because of course as the Judge observed the  parties
          might just be living together to  support  their  claim.   However
          the longer the parties live together, and at  different  addresses
          the less likely the relationship is  a  sham.   It  was  therefore
          important for the Judge to make a clear finding as to  whether  he
          accepted that they lived together and for how long.  The  decision
          is silent as to this crucial issue.

      11. Finally, although  the  Judge  has  referred  to  the  appropriate
          question to be asked as set out in Papajorgji, he  has  failed  to
          answer the question.   Had  he  done  so  he  would  have  avoided
          misdirecting himself in law in  seeming  to  require  evidence  to
          "convince" or "persuade" him that  the  marriage  is  not  one  of
          convenience.  The Judge has simply failed to explain  why  he  was
          satisfied that it is  more  probable  than  not  that  this  is  a
          marriage of convenience when all the  evidence  is  considered  in
          totality.

Remittal

      12. In my view the most fair and proportionate way in  which  to  deal
          with this case having regard to para 7.2 of  the  relevant  Senior
          President's Practice Statements and given the  nature  and  extent
          of the factual findings to be made is to remit the  matter  for  a
          de novo hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.  As observed  in  Miah
          an assessment that a marriage is one of convenience  is  a  matter
          of some moment, and the reassessment of this  issue  needs  to  be
          redone fully and fairly.

Decision

      13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law
          and is set aside.

      14. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  decision
          to be re-made.

Directions

(1) The matter shall be listed for  the  first  available  date  before  the
First-tier Tribunal.  TE: 2 hrs.  Lithuanian interpreter required.

(2) Seven days before the hearing the  appellant  shall  file  and  serve  a
comprehensive indexed and paginated bundle of  all  relevant  documents  and
witness statements relied upon.

Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
6 August  2015


