
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal no: IA/39894/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 19 May & 3 August 2016                    |On 9 August 2016              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before


                      Upper Tribunal Judge John FREEMAN



                                   Between


                                  David [A]
                                                                   appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Alasdair Mackenzie, counsel instructed by Islington
Law Centre
For the respondent:    Mr Stephan Kotas (on 19 May); Mr Keith Norton (on 3
August)


                           DETERMINATION & REASONS

    This is an appeal by the Home Office from  a  first-tier  decision  (by
    Judge Irene Malcolm, sitting at Hatton Cross  on  16  September  2015),
    allowing an appeal by a citizen of Ghana  who  was  born  there  on  20
    September 1986, and arrived in this  country  in  1998,  as  the  judge
    accepted, with some friends of his parents.  Nothing more was heard  of
    him until 18 May 2008, when he was arrested by the police as an illegal
    entrant. Shortly after that, on 6 June,  he  made  an  application  for
    leave to remain on the basis of his private and family life.

 2. The appellant had one child ([S]) in 2008 with  a  British  woman,  and
    another child ([O]) in 2009 with another ([AA]); on 14 January 2010  he
    was given three years' discretionary leave to remain, as the father  of
    [O].  Sadly, on 7 February 2010 [O] suffered a cot death, and there was
    then a history of domestic violence against [AA], which resulted  in  a
    community sentence for him, and their parting for the time being.

 3. The appellant says he nevertheless applied, in time, for further  leave
    to remain on the same basis as before; but his application was rejected
    as defective for some  reason:  he  then  overstayed,  as  he  says  he
    couldn't afford a solicitor to make another  application.    Eventually
    on 14 September 2013 he was detained by the police, and given notice of
    liability to removal as an overstayer, and on 15  October  a  'one-stop
    warning'.

 4. Further representations followed on 6 December, with the decision under
    appeal coming on 24 February 2014.  The appellant's appeal against that
    decision was upheld by the judge on the  basis  of  two  parts  of  the
    family and private life Rules, paragraphs EX.2  and  276ADE(1)(vi).  By
    the date of the hearing, he had been back living with [AA] for about  a
    year, she says since September 2014.

 5. Essentially those paragraphs pose a similar question, for the  purposes
    of EX.2 in terms of "insurmountable obstacles" defined as

         ... the very significant difficulties which would be faced  by  the
         applicant or their partner in continuing their family life together
         outside the UK and which could not be overcome or would entail very
         serious hardship for the applicant or their partner

    or in terms of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), dealing  with  the  applicant's
    own private life,

         ... very significant obstacles to the applicant's integration  into
         the country to which he would have to go if required to  leave  the
         UK

 6. The judge dealt with EX.1 and EX.2 at paragraph 49. and  accepted  that
    there would be very significant  difficulties  for  the  appellant  and
    [AA], who had got back together in 2013, in  maintaining  their  family
    relationship outside the UK. The judge also found  that  if  [AA]  did,
    contrary  to  her  expressed  intentions,  return  to  Ghana  with  the
    appellant, then there would be very serious hardship for  both  parties
    in establishing life there.

ERROR OF LAW

 7. No reasons were given for the decision at that point.  The  finding  on
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) appears at paragraph 53 as follows:

         I accept from the evidence that the appellant does  have  knowledge
         of his home country and  the  culture  and  traditions.   From  the
         evidence of  [AA]'s  sister  as  to  the  appellant's  interest  in
         teaching her children some of the  Ghanaian  language  and  cooking
         Ghanaian food  for  them.   However,  I  accepted  the  appellant's
         evidence that he has no family or contact with anyone in Ghana  and
         considered that given the length of time  that  the  appellant  has
         lived in the UK that there would be  significant  difficulties  for
         him if required to return to Ghana.

 8. No further reasons were given by  the  judge  at  that  stage  for  her
    conclusion as to "significant difficulties", and that is the real basis
    of the Home Office challenge to his decision.  It was not precisely the
    test set out in the Rule; but that is not the basis of challenge, which
    is the lack  of  proper  reasons  for  the  judge's  decision;  and  in
    particular her apparent failure to consider the sort of issues to which
    decision makers' attention is directed by the  Immigration  Directorate
    Instructions [IDIs].  The status of those is made quite  clear  in  the
    decision of this Tribunal in Miah [2016] UKUT  131,  and  the  relevant
    parts of the IDIs set out at paragraph 15 of that.

 9. As the Upper Tribunal made clear at paragraph 16, IDIs do not have  the
    status of law; but they are to be regarded as the "correct  prism"  for
    looking at what the Rules do require.  This was not something the judge
    did, and indeed it is not clear that she was invited to do it; but that
    is not the basis of challenge.  The basis  of  challenge  is  that  she
    simply did not consider the sort of questions which were required to be
    considered by the IDIs. Mr MacKenzie  sought  to  support  the  judge's
    decision on the basis that she must have been  aware  of  the  evidence
    before her, including  the  report  of  a  country  expert,  Dr  Mattia
    Fumanti, which was not specifically challenged by the Home Office.

10. It is a very great pity that the judge  spent  most  of  57  paragraphs
    setting out the history and the evidence and the parties'  submissions,
    and only gave her own conclusions in the very short space  to  which  I
    have  already  referred.   It  did  not  seem  to  me  that  in   those
    circumstances I could properly uphold her decision on the  basis  that,
    if she had given proper reasons, the result would inevitably have  been
    the same.  In the absence of any attempt by the judge to deal with  the
    country expert's conclusions, it followed that a  further  hearing  was
    required: eventually it took place on 3 August.

RE-HEARING

11. Law and Rules The  decision  under  appeal  was  based  partly  on  the
    appellant's claim under the private life route, and partly on his claim
    under the parent route, as the father of S. He does see S from time  to
    time; but Mr Mackenzie realistically conceded that his appeal could not
    succeed on that basis. The live issues as things stand are whether  the
    appellant can show

     a) 'very significant obstacles' to integration in  country  of  origin
        (see paragraph 276ADE (1) (vi) of the Immigration Rules); or

     b) 'insurmountable obstacles' (see EX.2) to his  pursuing  his  family
        life with [AA] there.

    Since  'insurmountable  obstacles'  is  defined  in  terms   of   'very
    significant difficulties' (see 5), there is no real difference  in  the
    tests set out: it is simply that (a) is  directed  to  the  appellant's
    personal position, and (b) to his and [AA]'s as a couple.

12. Mr Mackenzie acknowledged, without conceding the point, that the appeal
    was unlikely to succeed under article 8, if it failed under those heads
    of the Rules. While on an article  8  appeal  the  appellant  would  be
    entitled to credit for the English-language  skills  he  has  built  up
    while here, he is not in regular full-time work, and  his  relationship
    with [AA] was  formed  while  he  was  unlawfully  here,  though  later
    sanctioned, following the birth of their child, For practical purposes,
    the appeal succeeds or fails under the relevant provisions of the Rules
    alone; so there is no need to consider Ruppiah [2016] EWCA Civ  803.  I
    shall return to the effects of Miah  in due course, since those  relate
    directly to the facts of any given case.

13. Mr Mackenzie referred to Ogundimu  (Article  8  -  new  rules)  Nigeria
    [2013] UKUT 60 (IAC); but that was based on the previous version of the
    private life Rules, which required an appellant in these  circumstances
    to have 'no ties' with his country of origin. It follows that what  was
    said in that decision has only very limited relevance to the  issue  in
    the present case, requiring a straightforward conclusion as to  whether
    return to Ghana would  cause  'very  significant  obstacles'  or  'very
    significant difficulties' of the relevant kinds.

14. Facts         This appellant has been  here,  as  the  judge  accepted,
    since 1998, when he was 12. Her other relevant findings of fact are  at
    paragraph  53:  he  knows  something  of  Ghana  and  its  culture  and
    traditions, and has taken  an  interest  in  teaching  [AA]'s  sister's
    children "some of the Ghanaian language"  [what  the  judge  meant  was
    Twi], and cooking Ghanaian food  for  them.  However,  the  judge  also
    accepted that he has no family in Ghana and is not in touch with anyone
    there. The history he gave involved losing his parents in a  car  crash
    when he was six, and being brought to this country by a family friend.

15.  'Country  expert'        Dr  Fumanti  is  an  anthropologist  at   the
    University of St Andrews, who for the last ten years  or  so  has  been
    researching into links between the African diaspora in this country and
    their own, in particular between Ghanaian Methodists and their origins,
    for which he visited Kumasi and Accra in 2007, 2009 and  2012.  He  has
    not carried out any research himself into problems faced  by  Ghanaians
    returned to their country,  though  he  cites  a  number  of  published
    sources, none of them apparently directed to  that  specific  question,
    for what he says.

16. Dr Fumanti's salient conclusions on Ghana, in the order  summarized  by
    Mr Mackenzie in his skeleton argument, are as follows:

     a) there is no welfare state;

     b) housing is hard  to  get  and  expensive  for  someone,  like  this
        appellant, with only basic qualifications; rent has to be paid  for
        a long  time  in  advance,  and  he  would  risk  becoming  'street
        homeless', which would be 'extremely dangerous';

     c) unemployment is high, and even a street trader would need  to  rent
        space and pay bribes: the  appellant  would  most  likely  have  to
        compete for the lowest-paid work available, as a market porter or a
        cleaner, which would not pay for even the lowest rent;

     d) there is a 'strong social stigma against migrants who  have  failed
        to make it in the West', even amongst their own families  -  though
        on this appellant's history that would hardly bother him;

     e)  the  extended  family  is  'central  to  people's  well-being  and
        identity' and the source of  basic assistance  throughout  anyone's
        life; not having one  is  seen  as  'tantamount  to  a  social  and
        cultural suicide', and as 'the negation of one's humanity'.

17. Without going into the other background evidence put forward to support
    those conclusions, it is possible to accept most  of  what  Dr  Fumanti
    says, though he does not help his own credibility as an expert  witness
    by  the  unnecessarily  dramatic  terms  in  which  he  does  so   (see
    particularly under (e)). As  anyone  who  has  lived  in  a  developing
    country knows, most are without any social welfare system to speak  of,
    and so the extended family is just  as  important  as  it  always  was.
    Housing is hard to find without money, or work without  qualifications.
    The only way out is to the 'West' and returnees may well be branded  as
    losers.

18. Miah     As against that rather dismal view of the appellant's personal
    position on return to Ghana, it is necessary to  consider  the  factors
    referred to in paragraph 15 of Miah. That was a case  of  a  young  man
    from Bangladesh who had been brought here when he was 13; by  the  date
    of the hearing he had been in this country for six years, and,  as  the
    Tribunal found, had had no ties with his country  of  origin  since  he
    came. The Tribunal (McCloskey P and Judge Bruce) went on to say this:

    15.  These findings made, we turn to consider whether  the  Appellant's
         case satisfies paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules. It  is  common
         case that, in determining this issue, we should take  into  account
         the relevant  Home  Office  Immigration  Directorate's  Instruction
         ("the IDI"). This  is  entitled  'Family  Migration:  Appendix  FM,
         Section 1.0b' and was published in August  2015.  This  states,  in
         material part, at paragraph 8.2.3.4:
             "When assessing whether there are 'very  significant  obstacles
             to integration into the country to which they would have to  go
             if required to leave the UK', the starting point is  to  assume
             that the applicant will be able to integrate into their country
             of return, unless they can demonstrate  why  that  is  not  the
             case. The onus is on the applicant to show that there are  very
             significant obstacles to that integration, not on the  decision
             maker to show that there are not.  The  decision  maker  should
             expect to see original, independent and verifiable  documentary
             evidence of any claims made in this regard and must place  less
             weight on assertions which are unsubstantiated. Where it is not
             reasonable to expect corroborating  evidence  to  be  provided,
             consideration  must  be  given  to  the  credibility   of   the
             applicant's claims ....
             A very significant  obstacle  to  integration  means  something
             which would prevent or seriously  inhibit  the  Applicant  from
             integrating into the country of return ....
             Very significant  obstacles  will  exist  where  the  applicant
             demonstrates that they would be unable to establish  a  private
             life in the country of return, or where establishing a  private
             life in  the  country  of  return  would  entail  very  serious
             hardship for the  applicant  ....  The  decision  maker  should
             consider whether the applicant  has  the  ability  to  form  an
             adequate private life by the standards of the country of return
             - not by UK standards .... To establish a private life  in  all
             of its essential elements ...."
             [our emphasis]
    We highlight also the following significant passage, under  the  rubric
    "Family, Friends and Social Network":
             "An applicant who has family or  friends  in  the  country  of
             return should be able to turn to them for support to help them
             to integrate into that country .....
             The  decision  maker  must  consider  the   quality   of   any
             relationships with family or friends in the country of  return
             ...
             Where there are no family, friends or social networks  in  the
             country of return that is not in  itself  a  very  significant
             obstacle to integration.....
             Lack of employment prospects is very unlikely  to  be  a  very
             significant obstacle to integration."
             [Our emphasis.]

    16.  Decision makers and Judges should take care to apply  the  correct
        prism  when  considering  this  IDI.  Its  legal  status  must   be
        appreciated. It is not a statutory measure. It is, rather, a policy
        document. Being of this character, it attracts the application of a
        series of well established principles, four in  particular.  First,
        it is an  obligatory  material  consideration  in  decision  making
        processes. Second, it is not writ in stone.  Rather,  its  contents
        are  to  be  viewed  as  a  series  of  flexible  and  inexhaustive
        requirements. See Lumba (WL) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
        Department [2011] UKSC 12, at [21], [26] and [35], per  Lord  Dyson
        JSC. We would further emphasise that the IDI is not, and  does  not
        claim to be, an exhaustive code. To approach it as a collection  of
        rigid rules and/or a comprehensive edict would be erroneous in law.
        Finally, it is trite law that IDI's and kindred instruments do  not
        have the status of  law  and,  thus,  are  subservient  to  primary
        legislation, secondary legislation and the Immigration Rules.

19. To sum up what seems to me the right approach, as simply  as  possible:
    where immigration appeals, or any  other  subject  of  litigation,  are
    concerned, it is for Parliament to enact the law or approve the  Rules:
    there is no other source of domestic law on this subject  (see  Pankina
    [2010] EWCA Civ 719). In any individual case, that is the body  of  law
    which sets the questions that have to be answered, and it is for judges
    alone to answer them. The IDIs are not a source  of  law,  as  recently
    confirmed, if confirmation were required,  in  MM  (Uganda)  &  another
    [2016] EWCA Civ 450 at  paragraph  25.  However,  they  provide  useful
    guidance on the approach which needs to be taken.

20. With that in mind, I shall consider the  passages  highlighted  by  the
    Tribunal in that citation from Miah, because those are the  only  parts
    of the IDIs given direct  judicial  authority  by  that  decision.  The
    passage about 'independent and  verifiable  documentary  evidence'  and
    'assertions which are unsubstantiated' is  emphasized  mainly  to  draw
    attention to what is said at paragraph 17, for obvious  reasons,  about
    the need to treat it with caution.

21. However Miah  does provide some direct authority to the effect that

         When assessing whether there are  'very  significant  obstacles  to
         integration into the country to which they  would  have  to  go  if
         required to leave the UK', the starting point is to assume that the
         applicant will be able to integrate into their country  of  return,
         unless they can demonstrate why that is not the case.

    and

        Where there are no  family,  friends  or  social  networks  in  the
        country of return that is not in itself a very significant obstacle
        to integration.....
        Lack of  employment  prospects  is  very  unlikely  to  be  a  very
        significant obstacle to integration.

22. So far as the starting-point to be taken is concerned, the IDIs  (which
    are of course in the first place for Home Office personnel) do no  more
    in a judicial context than to re-state the burden of proof in this,  or
    most other kinds of immigration case. The lack of  family,  friends  or
    social networks in the country of  return  is  not  in  itself  a  very
    significant  obstacle  to  integration,  and  the  lack  of  employment
    prospects is very unlikely to be one, as it seems at all. However  they
    must be relevant factors to be considered.

23. Discussion        Mr Mackenzie's main point on Miah  was that it leaves
    very little room for  applying  the  test  approved  by  Parliament  in
    paragraph 276ADE (1) (vi) in any case of an appellant facing return  to
    their country of origin after a long time, but less than 20 years here.
    Such a person is very likely  to  have  no  family,  friends  or  other
    contacts there,  or  job  prospects  either.  On  the  other  hand,  he
    suggested that the country evidence about  Ghana  showed  it  would  be
    harder to integrate there than in many countries from which  appellants
    before this Tribunal come.

24. I am  not  persuaded  that  these  considerations  are  a  warrant  for
    disregarding either the plain words of paragraph 276ADE  (1)  (vi),  or
    the gloss put  on  them  in  Miah.  The  rather  un-English  expression
    'integration' is presumably taken from the European jurisprudence which
    speaks in those terms, and gives it its sanction. In plain English,  as
    Mr Mackenzie agreed, it must mean something like  'settling  down'.  It
    raises a straightforward question of fact which has to be  answered  on
    the merits of any individual case.

25. Private  life:  conclusions   I  have  already  accepted  Dr  Fumanti's
    conclusions, in general terms. I am not persuaded that  they  represent
    anything out of the ordinary, in the context of private life claims  by
    citizens of developing countries, who are the vast  majority  of  those
    involved in appeals before  this  Tribunal.  On  the  other  hand,  the
    appellant does  not  need  to  show  the  'exceptional  and  compelling
    circumstances'  required for a claim under article 8 to succeed outside
    the Rules, in making a case under paragraph 276ADE (1) (vi).

26. While this appellant has not entirely made his own way in life,  having
    been brought to this country when he was 12, he managed  to  stay  here
    and do so from 2004 when he reached 18, and was responsible for his own
    destiny, till 2008, when he was picked up by the police. In the  course
    of that year  and  the  next,  he  was  prepossessing  enough  to  form
    relationships and beget children with two different women, with one  of
    whom he is once again together: I shall come to his family  life  claim
    in due course. He has been able to maintain an existence here  for  the
    last eight years, which he is reluctant to lose, even though he has had
    no legal status in this country, apart from the period between  2010  -
    13, when he had leave to remain as the father of [O], even  after  she,
    sadly, had died, and he had parted company from her mother.

27. Dr Fumanti was understandably speaking  in  general  terms,  about  the
    general conditions  he  considered  likely  to  await  someone  of  the
    appellant's   age,   immigration   history,   and   lack   of    formal
    qualifications. I however have to consider him as a  person:  while  he
    did not give oral evidence before me, I have been  able  to  form  some
    view of his individual capabilities. He has not by any  means  entirely
    lost touch with his roots, given that he can still speak at least  some
    Twi, and even cook Ghanaian dishes. I am not satisfied  that  he  would
    face 'very significant obstacles' to integration in Ghana, even bearing
    in mind the general difficulties described by Dr  Fumanti.  It  follows
    that the private life appeal fails.

28. Family life        The appellant and [AA] describe their life  together
    in very recent statements, signed 22 July 2016. They say they are going
    strong, and anxious to get their household on its feet  financially  by
    the appellant passing through his present immigration difficulties  and
    becoming able to get a proper job. He says it would be 'scary' for  her
    in Ghana, and she says she knows nothing about the country at all.  She
    explained at the hearing that her surname of Adeyemi was given  her  by
    her mother, who was with a Nigerian by that name when she was expecting
    her; but even he turned out not to be her father.

29. What neither the appellant nor [AA] show any sign of having done is  to
    investigate the practical possibilities of her joining  him  in  Ghana,
    once he was re-established there. The only  evidence  bearing  on  this
    point before me came in the form of a page from the  Ghana  Immigration
    Service web-site, down-loaded by Mr Mackenzie or  his  solicitors.  The
    page is entitled 'Guide on Work Rights' and the passage to which I  was
    referred reads:

         (d) Foreign spouses with special skills may on application  to  the
         Minister of Interior be issued with work permits to work so long as
         they remain with partners who have  lawful  residential  status  in
         Ghana.

    There is however nothing to show that [AA] would  not  be  admitted  to
    Ghana as the appellant's partner, once he  had  re-established  himself
    there.

30. [AA]'s other objection to joining the  appellant  in  Ghana  is,  quite
    understandably, based on the life she has here. She works  as  a  part-
    time night controller for a mini-cab firm, which is not well  paid,  at
    just under �375 a month, but she says enables her and the appellant  to
    manage, with the help of housing  benefit,  which  she  expects  to  be
    restored soon. She has three  siblings  in  this  country,  with  their
    children, as well as various friends she has had  from  childhood,  and
    she is particularly fond of her sister Laura, who she describes as like
    a twin to her, and her children. It was Laura's children  who,  as  she
    told the judge, the appellant taught Twi and Ghanaian cooking.

31. Conclusions   I do not for one moment blame [AA] for preferring to stay
    in this country, of which she is a citizen by  birth.  However,  as  Mr
    Norton pointed out, that is a matter of choice for  her,  and  not  the
    main question asked by EX.2, whose terms I will set out once more. That
    paragraph asks whether there would be

         ... very significant difficulties ... faced  by  the  applicant  or
         their partner in continuing their family life together outside  the
         UK and which could not be overcome or  would  entail  very  serious
         hardship for the applicant or their partner

32. While I  am  not  satisfied  that  there  would  be  'very  significant
    obstacles' to the appellant re-establishing himself  in  Ghana  on  his
    own, I am prepared to accept that  there  would  be  'very  significant
    difficulties' for [AA] in joining him, in view of her birth and life in
    this country, and lack of any previous association with Ghana, as  well
    as her family ties here. The next question  is  whether  or  not  those
    could be overcome: since there is nothing to show  any  willingness  on
    the part of the appellant or [AA] even to investigate how that could be
    done, I am not prepared to accept that this is the case.

33. I do not doubt that it would be hard for [AA]  to  adjust  to  life  in
    Ghana, even on the basis that she joined the appellant only when he had
    re-established himself there; but I see  nothing  to  suggest  that  it
    would 'entail very serious hardship' for her, still less the  appellant
    himself. The nearest thing would be the loss  of  regular  face-to-face
    contact with Laura and her children; but children do grow up, and there
    would be nothing to stop her nowadays from keeping in touch with  Laura
    on Skype or some other electronic medium, as well as  by  visits,  when
    they could. Of course the adjustment would be hard; but not in my  view
    so much as to 'entail very serious hardship' for her.

34. That means the family life  appeal  must  fail  too;  in  view  of  the
    findings I have made on the fairly unrestrictive terms of the Rules  on
    this and the private life route, I think Mr Mackenzie was right not  to
    pursue the appeal on article 8 grounds, and it is dismissed.

Respondent's appeal against first-tier decision allowed: decision re-made
Appellant's appeal dismissed


                                                                       [pic]
                                             (a judge of the Upper Tribunal)
                                                            13 December 2017

