




 Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39851/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|                                              |                             |
|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 16 September 2014                         |On 9 October 2014            |
|Prepared:  29 September 2014                  |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                         Mr Ajibola Oluwafemi Laleye
                        (no anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr A T Laleye, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Nigeria.  He  appeals  with  permission
      against the determination promulgated on 20th May 2014  by  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Carroll who dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  against
      the respondent's decisions to refuse to vary his leave  to  remain  in
      the UK and to remove him.


   2. Judge Carroll noted that the appellant had indicated that he wished to
      have an oral hearing. The notification of the hearing date was sent to
      the appellant at the address in London in the notice of appeal.  There
      had been no correspondence. The Judge was satisfied that the notice of
      hearing had been duly served. The matter was stood down until later in
      the day. There was still no appearance and no explanation.


   3. The appellant had submitted an application for leave to  remain  as  a
      Tier 4 (General) Student.  His  application  was  refused  as  he  had
      failed to meet the requirements of paragraph 120(a) of Appendix  A  to
      the rules and had also not shown that he  was  in  possession  of  the
      relevant maintenance required for a consecutive 28 day period to  meet
      the maintenance requirements.


   4. The appellant appeals with permission from First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Brunnen. In granting permission. Judge Brunnen found that in  view  of
      the assertion that  the  appellant  did  not  receive  the  notice  of
      hearing, permission was granted '....so as to enable the appellant  to
      present his case'.


   5. However, Judge Brunnen went on to state that it did  not  appear  that
      his appeal had any prospect of success as the Judge had dismissed  the
      appeal because, amongst other reasons, the  appellant  had  failed  to
      submit any evidence with his variation application to show that he had
      the required funds. The grounds seeking  permission  did  not  address
      that issue. It  was  not  contended  that  any  evidence  of  funding,
      compliant  with  the  immigration  rules,  was  submitted   with   the
      application.  He  stated  that  the  lack  of  funding  evidence   was
      inevitably fatal both to the application and to the appeal  under  the
      immigration rules.


   6. With regard to Article 8, as the grounds made clear, the appellant has
      completed his course of  study.  There  was  nothing  in  the  grounds
      indicating any basis of claim that could conceivably  have  led  to  a
      finding that Article 8 was engaged.


   7. At the hearing before me, Mr Laleye informed the tribunal that he is a
      relative of the appellant. He was aware of  Judge  Brunnen's  comments
      regarding the problems posed by the lack of any evidence in respect of
      maintenance. He made no further submissions.


   8. Mr Walker submitted that in  the  circumstances,  even  assuming  that
      there had been some kind of procedural irregularity, there was in  the
      event  no  material  error  made  by  the  Judge  in  dismissing   the
      appellant's appeal.


     Assessment


   9. It is not contended by Mr Laleye that the appellant was able  to  meet
      the requirements under Appendix C of the  Immigration  Rules.  In  the
      circumstances, the appeal was in any  event  bound  to  fail  on  that
      basis, whether or not the appellant attended the hearing.   There  was
      no submission on Article 8 grounds.






Decision


     The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not  involve  the
making of any     material error of law and the decision shall stand.


     No anonymity order made.



                               Signed                     Date 29/9/2014


                               C R Mailer
                               Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




