
[pic]
IAC-HW-am-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: iA/39807/2014
                                                               ia/39808/2014
                                                               ia/39809/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27th July 2015                    |On 25th August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

          ABDUL GAFOOR KANNANTHODY KUNJHUMUHAMMED (FIRST APPELLANT)
                    REBIN JOHN VARKEY (SECOND APPELLANT)
                  CHRISTEENA MARY XAVIER (THIRD APPELLANT)
                        (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Sinjarajah, instructed by Paul John & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS





The Appellant

 1. The appellants are nationals of India born respectively on 21st  August
    1981, 27th  March  1987  and  5th  May  1988.   The  first  and  second
    appellants are partners in respect of their Tier 1 (Post Study) Migrant
    applications.

 2. The first appellant entered the United Kingdom on 27th October 2010  as
    a Tier 4 (General) Student with leave  until  September  2012  and  was
    subsequently granted further leave as a  Tier  1  (Post-Study)  Migrant
    until 31st July 2014.

 3. On 30th July 2014 he applied for further leave to remain in the UK as a
    Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) under the points-based system.

 4. The second appellant entered the United Kingdom on  24th  October  2010
    also as a Tier 4 (General) Student with leave in due course extended to
    1st August 2014 and he too applied for leave as an entrepreneur on 30th
    July 2014.  The third appellant is the partner  and  dependent  of  the
    second appellant.

 5. In a letter dated 26th September 2014 the Secretary  of  State  refused
    the  applications  with  reference  to  paragraph   245DD(b)   of   the
    Immigration Rules and paragraph 41-SD of Appendix A on the  basis  that
    the first two appellants had failed to comply with the  requirement  in
    relation to documentary evidence (Paragraph 41-SD(c)(i) of  Appendix  A
    and with reference to the third appellant under  paragraph  319C(b)  as
    her partner's application had failed.   The  Secretary  of  State  also
    decided to remove the appellants under Section 47  of  the  Immigration
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 6. The  linked  appeal  came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Fitzgibbon QC on 27th February 2015 and refused  their  appeal  on  3rd
    March 2015.

 7. The appellants were relying on third party funds from a Mrs N Tina.   I
    should set out  that  in  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  from  the
    Secretary of State noted that:

         "... no letter from the financial institution in which Mrs N Tina's
         funds are held has been supplied to establish that those funds  are
         accessible to you or your business as specified under paragraph 41-
         SD(c)1 of Appendix A of the Immigration Rules."

 8. The First-tier Tribunal Judge noted at paragraph 9 of his decision that
    the Secretary of State claimed that the appellants had not  provided  a
    letter from the bank  confirming  the  amount  available  in  the  form
    specified in paragraph 41-SD.  The appellants were deriving third party
    funds from  Mrs Tina and the judge recorded [9]

         "Ms Tina maintains that 'the bank authority stated that  they  have
         no such policy to issue a letter for UK Border Agency".

 9. An application for permission to appeal was made on the basis  that  it
    was submitted that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  failed  to  consider
    that the third party's funds were not held in a  financial  institution
    overseas and therefore there should be  no  requirement  on  the  third
    party to submit such a letter.  Secondly, it  was  submitted  that  the
    evidential flexibility provisions contained in paragraph 245AA  of  the
    Immigration Rules and their applicability to the appellants'  case  was
    not considered.  In particular when a  "specified  document"  had  been
    submitted which did not contain all of the specified  information,  the
    respondent had a discretion to grant the application anyway if  missing
    information was verifiable from other sources.

10. There were further grounds but for the time being I  shall  concentrate
    on the Rule in relation to the absence of the letter.

11. Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Zucker who referred  to  Durrani  (Entrepreneurs:  bank  letters;
    evidential flexibility [2014] UKUT 295  (IAC)  as  being  relevant  and
    indicating the first ground was arguable.

12. At the hearing before me Mr Sinjarajah attempted to persuade me that  I
    should either stay the decision or remit it to the First-tier  Tribunal
    in order that I allowed time for the appeal from Rodriguez in the Court
    of Appeal to be considered by the  Supreme  Court.   He  also  produced
    Ahmed and Another (PBS: admissible evidence) [2014] UKUT  00365  (IAC).
    This states that the prohibition on new evidence in Section  85A(4)  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 applies  to  the  non-
    points-scoring aspect of  the  Rule  such  that  where  a  points-based
    application is made and refused the assessment by the judge is to be of
    a material that was  before  the  decision  maker  rather  than  a  new
    consideration of the material.

Conclusion

13. It was accepted that no bank letter in compliance with the  Immigration
    Rule was produced and this was a requirement of the  Immigration  Rules
    Appendix A at paragraph 41-SD(c)(i).

14. The judge set out at paragraph 12 of the judge's determination:

         "In my view, the requirements of Appendix A are clear, unambiguous,
         and readily understood.  I do not accept that Lloyd's Bank, one  of
         the UK's major financial institutions,  has  no  capacity  to  give
         written confirmation in the required form that a third party funder
         has a particular amount of money available.  If this were the case,
         I would have expected confirmation from the bank  itself,  but  the
         appellants have not provided it.  I do not regard  Ms  Tina's  bare
         assertion as sufficient.  She did not attend the  hearing  to  give
         further details of what she claims the bank has told her."

    and  therefore  he  did  not  accept  that  the  requirements  of   the
    Immigration Rules had been complied with.

15. Mr Sinjarajah tried to persuade that in view of paragraph 13 there  was
    a clear error of  law  in  that  the  judge  had  stated  that  he  was
    proscribed from taking in late evidence as  indeed  was,  as  shown  by
    Ahmed, but at the same time the judge  criticised  the  appellants  for
    failing to seek clarification from the bank or taking  the  opportunity
    to transfer the funds to an institution capable of issuing the required
    document.

16. Even if that were an error, (and which I do  not  accept  it  could  be
    material because the judge took into account that there was no letter),
    it cannot rectify the difficulties for the appellants with the  failure
    to comply with the  immigration  requirements  as  specified.   Further
    regarding the submission to stay the case pending the Rodriguez  appeal
    to the Supreme Court first I am not persuaded that  this  would  assist
    the appellant for the reasons I give in relation to  the  onus  on  the
    respondent to request documentation.  Secondly, I must apply the law as
    it at present.  I saw no reason in the circumstances  to  postpone  the
    decision.

17. Paragraph 41-SD(c)(i) (of the Rules at the relevant date) stipulated:

         '(c)     The specified documents to show evidence of the funding
         available to invest, whether from the applicant's own funds or from
         one or more third parties, are one or more of the following
         specified documents:

             (i) A letter from each financial institution holding the
             funds, to confirm the amount of money available. Each letter
             must:

                  (1)  be an original document and not a copy ...'

18. Despite being referred to in the permission to appeal by supporting the
    grounds of appeal Durrani in fact confirms  that  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 41-SD are reasonable and sensible.

19. For completeness the argument in  the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal that the bank letter requirement did not apply because the funds
    were held outside the UK does not bear scrutiny.  The alternative  limb
    of the Rules can only be adopted if the funds are held in  the  account
    of the appellant himself and that was not the case here.

20. I am not persuaded that there has been any unfairness in  the  decision
    by the Secretary of State and perpetuated by the decision.   As  stated
    in EK (Ivory Coast) v The Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2014] EWCA Civ 1517 at 38:

         "The authorities in which the general public law duty  of  fairness
         has been found to impose additional obligations on the Secretary of
         State in the context of the PBS have been materially different from
         the present case.  It has been held that  where  the  Secretary  of
         State has withdrawn authorisation  from  a  college  to  issue  CAS
         letters, fairness requires that she should  give  foreign  students
         enrolled  at  the  college  a  reasonable  opportunity  to  find  a
         substitute college  before  removing  them:  Patel  (revocation  of
         sponsor licence - fairness) India [2011] UKUT 00211  (IAC);  Thakur
         (PBS Decision - Common Law Fairness) Bangladesh [2011]  UKUT  00151
         (IAC); and see Alam at para. [44].  But that requirement was  found
         to arise where there had been a change of  position  of  which  the
         Secretary of State was aware, and  indeed  which  she  had  brought
         about, in circumstances in which the students were  not  themselves
         at fault in any way, but had been caught out by action taken by the
         Secretary of State in relation to which they had had no opportunity
         to protect themselves.  In  the  present  case,  by  contrast,  the
         Secretary had no means of knowing why the  Appellant's  CAS  letter
         had been withdrawn and was not responsible for its withdrawal,  and
         the fair balance between the public interest in the  due  operation
         of the PBS regime and the individual interest of the Appellant  was
         in favour of simple operation of the regime without further ado."

21. Although that case relates to a Tier 4 application, it shows that  even
    where events have conspired to undermine the  appellant's  application,
    there is no burden on the Secretary of State to seek out documentation.
     The Rules here were clearly set out and in the hands of the  appellant
    to comply with them when they applied.

22. In this case it is clear that  Paragraph  245AA  does  not  assist  the
    appellant. The document does not fall within  the  realm  of  Paragraph
    245AA and there is no duty on  the  Secretary  of  State  to  seek  out
    documents certainly those not in existence. The  document  required  in
    this  instance  was  not  in  existence  at  the  date  of  either  the
    application or the decision made by the respondent and the  application
    was bound to fail.

Notice of Decision

23. I find no error of law and the decision shall stand.


Signed      Date 24th August 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

