
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/39329/2013
                                                               IA/39332/2013
                                                               IA/39333/2013
                                                               IA/39336/2013
                                                               IA/39340/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 7 August 2014                                |On 21st Oct 2014           |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE clive lane

                                   Between

                            YSC (first Appellant)
                            JC (second Appellant)
                            CC (third Appellant)
                            YC (fourth Appellant)
                            QPC (fifth Appellant)
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms Z Preston, Immigration Legal Advice Centre
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1.  The  appellants  are  citizens  of  Malawi.    The   appellants   made
    applications  for  leave  to  remain   in   the   United   Kingdom   on
    "compassionate  grounds"  but  their  applications  were   refused   by
    decisions of the respondent dated  25  October  2013.   The  respondent
    decided that the removal of the  appellants  from  the  United  Kingdom
    would not place the United Kingdom in breach of its  obligations  under
    Article 8 ECHR.  In addition, directions were given under Section 10 of
    the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 for the  appellants'  removal  from
    the United Kingdom.  The appellants appealed against the refusal to the
    First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Turnock)  which,   in   a   determination
    promulgated on 26 March 2014, dismissed the appeal.  The appellants now
    appeal, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant submits that the judge erred in law  by  considering  the
    appeals under the provisions of the "new" Article 8  Rules  which  came
    into effect in July 2012; the appellants'  applications  for  leave  to
    remain were made in June 2012.  It appears that both representatives at
    the First-tier Tribunal hearing considered that the "new" Rules  should
    be applied.

 3. To be fair to the appellant, the written grounds of appeal do not refer
    to this point; it was raised by the judge who granted permission in the
    First-tier Tribunal.  However, it is devoid of merit.  Whether  or  not
    the judge should or  should  not  have  applied  the  "new"  Rules,  he
    proceeded, in any  event,  to  carry  out  "freestanding"  analysis  of
    Article 8 ECHR outside the Immigration Rules.  The determination of the
    appeal on Article 8 grounds has been conducted  by  the  judge  without
    reference to the Immigration Rules.  Given that the judge  has  carried
    out this separate Article 8 assessment, it is difficult to see how  the
    appellants have  suffered  any  prejudice  by  the  approach  which  he
    adopted.

4.   Where the parties are in agreement (as confirmed at the Upper  Tribunal
    hearing by Ms Pettersen and Ms Preston) is that  the  minor  appellants
    were required to satisfy the amended paragraph 276ADE (amended as  from
    December 2012) which, in addition to requiring an applicant to be under
    the age of 18 years and  to  have  lived  continuously  in  the  United
    Kingdom for at least seven years added the requirement that  "it  would
    not be reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the United Kingdom."



5.   The addition of the provision as to the "reasonableness" of  return  to
    the country of nationality is relevant in this  appeal.   Had  the  old
    Rule applied, then it is certainly arguable (in the light of the length
    of time the children have resided in  the  United  Kingdom)  that  they
    satisfied the provision and should have been granted a period of leave.
     The grounds complain that the judge failed to have regard to the  best
    interests of the children (Section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009).  Had he done so, he  would  not  have  concluded
    that it was in the best interests of the children for them to accompany
    their parents on return to Malawi.  The requirement which  the  parents
    acknowledge  they  had  to  meet  as  to  "reasonableness"  brings  the
    provision in the Immigration Rules in line with Section 55 (as part  of
    the determination of the  appeal  on  Article  8  grounds  outside  the
    Rules).  Leaving aside the question  as  to  whether  "best  interests"
    imposes a higher level of test than "reasonableness", I do  not  accept
    the appellants' submission that the judge has failed to have regard  to
    the  children's  best   interests.    In   a   careful   and   detailed
    determination, the judge wrote this at [54]:

         [the children] would have the benefit of completing their education
         in the United Kingdom and access to support facilities provided  by
         NHS [if they were to continue remaining living here].  However they
         are not British citizens and have no entitlement to the benefit  of
         the education and NHS systems from which  they  have  benefited  to
         date.  Their parents have a poor immigration history  and  have  at
         least not cooperated with immigration services given the removal of
         the pages in the second appellant's passport.  Ultimately the  best
         interests of the children must be to  remain  together  with  their
         parents as a family.  The evidence is that conditions in Malawi are
         not  such  that  removal  of  the  family  there   would   not   be
         disproportionate.  The removal of the  children  would  cause  some
         inevitable disruption to their education but there is no reason why
         they cannot successfully continue their  education  in  Malawi  and
         enjoy family life with their parents.

6.   Given the particular facts in this case, I consider  that  analysis  to
    be wholly adequate.  The assessment of  the  "best  interests"  of  the
    children began and ended with the finding  that  those  best  interests
    would be met by their remaining as part of a family with their parents.
     Quite properly, the judge referred to the fact that the  children  are
    not British citizens.  That was a relevant factor as held by the  Court
    of Appeal in EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874;

   1. In my judgment, therefore, the assessment of the best interests of the
      children must be made on the basis that the facts are as they are in
      the real world. If one parent has no right to remain, but the other
      parent does, that is the background against which the assessment is
      conducted. If neither parent has the right to remain, then that is the
      background against which the assessment is conducted. Thus the
      ultimate question will be: is it reasonable to expect the child to
      follow the parent with no right to remain to the country of origin?
   1. On the facts of ZH it was not reasonable to expect the children to
      follow their mother to Tanzania, not least because the family would be
      separated and the children would be deprived of the right to grow up
      in the country of which they were citizens.
   1. That is a long way from the facts of our case. In our case none of the
      family is a British citizen. None has the right to remain in this
      country. If the mother is removed, the father has no independent right
      to remain. If the parents are removed, then it is entirely reasonable
      to expect the children to go with them. As the immigration judge found
      it is obviously in their best interests to remain with their parents.
      Although it is, of course a question of fact for the tribunal, I
      cannot see that the desirability of being educated at public expense
      in the UK can outweigh the benefit to the children of remaining with
      their parents. Just as we cannot provide medical treatment for the
      world, so we cannot educate the world.
   1. In fact the immigration judge weighed the best interests of the
      children as a primary consideration, and set against it the economic
      well-being of the country. As Maurice Kay LJ pointed out in AE
      (Algeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ
      653 at [9] in conducting that exercise it would have been appropriate
      to consider the cost to the public purse in providing education to
      these children. In fact that was not something that the immigration
      judge explicitly considered. If anything, therefore, the immigration
      judge adopted an approach too favourable to the appellant.

7.   The judge in  the  instant  appeal  has  carried  out  a  "real  world"
    assessment which is entirely in line with the principles annunciated in
    EV.  Whether one  applies  Article  8  ECHR  or  the  Immigration  Rule
    (including the "reasonableness" provision) the result will be the same;
    the children may be removed to Malawi with their parents.  I find  that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not err in law  as  asserted  in  the
    grounds of appeal or the oral submissions of  Ms  Preston  or  at  all.
    These appeals are dismissed.










DECISION

These appeals are dismissed.






Signed                              Date 20 October 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

