
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39262/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16th July 2014                             |On 28th July 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE

                                   Between

                               MD KHAIRUL ALAM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT GIVEN)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Samuel, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a male citizen of Bangladesh born 15 April 1980.  The
      appellant's immigration history is not in  dispute.   He  entered  the
      United  Kingdom  as  an  intending  Student  in  January   2010.    He
      subsequently applied for leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student
      Migrant.  That application was refused.  He appealed.  That appeal was
      dismissed under the Rules but allowed in respect of  Article  8  ECHR.
      As a result the respondent granted the appellant  discretionary  leave
      to enable him to complete his studies until 20 August 2013.  Prior  to
      that date he applied for further leave but  that  was  refused  on  25
      September 2013 because the respondent was not satisfied the  appellant
      satisfied the applicable Immigration Rules.   The  appellant  appealed
      that decision and his appeal  came  before  Judge  of  the  First-Tier
      Tribunal Keane sitting at Taylor House in March 2014.  An oral hearing
      was held.  The appellant attended and each party was represented.   In
      a decision dated 8 April  2014  the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal  on
      immigration and Art 8 grounds.

   2. The appellant then sought leave to appeal.   In  summary  the  grounds
      allege error in the judge failing to consider the High Court  judgment
      in Zhang and a change in Home Office  policy  enabling  applicants  to
      switch into the status of a Points Based System Dependent.   Error  is
      also alleged by failing  to  take  proper  account  of  Chikwamba  and
      further that the judge  failed  to  consider  paragraph  319c  of  the
      Immigration Rules.

   3. The appellant's application came before another judge  of  the  First-
      Tier Tribunal who granted leave to appeal.   In  giving  reasons  that
      judge summarised the application by making  specific  reference  to  R
      (Zhang) v SSHD (Full Reference given).  Paragraph  3  of  the  reasons
      refers to an announced change in policy as a result of Zhang.

   4. Hence the matter now comes before me in the Upper Tribunal.

   5. In his submission to me Mr Samuel summarised the basis of his argument
      as being that the judge had not dealt properly  with  the  content  of
      paragraph 319c of the Rules.  At the time of service of  the  original
      decision the respondent also  served  a  Section  120  Notice  and  in
      response (by way of the original grounds of appeal) the appellant  had
      given  notice  of  circumstances  that  should  have  given  rise   to
      consideration of paragraph 319c.  That paragraph was also mentioned in
      the skeleton argument placed before Judge Keane.  In the circumstances
      the judge was obliged to consider it and Mr Samuel submitted it was an
      error of law to fail to give that aspect consideration.

   6. At this stage it must be noted that with  due  respect  to  the  judge
      granting leave reference has been given to the wrong  case  of  Zhang.
      The correct case is R (On the application of Shuai Zhang) v  Secretary
      of State for the Home Department [2013] EWHC 891.  It is a  result  of
      this case that as from 1 October 2014 paragraph 319c  was  added.   It
      has to be said that the original grounds seeking leave were  unhelpful
      in this respect.

   7. Mr Deller initially sought to support the First-Tier decision  by  way
      of a submission.  However a discussion then took place focusing on the
      fairly straightforward argument put forward by Mr Samuel which focused
      on the omission from the determination of any mention of the correctly
      cited case of Zhang and the effect of paragraph 319c of the Rules.

   8. During the course of this discussion it was emphasised that by  reason
      of the immigration position of the appellants wife and her ability  in
      August of this year to apply  for  further  leave  to  remain  it  was
      possible for the appellant to seek leave as her dependent.

   9. At this stage Mr Deller  very  helpfully  conceded  that  the  limited
      aspect of a failure to deal with something mentioned in the grounds of
      appeal and the skeleton argument there was an error of law material to
      the decision contained within Judge Keane's determination.

  10. I indicated my agreement and for the reasons expressed by Mr Deller  I
      concluded that there was a material error of law and fell  for  me  to
      set aside Judge Keane's decision.

  11. Following a discussion with the two representatives it was clear  that
      the correct step now was to remit the  case  back  to  the  First-Tier
      Tribunal although it is likely that by the time the case comes  to  be
      reheard evens will have moved forward and the situation  may  well  be
      purely  academic.   I  consider  that  this  case  falls  within   the
      provisions of the practice directions issued by the  Senior  President
      so far as remittal to the First-Tier is concerned.

  12. I would direct that there be no listing  of  this  appeal  before  the
      First-Tier Tribunal until after 30 October 2014.




Signed                                  Date  22/7/14


Upper Tribunal Judge Poole


