
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39150/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 14 May 2014                                  |On 15 July 2014            |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                 said nawab
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     The appellant not present or represented
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwncyz, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Said Nawab, was born on 15 January 1991 and  is  a  male
    citizen of Pakistan.  The appellant had appealed against  the  decision
    of the respondent dated 25 September 2013 to refuse him  further  leave
    to remain.  First-tier Tribunal (Judge N P Dickson) in a  determination
    promulgated on 14 February 2014, dismissed the appeal.   The  appellant
    now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Judge Grant-Hutchison, granting permission on 6 March 2014, wrote:

         It is submitted amongst other grounds that it is arguable the judge
         erred in law by  permitting  a  procedural  or  other  irregularity
         capable of making a material  difference  to  the  outcome  of  the
         fairness of the proceedings when the appellant was self-represented
         and was not offered the services of an interpreter.  The  appellant
         stated in  his  grounds  for  permission  to  appeal  that  he  had
         difficulty keeping up with the manner in which the  questions  were
         posed to him in examination, he was under pressure and not been  to
         a hearing before.  The judge referred to  the  appellant's  English
         ability not being adequate at one stage of the hearing and comments
         at paragraph 15 of his determination  that  'questions  had  to  be
         repeated on a number of  occasions  and  there  were  a  number  of
         misunderstandings which were subsequently addressed' when  arguably
         they may not have been.

 3. At the appeal hearing on 14 May  2014,  Mr  Diwncyz  appeared  for  the
    respondent.  The appellant was not present nor was he  represented.   I
    am satisfied that the notice of hearing sent to the  appellant  at  his
    last known address in Dewsbury by first class post on 8 April 2014  has
    reached him; there was nothing on the file to indicate that Royal  Mail
    had been unable to deliver the notice.  The appellant has not given any
    or any adequate reason or excuse for  failing  to  attend  and  in  the
    circumstances I proceeded with the hearing in his absence.

 4. There are three grounds of appeal.  The first asserts  that  the  judge
    failed to  give  adequate  reasons  for  his  material  findings.   The
    appellant had applied for further leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General)
    Student and he had not obtained a  CAS  nor  did  he  have  an  English
    language certificate as required by the Immigration Rules.   The  judge
    noted [18] that:

         the appellant's appeal must fail as he has failed to  produce  even
         now a CAS - it is not a case where the appellant  should  be  given
         additional  time  as  his  college  has  ceased  business  as  this
         appellant admitted that his difficulties in providing  a  CAS  were
         solely due to his failure to provide an English language test.

    As a consequence, the appellant was  unable  to  obtain  the  necessary
    points to satisfy the requirement of the Immigration Rules.

 5. The grounds assert that the judge failed "to give any adequate  reasons
    for why he has refused to accept an offer  letter  [from  London  Essex
    College]."  The grounds assert that "the  offer  [letter]  from  London
    Essex College is a document akin to  a  CAS  and  ought  to  have  been
    accepted both by the respondent and by the  Immigration  Judge."   With
    respect, that  argument  is  nonsense.   The  contents  of  a  CAS  are
    prescribed in considerable detail in the Immigration Rules;  there  was
    no obligation whatever on the judge or upon the  respondent  to  accept
    and treat as  a  CAS  a  document  which  did  not  comply  with  those
    requirements.

 6. As regards the English language requirement, the judge  noted  at  [17]
    that, at the date of the hearing, the appellant was still awaiting  his
    TOEIC test  results  in  English.   Also  the  judge  did  express  his
    reservations regarding the appellant's ability to speak English (I note
    that he had not requested an interpreter for the hearing).   The  judge
    at [18] makes it entirely clear that it was the appellant's failure  to
    provide a CAS which led to the refusal of his application  and  to  the
    dismissal of his appeal.  I find that there was no evidence at all that
    any procedural impropriety occurred; the  judge  seems  to  have  taken
    trouble to explain the proceedings to the unrepresented  appellant  and
    to give him the opportunity to answer questions  in  cross-examination.
    However, even assuming the problems of comprehension did  arise  during
    the cross-examination, it is  impossible,  in  the  absence  of  a  CAS
    document, to see how the outcome of the  appeal  might  have  been  any
    different had the appellant been assisted by an interpreter; there  was
    nothing the appellant could have said in oral evidence which might have
    put right his failure to provide a CAS.

 7. In the circumstances, I find that the Tribunal has  not  erred  in  law
    such that its determination falls to  be  set  aside.   The  appeal  is
    dismissed.

DECISION

 8. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 14 June 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

