
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39523/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          | Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                   |
|On 1 July 2015                                | On 14 August 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

                        ms rupalben nikeshkumar patel
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Richards (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant's appeal against decisions to refuse to  vary  her  leave
    and to remove her was allowed by  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in  a
    decision promulgated on 23 December 2014.  That decision was set aside,
    as containing material errors of  law,  in  a  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal promulgated on 15 May 2015.  In directions made  on  the  same
    day, the appellant or her solicitors were required to provide a witness
    statement explaining the appellant's absence from the hearing at  Field
    House on 8 May 2015.

2.   The resumed hearing, at  which  the  decision  would  be  re-made,  was
    listed for 1 July 2015.  There was no appearance by the  appellant  and
    her Counsel, Mr Richards, said that attempts to locate her on  the  day
    had been unsuccessful.  No further evidence from the appellant had been
    made available and so her case was advanced in reliance upon the bundle
    provided to the First-tier Tribunal on 2  October  2014.   That  bundle
    contained a witness statement.

3.   Mr Richards said that, so far as the requirements  of  the  rules  were
    concerned, he had no further instructions and relied  on  the  evidence
    contained in the bundle.  It was accepted that the appellant was unable
    to show a valid CAS.  Shortly after the adverse decisions, she received
    a B2 certificate, this being  an  essential  requirement  but  not  one
    capable of determining the application for leave in her favour.  So far
    as the appellant's case on fairness was concerned, on which the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge had made findings, this was pursued  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal but he had no further submissions to make on this  point.   So
    far as Article 8 was concerned, Mr  Richards  had  no  instructions  to
    withdraw this part of the case.   It  was  clear  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge had not gone into details and it was accepted  that  the
    appellant's witness statement contained  no  particularised  Article  8
    case.  Again, no further evidence was available.

4.   Mr Duffy said that there was little more to  be  said.   The  appellant
    did not meet the requirements of the rules and her  fairness  case  had
    already been dealt with at the earlier  Upper  Tribunal  hearing.   The
    Secretary of State relied on guidance  given  in  Marghia  [2014]  UKUT
    00366.  There was no procedural irregularity in this case  and  nothing
    to show any substantive unfairness in the decisions made.

5.   So far as Article 8 was concerned, the Secretary  of  State  relied  on
    the decision of the Supreme Court in Patel [2013] UKSC 72 and  guidance
    given by the Upper Tribunal in Nasim &  Others  [2014]  UKUT  25.   The
    appellant was someone who had been present in the United Kingdom for  a
    relatively short time as a student.  There  was  nothing  to  show  any
    particular ties and so she might struggle to show that  Article  8  was
    engaged.  She fell far short of showing that the  requirements  of  the
    private life Immigration Rules  were  met  and  it  appeared  from  the
    limited evidence that nothing else had been advanced.

6.   Mr Richards had nothing to add to his earlier submissions.

Findings and Conclusions

7.   In this appeal, the burden lies with the appellant to prove  the  facts
    and matters she relies upon and the standard of  proof  is  that  of  a
    balance of probabilities.  The appellant's case in the remaking of  the
    decision has been entirely borne  by  the  evidence  contained  in  the
    bundle her solicitors provided in October 2014, in  readiness  for  the
    First-tier Tribunal hearing.

8.   The background and the appellant's immigration history  appear  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and in the  decision  of  the
    Upper Tribunal promulgated in May this  year.   There  is  no  need  to
    rehearse the facts.

9.   As Mr Richards accepted, the appellant has been unable to show a  valid
    CAS, and so has been unable to mount any substantive challenge  to  the
    Secretary of State's finding that the lack of such a document was fatal
    to her application for further leave.  Shortly  after  her  application
    was refused, she came into possession  of  a  certificate  showing  her
    abilities in the English language but this  was  insufficient  to  show
    that the requirements of the rules were met.

10.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that there was  unfairness  on  the
    part of the Secretary of State  in  deciding  the  application  in  the
    absence of a CAS certificate.  In concluding that this amounted  to  an
    error of law, I found that  there  was  no  procedural  or  substantive
    unfairness and that the Secretary of State was entitled to  refuse  the
    application for leave precisely because the appellant had no valid CAS.
     Overall, the decision making process in this case contained no unusual
    or irregular features at all.  The appellant applied for further  leave
    but was unable to show that the requirements of the rules were met  and
    the Secretary of State made an adverse decision.  The appellant had  no
    prospects of success in her application.

11.  So far as Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention  is  concerned,  the
    witness statement the appellant made on an uncertain date, contained in
    the bundle provided by her solicitors  in  October  2014,  advanced  no
    detailed case at all.  Although  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  took
    Article 8 into account, the decision  contained  no  findings  on  this
    aspect.

12.  As Mr Duffy submitted, the appellant is a person  who  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom relatively recently  in  October  2009,  as  a  student.
    There is nothing in her witness statement to suggest that she  has  any
    substantial ties to the United Kingdom and no detail at all  about  her
    remaining ties to  India.   She  cannot  show  that  the  private  life
    requirements of the rules, contained in paragraph 276ADE have been met.
     There is nothing to show that she has any individual interests covered
    by Article 8  which  give  rise  to  a  strong  claim  that  compelling
    circumstances may exist to justify the grant of leave outside the rules
    (see paragraph 56 of the judgment in SS (Congo) and Others [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 387).  There  are  no  compelling  circumstances  not  sufficiently
    recognised under the rules and it is enough in this case simply to  say
    so (see paragraph 33 of the  judgment  in  Sunassee  [2015]  EWHC  1604
    (Admin)).  Even if the evidence did justify an assessment  outside  the
    rules, the appellant would not succeed in the light of  guidance  given
    by the Supreme Court in Patel [2013] UKSC 72 and by the Upper  Tribunal
    in Nasim and others [2014] UKUT 25.  The factors  set  out  in  section
    117B of the 2002 Act  emphasise  the  public  interest  in  maintaining
    effective  immigration  controls  and  reveal  the  weakness   of   the
    appellant's Article 8  case,  as  she  has  no  qualifying  partner  or
    qualifying child and her status has been precarious throughout her time
    here.

13.  The appellant has not shown that the decisions to refuse  to  vary  her
    leave and to remove her by way of directions under Section  47  of  the
    Immigration, Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2006 are  unlawful
    and her appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

14.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  has  been  set  aside  and  is
    remade as follows: appeal dismissed.

ANONYMITY

15.  There has been no application for  anonymity  at  any  stage  in  these
    proceedings and I make no direction on this occasion.





Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal has been dismissed, I make no fee award.





Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

