
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/39030/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|On 6 December 2016                            |On 8 December 2016           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN
                        & UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            STEVEN RICHARD FORMAN
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr K McGuire, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co,
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as described above.  However, as we  are  now  remaking
    the determination of the FtT, which has been set aside, and as this was
    the terminology conveniently adopted by both representatives in written
    and oral submissions, the rest of this determination refers to  parties
    as they were in the FtT.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of the USA, born on 4 August 1946.

 3. On 25 September 2014 the respondent made  a  decision  which  sets  out
    paragraph 276ADE of the immigration rules and explains as follows:

      On 22 July 2014 you applied for leave to remain in the UK ...

      ... your application has been refused.

      The family life you claim to  have  with  your  godchildren  does  not
      constitute "family life" as set out in appendix FM of the  immigration
      rules. The claim has therefore been assessed solely on  the  basis  of
      your private life ...

      Decision under private life

      ... You are a national of the  USA  and  you  entered  the  UK  on  13
      September 2007. You have therefore lived in UK for 6 years and not ...
      for at least 20 years  ...  and  fail  to  meet  the  requirements  of
      paragraph 276ADE (1) (iii) ...

      In order to meet the requirements of paragraph 276  ADE  (1)  (vi)  an
      applicant must show that they are aged 18 and  above  and  that  there
      would be very significant obstacles  to  their  integration  into  the
      country to which they would have to go ... It  is  not  accepted  that
      there would be very significant obstacles to your integration  in  the
      USA ... because you state in your application that  you  have  family,
      social and financial ties in your home country ...

      Decision on exceptional circumstances

      It has been considered whether your application raises any exceptional
      circumstances which, consistent with the right to respect for  private
      and family life contained in article 8  of  the  ECHR,  might  warrant
      consideration ... of a grant of leave to remain in the UK outside  the
      requirements of the rules. It has been decided that it does not.

      ... you have raised the fact that you are unable to switch to the tier
      2 (skilled migrant) point based system route because you are unable to
      meet the "appropriate salary" requirements ... This is  not  a  reason
      ... sufficiently compelling or compassionate enough to reach the  high
      threshold required for a grant of leave outside the rules.

      You have  provided  evidence  ...  of  your  various  accolades  as  a
      professional musician and academic achievements as a  PhD  student  of
      the Royal Conservatoire of Scotland. You submitted a  sizeable  number
      of supporting letters from various academics and  music  professionals
      ... While it is acknowledged that you currently enjoy living,  working
      and studying in the UK as a highly skilled migrant, this is  not  give
      you the right to do so on an exceptional basis. It is clear  that  you
      have substantial personal and professional ties in  the  USA  and  own
      property and assets there.

      The Secretary of State is satisfied that  you  have  provided  ...  no
      compelling or compassionate reasons why you should be granted leave to
      remain outside the rules and is therefore not  prepared  exercise  her
      discretion in your favour ...

 4. On 1 October 2014 the appellant gave notice of appeal to  the  FtT,  on
    these grounds:

   i) The decision is not in accordance with the immigration rules.

  ii) The decision is otherwise not in accordance with the law.

 iii) The decision beaches the appellant's rights to private life (article 8
      ECHR).

 5. The grounds are general and unenlightening.  The  appellant  has  since
    abandoned (i) and (ii), and now advances his case on the basis of (iii)
    only.

 6. Designated FtT  Judge  MacDonald  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  by
    decision promulgated on 5 January 2015.

 7. The SSHD appealed to the Upper Tribunal. In a decision  promulgated  on
    19 June 2015 (which should be read as if incorporated  herein)  the  UT
    (the President, the Hon Mr Justice McCloskey, and  UT  Judge  Macleman)
    found material errors of law in the determination of the FtT,  and  set
    it aside.  Parties were directed to  make  submissions  in  writing  on
    whether the decision should be remade within the UT; on  the  necessity
    for a further hearing; and on whether there would  be  any  application
    for further evidence to be adduced under rule 15 (2A).

 8. In a response dated and received on 3 July 2015 the appellant said that
    the decision should  be  remade  in  the  UT,  by  way  of  a  de  novo
    assessment, for which purpose there should be a  further  hearing,  and
    that the appellant did not wish the UT to consider  any  evidence  that
    was not before the FtT and hence made  no  application  under  rule  15
    (2A).

 9. In a response also dated 3 July 2015,  but  having  had  sight  of  the
    appellant's submissions of that date, the SSHD agreed that it would  be
    appropriate for a further hearing to take place before the UT, for oral
    submissions to be made. The SSHD also did not wish the UT  to  consider
    any evidence that was not before the FtT.

10. The UT issued a direction dated 31 August 2015 for the  redetermination
    of the appeal to be undertaken in the UT "on the first  available  date
    ... before an appropriately constituted panel".

11. There was there after  an  unfortunate  delay,  due  to  administrative
    oversight, until the case was listed to come before us  on  6  December
    2016.

12. The parties provided and exchanged further written submissions  on  the
    remaking of the decisions,  which,  as  expanded  upon  orally  at  the
    hearing, are summarised below.

13. We do not set out the principal private life provisions of  the  rules,
    paragraph 276ADE, because the appellant now accepts that he cannot meet
    those requirements, and the distance by which he fell short is shown in
    the  respondent's  decision  which  we  have  quoted;  but  that  is  a
    significant part of the backdrop.

14. Part 5 A of the 2002 Act, introduced by section 19 of  the  Immigration
    Act 2014 and in      force since 25 July  2014,  establishes  a  regime
    under  the  heading  "Article  8   of   the   ECHR:   Public   Interest
    Considerations". Section 117A provides:


     (1)   This Part applies where a  court  or  tribunal  is  required  to
     determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-
          (a) breaches a person's right to respect for  private  and  family
          life under Article 8, and
                    (b) as a result would be unlawful  under  section  6  of
the Human Rights Act 1998.


       (2) In  considering  the  public  interest  question,  the  court  or
       tribunal must (in particular) have regard-
          (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed  in  section  117B,
          and
          (b) in cases concerning the deportation of foreign  criminals,  to
          the considerations listed in section 117C.


       (3) In subsection (2),  "the  public  interest  question"  means  the
       question of whether an interference with a person's right to  respect
       for private and family life is justified under Article 8(2).


      Section 117B,  embraced  by  the  cross  heading  "Article  8:  Public
      Interest Considerations Applicable in All Cases", provides:


      (1) The maintenance of  effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the
public interest.

     (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in  the  interests
     of the economic well-being of the United  Kingdom,  that  persons  who
     seek to enter or remain in  the  United  Kingdom  are  able  to  speak
     English, because persons who can speak English-
        (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
        (b) are better able to integrate into society.

     (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in  the  interests
     of the economic well-being of the United  Kingdom,  that  persons  who
     seek to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are  financially
     independent, because such persons-
        (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
        (b) are better able to integrate into society.

     (4) Little weight should be given to-
        (a) a private life, or
        (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,
     that is established by a person at a time when the person  is  in  the
     United Kingdom unlawfully.

     (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established  by  a
     person at a time when the person's immigration status is precarious.
        ...

15. Section 117B (6), relating  to  cases  of  parental  relationship,  and
    section 117C, relating to cases involving  foreign  criminals,  do  not
    apply.

16. The submissions of Mr Maguire derive also from  the  Human  Rights  Act
    1998. By virtue of section 1 and Schedule  1,  one  of  the  Convention
    rights protected under domestic law is article 8.  By section 6 (1):

      It is unlawful for a public  authority  to  act  in  a  way  which  is
      incompatible with a Convention right.





17. Both parties have approached this case throughout on the basis that  in
    terms of section 117B (5) the appellant's private life in  the  UK  was
    established at a time when his immigration status, although lawful, was
    precarious. That assumption is in line with AM Malawi [2015] UKUT  260,
    with Deelah [2015] UKUT 515 and with Rhuppiah v SSHD  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    803, where the Court said:
     1. For each individual grant to the appellant of  leave  to  enter  or
        remain, the period of the grant was  specifically  limited  to  the
        comparatively short and clearly delimited period required  for  the
        completion of a course of study on each occasion. When  each  grant
        of leave was made,  the  appellant  specifically  stated  that  her
        intention was to leave at the end of her period of  study.  On  the
        occasion of her application in each case, she may have had  a  hope
        that her leave might be extended when it came  to  an  end  if  she
        could find another study course, but she had no guarantee that  she
        would be able to do so and no guarantee that the  same  Immigration
        Rules would be in place when she made her further application.  The
        hope, if she had one, of possibly eventually being in a position to
        apply for ILR was still more  remote  and  tenuous.  The  position,
        therefore, in respect of each application for leave to enter or for
        an extension of her leave to remain was that the  appellant  had  a
        stated intention to leave the UK at the end  of  the  comparatively
        short period of leave requested, and only a speculative  hope  that
        she might be permitted to stay for longer at that point.
     1. On any proper interpretation  of  section  117B  (5)  this  was  an
        immigration status which was precarious, and the FTT was correct so
        to hold. This view also accords with that of McCloskey J sitting in
        the Upper Tribunal in Deelah and  others  (section  117B  -  ambit)
        [2015] UKUT 00515 (IAC) at para. [33].

18. We note that at paragraph 44 in Rhuppiah  the  Court  expressed  doubts
    about whether any grant of leave short of indefinite  leave  to  remain
    qualifies as "precarious" for purposes of section  117B  (5),  but  the
    authorities are clear for present purposes.

19. Mr Maguire in oral submissions confirmed that  we  were  to  treat  the
    appellant's status as precarious for purposes of section 117B (5).   He
    said that the appellant might pose an argument that his  status  should
    be classified as finite but not precarious, but that would have  to  be
    developed, if necessary, at a higher level.

20. That point was the first of the three grounds of  appeal  in  Rhuppiah.
    The third ground went to section 117B (2) (proficiency in English)  and
    section 117B (3) (financial independence).  The appellant does not  now
    contend that these are more than neutral factors in this case, in  line
    with the UT's earlier findings.

21. The second ground of appeal in Rhuppiah is pertinent for our  purposes,
    so we set out in full its resolution by Sales LJ, with whom  the  other
    two members of the Court concurred:
      Ground (ii): the interaction of section 117A (2) and section 117B (5)
   1. It is common ground that the starting point for consideration  of  the
      proper construction of Part 5A of the 2002 Act is that sections  117A-
      117D, taken  together,  are  intended  to  provide  for  a  structured
      approach to the application of Article 8 which produces in all cases a
      final result which is  compatible  with,  and  not  in  violation  of,
      Article 8. In  that  regard,  both  sides  affirmed  the  approach  to
      interpretation of Part 5A to  ensure  compliance  with  Article  8  as
      explained by this court in NA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for  the
      Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 662, in particular at [26] and [31].
   1. This is an important point when considering the interaction of section
      117A (2) and sections 117B and 117C. It is  possible  to  conceive  of
      cases falling within section 117B (4) (unlawful presence in the UK) or
      section 117B (5) (precarious immigration status in the  UK)  in  which
      private or family life (as appropriate) of an especially  strong  kind
      has been established in the  host  country  such  that  it  should  be
      accorded great weight for the purpose of  analysis  under  Article  8:
      Jeunesse v Netherlands  is  a  prime  example.  Mr  Southey  correctly
      submitted that the provisions in Part 5A had to be construed in such a
      way as to accommodate this sort of case. Mr Byass accepted  that  this
      is so. However, Mr Southey and Mr Byass  proposed  different  ways  to
      interpret the statute to ensure that this objective is satisfied.
   1. Mr Southey submitted that in section 117A(2) the use of  the  formula,
      "the court or tribunal must ... have regard [to]"  the  considerations
      listed in section 117B or in section 117C, as  the  case  may  be,  in
      considering the public  interest  question  -  that  is  to  say,  the
      question whether an interference with a person's right to respect  for
      private and family life is justified under Article 8(2):  see  section
      117A(3) - means that the court or tribunal is not bound in  all  cases
      to follow what Parliament says in those provisions. He submitted  that
      this was the effect of the use of  this  formula  in  other  statutory
      contexts, such as where a statute provides that a decision-maker  must
      have regard to guidance or a code of practice: see R  (London  Oratory
      School) v The Schools Adjudicator [2015] EWHC 1155 (Admin); [2015] ELR
      335, in particular at [58].
   1. In that case Cobb J held that the Schools Adjudicator had a discretion
      whether to follow  certain  guidance  issued  by  the  relevant  Roman
      Catholic Diocese, to which he was required to have regard;  had  acted
      correctly to the extent that he looked to see if there were  good  and
      proper reasons for declining to act in accordance with that  guidance;
      but had applied too high a threshold when he  had  decided  he  should
      follow the guidance unless there was "a compelling reason" not  to  do
      so: see [58] and  [62]-[64].  At  para.  [64],  Cobb  J  said  that  a
      "compelling reason" test would be apposite in relation  to  a  context
      requiring regard to be had to statutory guidance, as in R  (Munjaz)  v
      Mersey Care NHS Trust [2005] UKHL 58; [2006] 2 AC 148.  In  Munjaz  it
      was said that there should be "cogent reasons" or "cogent reasons  ...
      spelled out clearly, logically and convincingly" to depart  from  such
      guidance: see at [20] and [68]-[69] per Lord Bingham  and  Lord  Hope,
      respectively.
   1. In my judgment, Mr Southey's general  submission  goes  too  far.  One
      needs to ask with clarity and precision, to what does section 117A (2)
      require regard to be had? Section 117A (2) does not  have  the  effect
      that, for example, a court or tribunal has a discretion  to  say  that
      the maintenance of effective immigration control is not in the  public
      interest, in direct contradiction of the statement of public policy by
      Parliament in section 117B (1). Where Parliament has  itself  declared
      that something is in the public interest - see sections 117B (1),  (2)
      and (3) and section 117C (1) - that is definitive as to that aspect of
      the public interest. But it should be noted that having regard to such
      considerations does not mandate any particular outcome in an Article 8
      balancing  exercise:  a  court  or  tribunal   has   to   take   these
      considerations into account and give them considerable weight,  as  is
      appropriate  for  a  definitive  statement  by  Parliament   about   a
      particular aspect of the public interest, but they  are  in  principle
      capable of being outweighed by other relevant considerations which may
      make it disproportionate under Article  8  for  an  individual  to  be
      removed from the UK.
   1. Another type of consideration identified in Part 5A  to  which  regard
      must be had under section 117A (2) is the statement  in  section  117C
      (6) that "the public interest requires deportation  unless  there  are
      very compelling circumstances,  over  and  above  those  described  in
      Exceptions 1 and 2" (my emphasis). There is a similar  requirement  in
      section 117C (3), on its proper  construction:  see  NA  (Pakistan)  v
      Secretary of State for the Home  Department  at  [23]-[27].  In  these
      provisions, Parliament has actually specified what the outcome  should
      be of a structured consideration of Article 8 in relation  to  foreign
      criminals as set out in section 117C, namely that under the conditions
      identified there the public interest requires deportation.  The  "very
      compelling circumstances" test in section 117C (3) and (6) provides  a
      safety valve, with an appropriately high threshold of application, for
      those exceptional cases  involving  foreign  criminals  in  which  the
      private and family life considerations are so strong that it would  be
      disproportionate and in violation of Article 8  to  remove  them.  If,
      after working through the decision-making framework in section 117C, a
      court or tribunal concludes that it is a case in  which  section  117C
      (3) or (6) says that the public interest "requires" deportation, it is
      not open to the court or tribunal to deny this and to  hold  that  the
      public interest does not require deportation.
   1. A similar point arises in relation to section  117B  (6).  Where  this
      subsection applies, Parliament has stated that  "the  public  interest
      does not require the person's removal" (my emphasis). This  court  has
      held that by this provision Parliament has again  specified  what  the
      outcome  should  be  (i.e.  non-removal):  see  R  (MA  (Pakistan))  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 705,  [17]-
      [20]. It would not be open to  a  court  or  tribunal  to  hold  that,
      contrary to the statement in this subsection, the public interest does
      require removal.
   1. Finally, in a third  and  distinct  category  are  the  considerations
      identified in section 117B (4)  and  (5),  which  state  that  "little
      weight should  be  given  to"  private  and  family  life  in  certain
      circumstances. These are considerations  which  do  not  amount  to  a
      definitive statement of the public interest, unlike section 117B  (1),
      (2) and (3),  and  which  do  not  involve  a  substantive  conclusion
      regarding what the public interest requires when applying  Article  8,
      unlike section 117B (6) and section 117C (3) and (6).
   1. Reading section  117A(2)(a)  in  conjunction  with  section  117B  (5)
      produces this: "In considering the public interest question, the court
      or tribunal must have regard to the consideration that  little  weight
      should be given to a private life established by a person  at  a  time
      when the  person's  immigration  status  is  precarious".  That  is  a
      normative statement which is less definitive than those given  by  the
      other sub-sections in section 117B and section 117C. Although a  court
      or tribunal should have regard to the consideration that little weight
      should be given to private life established in such circumstances,  it
      is possible  without  violence  to  the  language  to  say  that  such
      generalised normative guidance may be  overridden  in  an  exceptional
      case by particularly strong features of the private life in  question,
      where it is not appropriate in Article 8 terms to attach  only  little
      weight to private life. That is to say,  for  a  case  falling  within
      section 117B (5)  little  weight  should  be  given  to  private  life
      established in the circumstances specified, but that approach  may  be
      overridden where the private  life  in  question  has  a  special  and
      compelling character. Such an  interpretation  is  also  necessary  to
      prevent section 117B (5) being applied in a manner which would produce
      results in some cases which would be incompatible with Article 8, i.e.
      is necessary to give proper effect to Parliament's intention  in  Part
      5A; and a similar interpretation of section 117B (4) is required,  for
      same reasons. (Mr  Byass'  own  suggestion,  that  the  words  "Little
      weight" in sub-sections 117B (4) and (5) should be read so as to  mean
      "great weight" should be attached to private  or  family  life  in  an
      appropriate case seemed to me to be linguistically untenable, although
      directed to the same outcome of achieving compatibility  with  Article
      8).
   1. In my view, reading section 117A (2) and section 117B (5) together  in
      this way, as is appropriate, means that considerable weight should  be
      given to Parliament's statement in  section  117B  (5)  regarding  the
      approach which should normally be adopted. In  order  to  identify  an
      exceptional case in which a departure  from  that  approach  would  be
      justified, compelling reasons would have to be shown why  it  was  not
      appropriate. That is a significantly higher threshold than  was  urged
      upon us by Mr Southey by reference to the London Oratory School  case.
      There is a considerable difference between a statement  by  Parliament
      itself as to what the  usual  approach  should  be  and  the  Diocesan
      guidance at issue in that case. The threshold to displace the ordinary
      rule in section 117B (5) in the present context cannot  be  less  than
      that to justify a decision not to follow statutory guidance as in  the
      Munjaz  case.  Identification  of  the  test  as  one  of   compelling
      circumstances differentiates the position in an appropriate  way  from
      that applicable in relation to foreign criminals, in relation to which
      a test of "very compelling circumstances" applies.
   1. I turn from this discussion of the proper interpretation  of  sections
      117A (2) and 117B (5) to consider whether the  FTT  erred  in  law  in
      adopting the approach it did at paras. [60] and [63] of its  decision,
      set out above, in saying that it was required  by  statute  to  attach
      little weight to the  appellant's  private  life  established  in  the
      period when she was the beneficiary of a series of grants of leave  to
      enter or remain as a student, and hence had a  precarious  immigration
      status for the purposes of section 117B (5). In my judgment,  the  FTT
      did not err in its approach.
   1. Here it is important to remember that before the FTT  the  appellant's
      then  representative  (not   Mr   Southey)   did   not   propose   the
      interpretation of sections 117A (2) and 117B (5) urged by  Mr  Southey
      on the appeal and which to a  material  degree  I  have  found  to  be
      correct, as explained above. Before the FTT,  the  appellant  did  not
      contend that her case  was  one  involving  special  circumstances  to
      justify a departure from the approach set out  in  section  117B  (5).
      Rather, her argument was that her immigration status at  the  relevant
      time was not "precarious", which argument the FTT correctly dismissed.
      In the absence of any argument that  if  the  appellant's  immigration
      status was precarious, there were nonetheless special reasons why  the
      guidance in section 117B (5) should be treated as overridden, the  FTT
      was left with a situation in which section 117B (5) did indeed require
      it to give little weight to the private life factors relied on by  the
      appellant, as it said. The FTT cannot be  criticised  for  failing  to
      identify for itself and address the completely different argument  now
      advanced by the appellant for the first time on this appeal.
   1. I think it is appropriate to say, however, that even if  the  FTT  had
      committed an error of law by omitting to consider whether  there  were
      compelling circumstances to warrant a departure from the approach  set
      out in section 117B (5), in  my  view  that  would  not  have  been  a
      material error of law. I consider that on the facts of this case,  set
      out very clearly by the FTT, there was only  one  possible  answer  to
      that question, i.e. that there were no such  compelling  circumstances
      in this case.

22. Parties agreed that there is no reported Scottish case in point.

23. Mr Matthews submitted as follows.  Rhuppiah, being  the  only  reported
    authority in an area of UK jurisdiction, should be followed.  It was an
    example of much longer residence, reliance by a third  party  upon  the
    appellant, charitable working and financial self-sufficiency, who might
    well have succeeded in her application but for using  the  wrong  form.
    Those facts were  different  but  in  many  ways  no  weaker  than  the
    appellant's, yet the members of the Court agreed  there  was  only  one
    possible answer, and no  compelling  circumstances.    Tier  2  of  the
    points-based system provides  detailed  rules  by  which  migrants  may
    legitimately undertake employment in  the  UK  labour  market.  If  the
    appellant's employers thought his work as  valuable  as  claimed,  they
    would be prepared to  pay  the  amount  which  the  migration  advisory
    committee fixed as a reasonable rate for the job. It  was  not  in  the
    public interest that migrants and employers avoid the  requirements  of
    the points-based system by seeking leave  to  remain  on  private  life
    grounds. The fact that tier 2 had not been adopted as the chosen  route
    carried weight in the assessment of proportionality. It undermined  the
    claimed interference with private life, when a significant aspect of it
    was the employment with the Royal Conservatoire  of  Scotland  and  the
    state provided  an  adequate  route  from  which  the  appellant  could
    benefit, but for his employers' unwillingness to pay.  Under  reference
    to Patel and others v SSHD [2013] UKSC  72  and  to  Nasim  and  others
    [2014] UKUT 25, it was doubtful whether the appellant's employment even
    fell within the scope of article 8 protection. At best  his  employment
    was at the outer reaches of the scope of protected  private  life.  The
    appellant conceded that there were no very significant obstacles to re-
    establishment of his life in the USA. There was no good reason  to  say
    that his private life  would  be  interfered  with  in  a  sufficiently
    serious manner to engage article 8. There was no reason  why  he  could
    not continue his important work on rhythm theory or why that might  not
    still be used in teaching in Scotland, or why his presence in  Scotland
    was integral to completion and publication of his proposed textbook  on
    the subject. The appellant might be a loss  from  the  music  scene  in
    Scotland but that scene existed before his arrival and  would  continue
    without him.  He relied on his relationship with a close friend and her
    two children to whom he is godparent, but  that  was  not  family  life
    within the legal meaning of the term. It did properly fall  within  the
    scope  of  private  life  but  there  was  nothing  to  bring  about  a
    disproportionate result in terms of article 8.  There  was  nothing  to
    show that the appellant's private life had such special and  compelling
    character as to outweigh the public interest in the observance  of  the
    rules.

24. Mr Maguire submitted that the principle that little  weight  should  be
    given to  a  private  life  established  at  a  time  when  a  person's
    immigration status is precarious, set out in section 117B (5), was  not
    reflected in and did not form part of the jurisprudence of the European
    Court of Human Rights. There might be cases where it was  inappropriate
    to apply that principle. Section 117A binds the tribunal only to  "have
    regard" to the considerations listed in section 117B. It remained  open
    to conclude that the strength of a person's private life was such  that
    the principle did not apply. This was the conclusion reached, albeit by
    a somewhat different route, by Sales LJ in Rhuppiah  at  paragraph  53.
    The problem with that approach was that  "(a)  the  reference  to  'the
    private life in question [having] a special and  compelling  character'
    suggests that the private life should have  an  exceptional  character,
    when in fact the 'special and compelling character' may come  from  the
    length of the private life and the level of integration;  and  (b)  his
    Lordship's approach makes no concession for circumstances in which  the
    public  interest  in  removal  is  lessened  by  other  considerations"
    (written  submission,  paragraph  35).   The  appellant's  unique   and
    significant contribution to  the  community  in  general  lessened  the
    weight of the public interest in his  removal  and  would  justify  the
    tribunal disapplying the principle in section 117B (5).  To do so would
    be to do no more than to follow the approach of the Court of Appeal.

25. We found the written submissions somewhat ambiguous as to  whether  the
    appellant could succeed  consistently  with  Rhuppiah,  or  only  by  a
    different approach.  The position taken  is  at  some  points  that  we
    should go further than Rhuppiah in choosing to  disapply  section  117B
    (5), and at others that the comments by Sales LJ about "overriding  the
    generalized normative guidance therein"  are  sufficient  authority  to
    that effect.  In oral submissions Mr Maguire made it clear that  if  we
    thought we could not decide in the appellant's favour consistently with
    Rhuppiah, we were not asked to take a different view of the law.  While
    the appellant reserved his position as to challenging Rhuppiah  in  any
    further proceedings, his present contention was that he  could  succeed
    consistently with that case. The expression "little weight" in  section
    117B (5) must admit of some exceptions, otherwise it would do  violence
    to the principles of  article  8.  The  appellant's  private  life  was
    clearly entitled to significant weight, such that the  public  interest
    in  removal  was  lessened,  and  was  outweighed  by  features  of   a
    sufficiently special and compelling nature. We were referred us to  the
    positive comments of the FtT, such as  the  appellant's  "exceptionally
    strong compelling case to be allowed to remain  here",  (paragraph  62)
    and the "unjustifiably harsh consequences" of removal  (paragraph  65),
    as findings of mixed fact and law, which  had  not  been  found  to  be
    erroneous and which should form the foundation of our further decision.

26. Mr Maguire asked in the alternative  that  if  we  did  not  allow  the
    appeal, it should be remitted to the  FtT  for  rehearing  and  further
    analysis.

27. Mr Maguire also submitted that the SSHD should not be permitted at this
    stage to introduce new arguments. He said that the proposition that the
    appellant's employment did not fall within  the  limits  of  article  8
    protection, or did not pass "Razgar question  2",  had  not  previously
    been put.

28. Mr Matthews in response said that the  respondent's  arguments  on  the
    limited scope for protection  of  employment  through  article  8  were
    before the FtT, although not perhaps in exactly the same form.  In  any
    event, it was clear that the UT had already decided there should be  an
    entirely fresh resolution of the case, not restricted by  any  previous
    findings, which had been set  aside  in  their  entirety.  Parties  had
    agreed that the decision was to be remade  on  the  basis  of  evidence
    previously tendered and of submissions,  so  there  was  no  scope  for
    seeking a rehearing in FtT.

29. We now draw the threads together.

30. The earlier decision of the UT is plain.  The findings of the FtT  have
    been set aside.  We are not bound by anything said there.  This  is  an
    entirely fresh decision, although based on the same evidence.

31. There no scope for further hearing.

32. There is no dispute about the facts.  The appellant came to the UK as a
    student in 2007 and had lawful leave as such,  and  then  in  the  post
    study work category, until he made the  application  leading  to  these
    proceedings.  He did so on the explicit basis in  his  covering  letter
    that he could not move into the tier 2 category because  the  RCS  "did
    not have sufficient budget to offer a salary ... which would  earn  the
    requisite points.  The only option left is this ...".

33. The context of the appellant's achievements  in  his  professional  and
    academic careers and of the high personal regard in which he is held is
    clear.  His various accolades were acknowledged by  the  respondent  in
    her decision, and are again referred to at paragraphs 3 and  4  of  our
    error of law decision.

34. Mr Maguire stressed the comment at paragraph 6 of  that  decision,  "If
    this were a merits appeal, there could only be one outcome",  which  he
    said pointed the way to success; but that has to be  read  in  context.
    At paragraph 19, the decision observes that but for error of  law,  the
    judge  "would  have  been  obliged  to  find  unequivocally  that   the
    [appellant's] private life in the UK could not be  accorded  more  than
    slight weight."

35. Parties are not restricted to arguments made previously.  In any event,
    the extent to which the appellant's pursuit of employment  fell  within
    article 8 protection was in issue in terms of the application  made  to
    the respondent, in terms of the respondent's decision, and in the  UT's
    error of law decision, paragraph 11.

36. We do not find that the appellant's  employment,  academic  and  career
    interests are in principle excluded entirely from the list  of  factors
    in his favour; but they are part of the "fuzzy penumbra" of article  8.
    We do find that they are  not  capable  of  contributing  much  to  the
    eventual finding he seeks, that refusal of further leave to  remain  in
    the UK is a breach of his fundamental human right to  respect  for  his
    private life.

37. We are bound to have regard to the  considerations  listed  in  section
    117B.

38. It is common ground that the only such consideration of  importance  is
    section 117B (5).

39. We find in light of the case law cited above, both of the UT and of the
    Court of Appeal, that the  appellant's  private  life  in  the  UK  was
    established at a time when his immigration status was precarious.

40. We are bound to give that private life "little weight".

41. There is a little scope  for  latitude,  beyond  those  bald  words  of
    statute, as established in Rhuppiah at paragraph 34 and 35.  We  cannot
    broaden the lawful scope any further than that.   Its extent is put  in
    slightly different ways, all to similar  effect:  "particularly  strong
    features of the private life in question, where it is  not  appropriate
    in Article 8 terms to attach only little  weight";  "private  life  ...
    [of] a  special  and  compelling  character"  (paragraph  34);  or  "an
    exceptional case in which a departure from [the normal] approach  would
    be justified", based on "compelling reasons" (paragraph 35).

42. Every case of course turns ultimately on its unique  facts,  and  every
    appellant  may  say  that  his  case  is  exceptional.   However,   the
    respondent was justified in referring to Rhuppiah as a case where quite
    strong facts, if personal merit were the key,  came  nowhere  near  the
    target.  Probably there can be no definition of a qualifying case,  and
    one can be recognised only as and when it arises.

43. We consider the extent of the interference with private life  which  is
    caused by the decision under  appeal.   It  means  that  the  appellant
    cannot continue with his part-time work at the RCS, or other  part-time
    work, on the basis of the application which has been refused.  It means
    that he cannot approach his future on the basis of long term  residence
    in the UK, unless he is able to bring himself within the ambit  of  the
    rules.  There is  nothing  in  his  immigration  history  or  in  these
    proceedings which will count against him in any future application.  If
    he moves abroad, he may return as a visitor.  We think that is  likely,
    and it would provide for ample contact with his godchildren and friends
    (who may also visit him).  It may be  that  other  avenues  within  the
    rules are open to him.  There is no great interference.

44. The required labels have been applied in submissions to  the  facts  of
    this case, but in truth it is only a routine example of  the  operation
    of the rules; disappointing no doubt to  the  appellant  and  his  many
    supporters, but no more than that.  We find  nothing  in  terms  of  an
    article 8 right which might entitle  us  to  depart  from  the  "normal
    approach".

45. The appellant's undoubted personal merits,  even  outstanding  personal
    merits, do not entitle us to make a decision in his  favour.   They  do
    not constitute an exceptional or compelling circumstance  in  terms  of
    identifying a breach of his fundamental human rights, or  endowing  him
    with a right to remain in the UK, irrespective of compliance  with  the
    immigration rules.

46. Little weight being given to the  appellant's  private  life,  we  must
    remake the decision thus: the  appeal,  as  originally  brought  by  Dr
    Forman to the FtT, is dismissed.


            [pic]

            7 December 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
