
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39222/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 January 2015                           |On 26 January 2015            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                                dennis dadzie
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Oyediran of Chris Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This matter comes before me today following an 'error of  law'  hearing
    on 4 December 2014.  The Decision and Reasons in respect of the  'error
    of law' is appended to this Decision and should be read as part of  the
    current decision: see Appendix below.


2.   At the error of law hearing, having found an error of  law  in  respect
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's approach to issues  in  relation  to
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules and Article 8, there was also
    some discussion as to the possibility that the Appellant might have met
    the requirements for a permanent residence card in consequence of being
    a person who had retained the right of residence pursuant to Regulation
    10(5) of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006.
    Directions were given at the previous hearing indicating that  argument
    would be permitted on that issue over and above the matters in relation
    to the Rules and Article 8.


3.   Today the Appellant produces a number of supporting documents  relevant
    to the question of whether or not his mother was a worker at  the  date
    of her divorce from her ex-partner who is, or was, an  EEA  national  -
    the divorce having taken place in July 2009.  The  documents  take  the
    form of certified copies of payslips from that period together  with  a
    covering letter from the employer stating that the  Appellant's  mother
    had been employed from 1 June 2008.  The covering letter  is  dated  10
    December 2014.


4.   The documents submitted today are consistent with documents  previously
    submitted in support of the Appellant's application  and  contained  in
    the Respondent's bundle before the First-tier Tribunal.  The  documents
    previously submitted include P60s for the tax years ending 5 April 2012
    and 5 April 2013.  These documents do not exactly  correlate  with  the
    period over which the payslips now produced are  spread  but  they  are
    confirmation of the fact of employment with Mitie  Security.   Moreover
    the Appellant had previously submitted a  letter  from  Mitie  Security
    dated 29 April 2013 giving his mother's  employment  commencement  date
    consistently as 1 June 2008.


5.   I have also heard  oral  evidence  from  the  Appellant's  mother,  Mrs
    Francisca Appiah-Kyei who confirmed the truth of the statement that she
    had signed on 17 September  2014  as  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Additionally she answered questions both  from  Mr  Oyediran
    and Mr Whitwell in respect of her employment history.  I consider  that
    she gave her evidence in a manner that was both  internally  consistent
    and consistent with the supporting evidence.  It seemed to me that  she
    was careful when giving her answers to try and be as  accurate  as  her
    memory permitted.  I find her to be a credible witness and I accept  on
    the basis of her testimony and the supporting documents  that  she  has
    indeed been employed as claimed including  during  the  period  of  her
    divorce.


6.   I acknowledge Mr Whitwell's  reservations  concerning  the  absence  of
    other materials that might have further supported the Appellant's  case
    in this regard.  It is perhaps unfortunate that  bank  statements  from
    the period corroborating payments  from  the  employer  have  not  been
    produced or that the witness was unable  to  produce  her  SIA  licence
    today which she stated was in her work bag rather than the bag that she
    had brought to the Tribunal.  Nonetheless,  and  notwithstanding  these
    matters, I am satisfied on the available materials - as I have  said  -
    that the witness's evidence should be accepted as credible.


7.   In those circumstances I turn to a consideration of  Regulation  10  of
    the 2006 Regulations and in particular Regulation 10(5) and 10(6).


8.   I am satisfied on a balance of probabilities that the Appellant  ceased
    to be a family member of his mother's ex-partner, who was  a  qualified
    person,  on  the  termination  of  his  mother's  marriage  (Regulation
    10(5)(a)).  I am satisfied that he was at that  time  residing  in  the
    United Kingdom in accordance with the EEA Regulations.   It  is  to  be
    noted that he has been present in the United Kingdom  pursuant  to  the
    Regulations since his entry on 1 July 2006.  I am also  satisfied  that
    the condition of regulation 10(6) is met (see below),  and  I  am  also
    satisfied that prior to the initiation of the divorce  proceedings  the
    Appellant's mother and ex-husband  had  enjoyed  a  marriage  that  had
    lasted for at least three years and had resided in the  United  Kingdom
    for at least one year during its duration.  I  do  not  understand  any
    such matters to be disputed by the Respondent.


9.   So far as regulation 10(6) is concerned,  the  Appellant  was  in  July
    2009 a family member of a person falling  within  regulation  10(6)(a).
    His mother, although not an EEA national, was nonetheless somebody  who
    fell within the definition of a worker if she had been an EEA national.
     So far as the question of being 'the family member of such  a  person'
    (regulation 10(6)(b)), I remind myself that in July 2009 the  Appellant
    would have been under 21 years and thereby  met  the  definition  of  a
    family member under regulation 7(1)(b)(i).


10.  Accordingly in those circumstances I find  that  at  the  date  of  the
    Appellant's mother's divorce the Appellant  was  a  family  member  who
    retained the right of residence.


11.  With reference to regulation 15(1)(f), "a person  who  has  resided  in
    the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with  these  Regulations  for   a
    continuous period of five years... [and who] was at  the  end  of  that
    period, a family member who  has  retained  the  right  of  residence",
    "shall acquire the right to reside in the United Kingdom  permanently".
    The Appellant would have been residing in the United  Kingdom  pursuant
    to the Regulations for five years as of  2  July  2011,  and,  for  the
    reasons already explained, at that point he would have been  'a  family
    member  who  had  retained  the  right   of   residence'.    In   those
    circumstances he is a person who has acquired the right  to  reside  in
    the United Kingdom permanently  and  his  appeal  is  therefore  to  be
    allowed on EEA grounds.


12.  In the circumstances it is unnecessary to  give  any  consideration  to
    the case under the Rules or under Article 8 of the ECHR.


Notice of Decision

13.  The appeal is allowed.


The above represents a corrected transcript of an ex tempore decision  given
at the hearing on 15 January 2015.



Signed                                  Date:  25 January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
                                  APPENDIX

               TEXT OF 'DECISION AND REASONS' ON ERROR OF LAW



   1. This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Oakley promulgated on 19 September 2014, allowing Mr  Dadzie's  appeal
      against a decision dated 10 September 2013 to refuse to issue him with
      a Permanent Residence Card as confirmation of a right of residence.


   2. Although in the proceedings before me the Secretary of  State  is  the
      appellant,  and  Mr  Dadzie  is  the  respondent,  for  the  sake   of
      consistency with the proceedings  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  I
      shall hereafter refer to Mr Dadzie as the Appellant and the  Secretary
      of State as the Respondent.


Background

   3. The Appellant is a national of Ghana born  on  2  September  1990.  He
      entered the UK on 1 July 2006 as the holder of an  EEA  Family  Permit
      visa valid until 16 December 2006. On 1 November 2007 he applied for a
      Residence Card as the stepson of an  EEA  national  exercising  treaty
      rights in the United Kingdom, which was issued on  6  May  2008  valid
      until 6 May 2013. On 1 May 2013 he applied for a  Permanent  Residence
      Card as the son of a British Citizen. The  factual  matrix  underlying
      the Appellant's immigration history is summarised in the  findings  of
      fact  set  out  at  paragraphs  13-20  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
      determination - save that there appears to be  a  misunderstanding  in
      relation to the reason the Appellant was  advised  not  to  apply  for
      British citizenship at the same  time  as  his  younger  brother,  the
      Appellant no longer being a minor at the relevant date.


   4. The application for a Permanent  Residence  Card  was  refused  on  10
      September 2013 for reasons set out in a 'reasons for  refusal'  letter
      ('RFRL') of that date, and a Notice of Immigration Decision was issued
      accordingly.


   5. The Appellant appealed to  the  IAC.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      allowed the appeal for reasons set out in his determination:  although
      the case under the EEA Regulations was dismissed (indeed  conceded  by
      the Appellant),  the  Judge  allowed  the  appeal  with  reference  to
      paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.


   6. The Respondent sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal which
      was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Colyer on 5 November 2014.


Error of Law

   7. The Respondent complains that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  did  not
      adequately engage with the requirement under paragraph  276ADE(vi)  in
      respect of there being "very significant obstacles to the  applicant's
      integration to the country to which he would have to go if required to
      leave the UK", to an extent that either indicates  a  misdirection  of
      law, or otherwise an inadequacy of reasoning amounting to an error  of
      law.


   8. I accept the Respondent's submissions  in  this  regard.  I  make  the
      following observations:

(i) At paragraph  24  of  the  determination  the  Judge  does  not  clearly
      identify the relevant test under paragraph 276ADE(vi). The concept  of
      'obstacles to returning to  live'  in  a  country  is  not  inevitably
      congruent with the concept of, and  consideration  of,  'obstacles  to
      integration'.

(ii) At paragraph 27, whilst the Judge identifies that  the  Appellant  only
      has a  single,  elderly,  relative  remaining  in  Ghana,  who  "would
      scarcely be in a position to assist the Appellant were he to  return",
      beyond the absence of family assistance he does not identify any other
      reason why the Appellant, a young man in his early 20s who  had  lived
      in Ghana up to the age of 16, would face any particular -  never  mind
      very significant - obstacles to  integrating  himself  back  into  his
      country of origin and nationality.

(iii) Further to the above, at paragraph 27 the Judge also  places  emphasis
      on the strength of the relationship with the Appellant's mother in the
      UK - and implicitly the impact upon her of his departure - "He has  in
      fact been a tower of strength to his mother in recent times, in  terms
      of the employment that he has undertaken in  order  that  she  can  be
      supported". Whilst this may potentially be an obstacle to returning to
      live in Ghana in  a  broader  sense  (e.g.  see  the  ambiguous  self-
      direction of the Judge identified at (i) above), it is of no  material
      significance when considering the question of the Appellant's  ability
      to integrate into life in Ghana.

(iv) At paragraph 26 the Judge makes reference  to  the  Appellant's  mother
      having  "been  very  badly  advised  when  she  applied  for   British
      citizenship for only herself and her other son, and  did  not  include
      the Appellant". As noted above, it would appear that this  advice  was
      in fact sound, the Appellant by that stage being too old  to  register
      as a minor. Mr Oyediran acknowledged that it appeared the Judge was in
      error in this regard. The Judge, however, appears to attach weight  to
      this circumstance in determining the key question: "He appears to have
      been the victim of bad advice in 2009 when he has not been included in
      his mother's application for British citizenship and I  conclude  that
      in the Appellant's case there would be significant  obstacles  to  him
      being returned to live  in  Ghana"  (paragraph  27).  It  is  entirely
      unclear why the Judge thinks this is a material consideration  to  the
      question of 'obstacles', and yet it is conjoined with that  conclusion
      in the same sentence. Even if  the  Judge  had  been  correct  in  his
      evaluation that the Appellant  had  been  denied  the  opportunity  of
      securing British citizenship through poor legal advice, this would not
      be relevant to the question of  integration  into  Ghana.  This  is  a
      material error of law.


   9. The matters to which  the  Judge  has  had  particular  regard  -  the
      relationship with the mother and (erroneously) the missed  opportunity
      of acquiring British citizenship - perhaps more properly belong to  an
      Article 8 consideration outside the parameters of the Rules. Indeed in
      resisting the Respondent's appeal Mr Oyediran in large part sought  to
      place emphasis on the Appellant's factual circumstances in the context
      of Article 8; those submissions necessarily do  not  directly  address
      the contended error of law. However, it is under the  Rules  that  the
      Judge purports to allow the appeal, and he does not otherwise go on to
      a consideration of Article 8 beyond the provisions of the Rules.  This
      is perhaps particularly unfortunate because it is not readily apparent
      on the face of the determination that the  Appellant  was  seeking  to
      make out a case under paragraph 276ADE, so much as under  the  broader
      terms of Article 8 jurisprudence: e.g. see  Skeleton  Argument  before
      the First-tier Tribunal, and  note  the  emphasis  in  the  supporting
      evidence on the family and private life established in the UK.


  10. Be that as it may, I find that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred  in
      law by not properly applying the terms of  the  Rules,  and  otherwise
      providing inadequate reasons for his  favourable  decision  under  the
      Rules.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is   set   aside
      accordingly.


Re-making the Decision

  11. During the course of discussion I raised with the representatives  the
      possibility that the Appellant was 'a family member who  has  retained
      the right of residence' pursuant to  regulation  10(5),  and  that  he
      might  thereby  have  satisfied  the  requirements  for  a   Permanent
      Residence Card given his particular history. This did not appear to be
      something to which the original decision-maker had had regard, and had
      not apparently been in the Appellant's representative's mind when  the
      concession under  the  Regulations  was  made  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal.


  12. Any such 'route' to establishing a right to permanent residence  would
      likely turn on the  circumstances  at  the  time  of  the  Appellant's
      mother's divorce in July 2009: see regulation  10(6)(a).  No  evidence
      has been filed in this regard and the witness  statements  before  the
      First-tier Tribunal do not expressly address this matter.


  13. Given the declaratory nature of EEA decisions, in my judgement on  the
      facts of this  particular  case  it  is  not  appropriate  to  exclude
      exploration of this matter in re-making the  decision  in  the  appeal
      because it had not previously been advanced or because the EEA  ground
      of appeal had previously been conceded on  behalf  of  the  Appellant.
      Little is achieved by relying on procedural estoppel if the  Appellant
      has in fact acquired substantive rights that are not  contingent  upon
      appellate procedures.


  14. In all of the circumstances, whilst it is unlikely given the available
      evidence and the First-tier Tribunal's findings  at  paragraphs  13-18
      that it will be necessary to hear much further by way of  evidence  in
      relation to either or both paragraph 276ADE(vi) and Article 8,  it  is
      appropriate that the Appellant be afforded an  opportunity  of  filing
      further evidence in  relation  to  the  issue  of  retained  right  of
      residence, and for such a matter to be explored through oral  evidence
      at a resumed hearing. Whilst at this stage, I do not seek  to  confine
      the scope of the rehearing,  given  that  the  scope  of  any  further
      consideration is likely to be narrow it is not necessary to remit this
      matter to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing afresh: the matter  is
      retained in the Upper Tribunal and reserved to me.


  15. At the conclusion of the hearing I indicated that the Appellant should
      file any further evidence upon which  he  wished  to  rely,  including
      evidence in  respect  of  his  employment  in  2009  with  a  view  to
      exploration of regulation 10(5). I  also  indicated  that  insofar  as
      Article 8 was relied  upon,  I  would  expect  submissions  from  both
      parties on all relevant matters including sections  117A-117D  of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.


Notice of Decision

  16. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  involved  a  material
      error of law and is set aside.


  17. The decision in the appeal is to be remade before the Upper  Tribunal,
      reserved to me.


