
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39181/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 15 July 2014                                 |On 12 August 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           JUSTINE TCHOUATE KANDA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G Ajomaning, Alpha Shindara Legal


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent, Justine Tchouate Kanda, was born on 12 March  1981  and
    is a citizen of Cameroon.  I shall  hereafter refer to  the  respondent
    as the appellant and to the Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    as the respondent (as they  were  respectively  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant (who had been in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    student/post-study worker) applied in July 2012 for a variation of  her
    leave to remain which the respondent refused in  a  decision  dated  10
    September 2013.  The appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Batiste) in which, in a determination promulgated  on  11  March
    2014, allowed the appeal under Article 8 ECHR.  The Secretary of  State
    now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Grounds of appeal assert that (in the light of Gulshan  (Article  8-new
    rules-correct approach) [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC) ) and MF (Nigeria) [2013]
    EWCA Civ 1192) only exceptional cases will succeed under Article 8 ECHR
    outside the Rules where they have failed by reference to  the  complete
    code as regards Article 8 now provided by the Immigration  Rules.   The
    Secretary of State also relies on Nagre [2013]  EWHC  720   which,  she
    submits, provides that exceptional circumstances will  be  "ones  where
    refusal would lead to an unjustifiably harsh outcome".  The  respondent
    asserts that the First-tier Tribunal failed to provide adequate reasons
    "why  the  appellant's   circumstances   are   either   compelling   or
    exceptional".  The respondent submits that there is no reason "why  the
    appellant and her partner cannot maintain contact with  each  other  by
    modern means of communication and  by  visits  while  she  returns  [to
    Cameroon] to seek entry clearance".  In a concise determination,  Judge
    Batiste recorded that the appellant could not satisfy the  requirements
    of Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE [9].  At [17], he wrote:

         I accept that it is only in exceptional circumstances where someone
         who has entered into a relationship but knowing that  their  status
         is precarious can rely on  that  relationship  to  enable  them  to
         remain under  Article  8.   When  combined  with  the  [appellant's
         pregnancy] I find that this is one of those exceptional cases.

    The judge went on to examine the public  interest  concerned  with  the
    appellant's removal noting  that  "her  family  unit  are  clearly  net
    contributors to society".  The appellant is in a genuine and subsisting
    relationship with a British citizen by whom she is expecting  a  child.
    The  judge  accepted  that  emotional  support  is  important  for  the
    appellant from her partner during  the  pregnancy.   He  considered  it
    unreasonable to expect the appellant  to  return  to  apply  for  entry
    clearance from Cameroon because of her pregnancy.  He found  "that  the
    interference in  this  case  is  disproportionate  to  the  public  end
    sought".

 3. I find that the appeal should  be  dismissed.   I  do  not  accept  the
    submission made in the grounds of appeal that the judge has  failed  to
    give reasons for finding the circumstances of this particular  case  to
    be exceptional.  Significantly,  the  refusal  letter,  dismissing  the
    appeal under Rule 276ADE of the Immigration Rules,  does  nothing  more
    than to record that the appellant (who entered the  United  Kingdom  in
    January 2009) had not lived continuously in this country for  at  least
    twenty years.  There is  no  reference  at  all  to  her  circumstances
    (including her relationship  and  pregnancy)  in  the  context  of  the
    Immigration Rules refusal.  Further, the letter is entirely  silent  as
    to Article 8 outside the Rules where  one  might  have  expected  those
    circumstances to have been subjected to analysis.  I consider  that  it
    was open to the judge to have regard to circumstances of the  Appellant
    and her partner which lay outside  the  Immigration  Rules  subject  to
    which her application had been refused.  The appellant's pregnancy  and
    her genuine relationship with her partner entitled the judge  to  carry
    out the Article 8 analysis with which the refusal letter did not engage
    at all.  I accept that it is not enough for a judge simply  to  assert,
    without  explanation,  that  the  circumstances  of  an  appellant  are
    exceptional; in particular, the facts in an appeal must not fall within
    the matters anticipated by the Immigration Rules.  Conversely,  once  a
    judge had identified and explained the basis of his or her  finding  of
    exceptionality (or lack of it) it may be difficult for  a  disappointed
    party to disagree with that judgment.  Whilst the Immigration Rules now
    strive to achieve greater consistency in decision making and remove the
    need for a "free-wheeling" analysis of Article 8, there remains  scope,
    where appropriate, for the exercise  of  judicial  discretion.  In  the
    present appeal, the judge has reached a conclusion which  was  open  to
    him on the evidence and he has supported his findings  with  clear  and
    cogent reasons. I see no reason to interfere with his determination.

DECISION

 4. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 11 August 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
