
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39287/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25 November 2014                           |On 16 December 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                                MS G A BLACK


                                   Between

                               Mr AMJAD ASLAM
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Miss A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against a decision by the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge
    Mitchell) promulgated on 11th September 2014.  The  Tribunal  dismissed
    the appeal against the Secretary of State's refusal of leave to  remain
    on the grounds that it had no jurisdiction to hear the appeal.


Background

2.   The Appellant whose date of birth is 7 April 1981 and he is  a  citizen
    of Pakistan.

3.   The Respondent considered the application for further leave  to  remain
    and refused the same with reference to paragraph 322 and 322(2) of  the
    Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended) and under Article 8 of the  ECHR.
    The Respondent was not satisfied that the Appellant was  seeking  leave
    to remain in the UK for a purpose not covered by the Immigration  Rules
    and  was  not  prepared  to  exercise   discretion   in   his   favour.
    Furthermore, the Respondent relied on false representations made by the
    Appellant for the purpose of obtaining previous leave to remain and was
    not prepared to exercise discretion.  The Appellant's leave  to  remain
    expired on 30th November 2008.  There was no right  of  appeal  against
    the refusal.  In the reasons for refusal letter  dated  24th  September
    2013 the Respondent considered the appellant's claim  under  Article  8
    and referred to his previous claim and decision.  She  found  that  the
    appellant's  submissions  did  not  amount  to  a  fresh   claim,   and
    accordingly he had no right of appeal.

4.   In grounds  of  appeal  dated  23.9.2013  it  was  submitted  that  the
    Appellant did have an in country right of appeal  limited  to  a  human
    rights claim.

5.   The hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  was  listed  for  an  oral
    hearing on 28 August 2014.  There  was  no  appearance  by  either  the
    Appellant or his  representative  and  so  the  Tribunal  proceeded  to
    determine the matter without a hearing. The  Tribunal  determined  that
    there was  no  valid  appeal  before  the  Tribunal  as  there  was  no
    appealable decision under section 82(2) of the 2002 Act.

Grounds of Application

6.   In grounds submitted by and on behalf of the Appellant  it  was  argued
    that his representatives faxed a letter to the Tribunal  on  22  August
    2014 (six pages) requesting the matter to be determined on  the  papers
    with reference to supporting documents.   It  would  appear  that  such
    documentation  did  not  reach  the  court  file.   The  Appellant  was
    effectively denied a valid in country right  of  appeal  under  Section
    94(2) of the Nationality Immigration  &  Asylum  Act  2002  ("the  2002
    Act").

Permission

7.   Permission was granted by Designated First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Zucker
    on 21 October 2014 in the following terms:

         "Through no fault of the judge, it is arguable that there has  been
         unfairness on the basis that certain documentation  did  not  reach
         the judge and that an application on human rights grounds had  been
         made in time.  It is arguable that the  determination  contains  an
         error of law".

The Hearing

9.   Miss Holmes appeared on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  in  this
    matter and there was no appearance by or on behalf of the Appellant  or
    his legal representatives, Ebrahim and Co.  I was satisfied  that  both
    the Appellant and his representatives had been properly served with the
    notice of hearing giving the date and time of the hearing and there was
    no communication to the Upper Tribunal to  explain  why  neither  party
    attended for the hearing nor  seeking  any  adjournment.   I  proceeded
    therefore to determine the appeal in the  absence  of  the  parties  in
    accordance with the Asylum &  Immigration  Upper  Tribunal  (Procedure)
    Rules 2008, Rule 38.

10.  I heard brief submissions from Miss Holmes to the effect that the  copy
    of the fax dated 20 August 2014 was inadequate evidence to support  the
    Appellant's claim that his notice and grounds of appeal under Article 8
    were sent to the Tribunal.

Discussion and decision

11.  The Tribunal hearing this appeal proceeded to  dismiss  the  appeal  on
    the grounds that it had no  jurisdiction  as  there  was  no  right  of
    appeal.  It is argued that the Tribunal ought to have  considered  that
    the Appellant had an in country right of appeal  under  Article  8  and
    that documentary evidence had been produced in  support  with  the  fax
    sent  on  20  August  2014.   However,  as  there   was   no   original
    documentation produced, no transmission slip  and  no  confirmation  of
    receipt by the Tribunal of the same, I was unable to find that this fax
    was evidence that such documentation had been sent.

13.  In the file, however, there were grounds of appeal dated 23.9.2013  and
    undated additional grounds of appeal, which referred to the  Article  8
    claim. In  addition  there  was  correspondence  from  the  Appellant's
    solicitors dating back to 12 October 2011, which I find  related  to  a
    previously determined Article 8 claim.  Indeed, the reasons for refusal
    letter dated 24.9.2013 referred to and considered  the  claim  made  on
    behalf of the Appellant under  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights  Act.
    However, what is apparent from the reasons for refusal letter  is  that
    the Secretary of State did not admit the Appellant's claim as  a  fresh
    claim and accordingly he had no right  of  appeal.  Notwithstanding,  I
    find that the Appellant has produced no supporting documentary evidence
    showing that Article 8 is engaged.

14.  I have regard to all of the evidence before me and I am satisfied  that
    there was certainly notice and grounds of appeal and additional grounds
    of appeal that ought to have been before the  Tribunal  who  considered
    this matter in  any  event.  However  there  was  no  right  of  appeal
    available to the appellant in respect of human rights as he had  failed
    to establish a fresh  claim.  The  failure  of  the  Tribunal  to  make
    reference to the human rights issues arguably may amount to an error of
    law.  However, I am satisfied that the error is  not  material  to  the
    outcome.  The Appellant failed to attend  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    support his claim and he has failed to attend  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    support of this appeal.  Despite  the  notices  of  appeal  relying  on
    Article 8, there is no evidence  detailing  any  new  Article  8  claim
    either on the grounds of private and family life (see Patel and Sakar).
    Therefore even had the Tribunal found any valid  right  of  appeal  and
    proceeded to determine the Article 8 issues, it was bound to fail.

Decision

15.  I find no material error  of  law  in  the  determination  which  shall
    stand.


 No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 4.12.2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed        Date 4.12.2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

