
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/39978/2014
                                                               IA/40030/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 November 2015                  |On 16 December 2015                  |
|Oral decision                        |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                SYED ALI NAQI
                                 RABAB MEHDI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr P Saini, Counsel, instructed by Saj Law Chambers


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an error of law hearing in which the Secretary of State is  the
    appellant. For  convenience  I  shall  refer  to  the  parties  as  the
    "Secretary of State" and the  "appellants"  as  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. The Secretary of State appeals a decision made by  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Housego) ("FtT") who in a decision promulgated on 6 May
    2015 allowed the appeals against the decision to refuse to grant  leave
    to remain as a Tier 1 (General) Migrants and to remove them by  way  of
    directions under Section 47 of the 2006 Act.

 2. The Tier 1 application made by the  appellants,  who  are  husband  and
    wife, were refused with reference  to  paragraphs  322(1A)  and  322(2)
    Immigration Rules that in a previous application the  appellant  relied
    on false evidence of employment and earnings from a company Envo  Green
    Limited found to be bogus and  which  existed  only  to  provide  false
    document  of  earnings  for  immigration  purposes.   In  the  Tier   1
    application it was that previous deception that was of relevance to  UK
    experience.

    First-tier Tribunal

    3.   The FtT found that the Secretary of State failed to make  out  her
    case evidentially under paragraph 322(2) with reference to the previous
    application and that a refusal under that paragraph was  not  mandatory
    [14]. The Secretary of State produced no documentary evidence  to  show
    that Envo Green Limited was engaged in illegal activity.  The  FtT  was
    not prepared to simply accept what was stated in  the  refusal  letter.
    There was no certificate of conviction, no record of sentencing remarks
    and no indication of time scale as to when the deception  had  occurred
    [21].  The Secretary of State failed to produce adequate evidence  that
    the appellant used  false  documents  in  connection  with  a  previous
    application [23].

    4.   The FtT had no evidence to prove  that  the  criminal  proceedings
    related to the relevant time and /or any link to documents produced  by
    the appellant in or about 2010 when he claimed to be working  for  that
    company.  Further, there was no challenge  made  as  to  the  documents
    relied on by the appellant which included payslips and P60s [17].   The
    FtT appeared to proceed on the basis that it  was  plausible  that  the
    appellant could have genuinely worked for that company  in  2010  given
    that the prosecution was in 2014.

    5.   The FtT followed the approach in A v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 773.  It
    was not the case that the appellant was relying on false documents  for
    his present application. He had  been  awarded  points  save  under  UK
    experience where the deception was relied on.

    Grounds for permission

    6.   The Secretary of State contended that the FtT erred in failing  to
    rely  on  reference  made  in  the  refusal  letter  to  the   criminal
    proceedings in June 2014 at Harrow Crown Court in R  v  Sultan  Shahzad
    and Others where it was found that Envo Green Limited was one  of  many
    ghost companies used by persons convicted and that it  had  no  genuine
    trading existence.  It was not possible for  evidence  to  be  produced
    with every refusal notice presented at an error  of  law  hearing.  The
    Secretary of State further contended that  there  was  nothing  in  the
    evidence to show assertions were erroneous.

    7.   The Secretary of State was granted permission to appeal  by  Upper
    Tribunal  Judge  Gleeson  on  25  August  2015,  following  refusal  of
    permission by First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson. Judge  Gleeson  issued
    directions for the respondent to produce the sentencing remarks in R  v
    Sultan Shahzad and Others, the Companies House  registration  for  Envo
    Green Ltd and any evidence to show a connection  between  that  company
    and the defendant Sultan. The appellant  was  to  produce  evidence  in
    rebuttal.  The matter was to be listed as a rolled up  hearing.   In  a
    letter dated 25th September 2015 the Secretary of  State  produced  the
    sentencing remarks. Although the letter also  claims  to  produce  "the
    evidence relied  on  by  the  Crown  in  that  appeal  that  led  to  a
    conviction," that evidence was not attached to the  Tribunal's  bundle.
    It was submitted that the evidence provided a clear  link  with  Mr  S.
    Sultan and Envo Green Ltd which was incorporated on 26th May  2010  and
    dissolved on 27.12.2011.  There was no registration  of  any  employees
    and no tax returns submitted.

    Preliminary issue

    8.   Mr  Saini  argued  that  the  directions  made  by  Judge  Gleeson
    resulting in the production of further material were not  of  relevance
    until the Tribunal had reached the stage of finding an  error  of  law.
    It would be wholly unfair for new evidence  to  be  considered  at  the
    initial stage that was not before the FtT.   No  application  had  been
    made for new evidence to be admitted pursuant to the Practice rules.

    9.   Mr Melvin responded that the evidence had been  available  at  the
    time of the FtT hearing and it was open to the FtT  to  have  adjourned
    for evidence to be produced. Mr Melvin  submitted  that  Judge  Gleeson
    granted permission on the basis that the FtT's approach was  erroneous.
    There was no rebuttal evidence  from  the  appellant.   Whilst  it  was
    accepted that the detailed evidence had not been provided for the  FtT,
    evidence was referred to in the Reasons for Refusal Letter  and  was  a
    matter of public record,  that the Tribunal could take into account.

    Decision re preliminary issue

    10.  I decided that there was no reason  for  me  to  depart  from  the
    standard procedure in an error of law hearing.  In the event that  (and
    if) I find a material error of law I will then  be  in  a  position  to
    consider  whether  or  not  to  admit  the  further  material  produced
    consequent to the directions made.

    Submissions

    11.  Mr Melvin relied on the grounds of appeal on which permission  had
    been granted and a skeleton argument. The FtT failed to grant a further
    opportunity to the Secretary of State to substantiate  the  reasons  in
    the refusal letter by way of further evidence.  Given  the  gravity  of
    the criminal proceedings the FtT itself should have  requested  further
    evidence from the Secretary of State.  The conviction was a  matter  of
    public record.  The appellant had adduced no evidence in rebuttal.  The
    FtT erred in its approach to the assertions made by  the  Secretary  of
    State as to matters of public record.

    12.  Mr Saini replied that the Secretary of State  had  ample  time  in
    which to substantiate the allegations made in the refusal  letter;  the
    refusal letter was dated 13.9.14, the  bundle  for  hearing  was  dated
    26.11.14 and the FtT hearing took place  on  22.4.15.  The  adjournment
    point had not been raised in the grounds of application for permission.
     There had been no application made at the FtT for more time or for  an
    adjournment and the Home Office Presenting Officer ("HOPO") was content
    to proceed and rely on the refusal letter (Mr  Saini  appeared  at  the
    FtT).  It was a matter for the Secretary of State who had the burden to
    discharge that false documents were relied on.  The appellant was under
    no obligation to produce rebuttal  evidence  until  the  deception  was
    established. The  HOPO  failed  to  obtain  the  necessary  documentary
    evidence to support the allegation made, and  it  was  insufficient  to
    request that the FtT check Lawtel [11].  In any event for  the  FtT  to
    have done so would have amounted to the Judge going off on a frolic  of
    his/her own.  The refusal letter makes no connection with the appellant
    in the prosecution. The sentencing remarks produced fail  to  meet  the
    standard to show deception in AA (Nigeria).

    Discussion and decision

    13.  I have carefully considered  the  submissions  made  this  morning
    including those with regard to the grant of permission  and  directions
    made by Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson. I have to consider whether or not
    the First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law such that  the  outcome
    of the decision would be different.  I do  so  with  reference  to  the
    grounds of appeal relied on and having regard to the evidence that  was
    before the FtT. I take the view that the correct approach was  for  the
    FtT to follow AA (Nigeria).  Where deception is alleged the  burden  is
    on the respondent to produce evidence to show that deception  has  been
    used. The standard of proof is  the  civil  standard,  the  balance  of
    probabilities. The evidence  must  be  cogent  and  reliable.  In  this
    instance the respondent relied on the reference made in the Reasons for
    Refusal Letter to R v Sultan  Shahzad  and  Others  but  there  was  no
    specific evidence before the FtT to  connect  the  appellant  in  those
    proceedings. Indeed at the FtT hearing  there  was  not  even   generic
    evidence produced by the respondent.

    14.   The Appellant is entitled to know the reasons  for  the  decision
    made, and where deception is alleged the respondent must discharge  the
    burden and produce the relevant evidence. The opportunity for  that  to
    be done is in Reasons for Refusal Letter or at the hearing  before  the
    FtT.  The FtT found that the respondent  had  not  met  the  evidential
    burden. The FtT is required to make findings based on evidence and  for
    it to rely on assertion is not enough. Whilst  acknowledging  that  the
    respondent was not a party to the criminal  proceedings  and  the  fact
    that the conviction was a matter of public record, those  factors  take
    the matter no further in addressing the absence of any evidence linking
    the appellant  in  and\or  establishing  the  deception.  Even  if  the
    sentencing remarks had been before the FtT, the FtT would have  had  to
    consider whether  there  was  strong  and  cogent  evidence  that  this
    appellant was involved in the  particular  deception  to  the  required
    standard, and make findings accordingly. There was no application  made
    for an adjournment by the HOPO and the Secretary  of  State  had  ample
    time in which to substantiate her case in advance of the  hearing.   It
    was not incumbent on the FtT to search out evidence in support  of  the
    Secretary of State's allegations or claim.

    15.  I conclude that there is no material error of law disclosed in the
    FtT decision and reasons. The Secretary of State has failed to make out
    the grounds of appeal that the FtT erred in its approach. The appeal is
    dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.  The FtT decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 3.12.2015

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 3.12.2015

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
