

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                Appeal
Numbers: IA/39942/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28 August 2014                             |On 02 October 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                MATILDA APEKU
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr A Aminu of KA Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the  applicant's  appeal  against   the
    decision made on 20 September 2013 refusing her  a  residence  card  as
    confirmation of her rights of residence as a family member  of  an  EEA
    national. In this determination I will refer to  the  parties  as  they
    were before the First-tier Tribunal, the applicant as the appellant and
    the Secretary of State as the respondent.


Background

 2. In brief outline the background to this appeal is that the appellant is
    a citizen of Ghana born on 05 July 1968. On 09 July  2012  she  applied
    for a residence card on the basis that she was the  wife  of  a  French
    citizen exercising treaty rights in the UK. She relies on  a  customary
    marriage taking place in Accra on 09 April 2011.  Her  application  was
    supported  by  a  customary  marriage  certificate  and   a   statutory
    declaration to that effect together with evidence that her partner  was
    a qualified person within  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 ("The 2006 Regulations").

 3. However, the  respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  a  valid  marriage
    certificate had been produced as evidence that the relationship was  as
    claimed. She went on to consider the position under reg 8 of  the  2006
    Regulations but was not satisfied that the appellant  had  demonstrated
    sufficiently that she  was  in  a  durable  relationship  with  an  EEA
    national. For these reasons the application was dismissed.


 Findings of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The appellant appealed against this decision and her appeal  was  heard
    on 06 May 2014. The appellant and her husband relied upon  the  witness
    statements they had submitted and gave oral  evidence  confirming  that
    they had met in Luton in December 2009 through  a  mutual  friend,  had
    fallen in love and subsequently married on 09 April 2011  by  proxy  in
    Ghana. There was a dispute as to whether the parties had taken part  in
    a valid marriage. The judge commented that it was correct to  say  that
    the statutory declaration  did  not  contain  the  address  where  both
    parties were residing at the time of marriage but the documentation had
    been put before the Ghanaian High Commission and in a letter  dated  18
    January 2013 it was confirmed that the marriage was genuine and lawful.
    On  the  basis  of  the  evidence  before  him  the  judge  found  that
    notwithstanding the reservations of the respondent  the  Government  of
    Ghana had provided clear evidence that this was  a  valid  marriage  by
    proxy [30].

 5. He went on to consider the substance of the relationship,  noting  that
    there was some doubt as to whether her husband had met the  appellant's
    sister and whether her sister had  recently  died  given  that  he  had
    visited in 2013 commenting that on the face of this there may appear to
    be something suspicious [32] but he held that the other evidence of the
    durable relationship was clear from  the  documents  referring  to  the
    marriage invitation at page 80 of the appellant's  bundle  as  well  as
    photographs of the appellant and his wife at a celebration  in  the  UK
    and pictures of  the  customary  marriage.  He  found  that  this  lent
    credibility to the fact that they were in a  durable  relationship  and
    had lived together at the date of the decision for  a  period  of  more
    than 2 years.




 6. The judge summarised his findings as follows:

        "35 I am satisfied that this is not  contrived  and  this  together
        with the other evidence satisfies me on a balance of  probabilities
        that these parties are in a  durable  relationship  and  that  they
        continue to live together as husband and wife which  is  what  they
        have been doing since the date of their marriage.

        36 I therefore allow this appeal on the  balance  of  probabilities
        and find that this was a valid customary marriage by proxy in Ghana
        as certified as such by the Ghanaian High Commission in London  and
        the Ghanaian Foreign Ministry.

        37 I find that the assertion and interpretation of the law  by  the
        respondent does not have much credibility and therefore allow  this
        appeal on that basis.

        38 In any event I am satisfied that this couple are  in  a  durable
        relationship  for  the  reasons  set  out   above   and   therefore
        notwithstanding the validity of the marriage  documentation,  I  am
        satisfied of the EEA regulation 7 and 8 of  the  Immigration  (EEA)
        Regulation 2006.

        39 I therefore allow this appeal on a balance of probabilities  for
        the reasons set out above."

The Grounds and Submissions

 7. The respondent sought permission to appeal on the basis that the  judge
    had failed to follow the guidance in Kareem (proxy marriages-  EU  law)
    [2014] UKUT 24 and, in so far as the appeal was allowed  on  the  basis
    that the appellant was an extended  family  member  under  reg  8,  had
    failed to have regard to the provisions of reg 17 (4) and  should  have
    limited his decision  to  a  finding  that  the  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law so  that  the  respondent  could  exercise  her
    discretion under that regulation.

 8. Mr Tufan adopted the grounds in his submissions and relied  on  TA  and
    Others (Kareem explained) Ghana [2014] UKUT 00316 which confirmed  that
    whether there was a  valid  marriage  for  the  purposes  of  the  2006
    Regulations must be examined in accordance with the laws of the  Member
    State from which the relevant union citizen  obtained  nationality.  He
    also adopted an argument  identified  when  permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by Judge Holmes that the judge had failed adequately to  engage
    with evidence which he had himself described  as  suspicious  in  [32].
    There was no adequate explanation, so he  submitted,  for  the  finding
    that the couple were living in a durable relationship akin to marriage.
    Even if there were, the judge should not have simply allowed the appeal
    when there was a discretion still to be  exercised  by  the  respondent
    under reg 17.

 9. Mr Aminu submitted that there was no error of law and  that  the  judge
    had properly applied Kareem.  He argued that once it had been found  to
    be a genuine marriage under Ghanaian law, that resolved  the  issue  of
    validity. In any event, the  judge  was  satisfied  that  there  was  a
    durable relationship and on this basis had been entitled to  allow  the
    appeal. There was no proper  basis  for  a  challenge  to  the  judge's
    findings of primary fact and he had  given  adequate  reasons  for  his
    decision.

Consideration of whether there is an error of law

10. I must consider whether the judge erred in law such that  his  decision
    should be set aside. The main argument raised by the respondent in  her
    grounds is that the judge failed to take into account the  decision  of
    Kareem and in particular failed to consider the issue  of  whether  the
    marriage would be recognised under French  law.  The  reason  for  this
    approach is set out in [18] of Kareem: in the light  of  the  intrinsic
    link between nationality of a Member State and  the  exercise  of  free
    movement rights, the legal system  of  the  nationality  of  the  union
    citizen governed whether a marriage had been contracted. It was  argued
    in TA and others that if the marriage was shown  to  be  valid  in  the
    country where the ceremony took  place,  there  was  no  need  for  its
    lawfulness  to  be  considered  further.  However,  that  argument  was
    rejected in TA as inconsistent with Kareem. In substance this  was  the
    basis of Mr Aminu's submission but in the light of Kareem  and  TA  and
    others it cannot succeed. I am therefore satisfied that the judge erred
    in law in finding that the appellant was able to show that  she  was  a
    spouse within the provisions of reg 7.

11. The next point was not made in the respondent's grounds but arises from
    the terms of the grant of permission by Judge Holmes. It is argued that
    the  judge  erred  in  finding  that  the  couple  were  in  a  durable
    relationship  by  failing  adequately  to  engage  with  the  evidence.
    However, I am not satisfied that there is any substance in this ground.
    The judge identified in [31] and [32] aspects  of  the  evidence  which
    might raise suspicions but he was entitled  to  balance  those  matters
    with the evidence which supported a finding that a durable relationship
    had been formed. I am satisfied that there was ample evidence on  which
    the judge could find that there was such a relationship.  This  was  an
    issue of fact for him to assess on the evidence as a whole  and  it  is
    not arguable that he reached findings which were not properly  open  to
    him. His finding that the  appellant  was  an  extended  family  member
    within reg 8 cannot be challenged on legal grounds.

12. The final issue is whether on this basis the judge was entitled  simply
    to allow the appeal. It is clear from  the  Tribunal  determination  in
    Ihemedu (OFMs-meaning) Nigeria[2011] UKUT 340 that reg 17 [4] makes the
    issue of a residence card to an extended  family  member  a  matter  of
    discretion and where that discretion has not  yet  been  exercised  the
    most an immigration judge is entitled to do is to allow the  appeal  as
    being not in accordance with the law  leaving  to  the  respondent  the
    matter of whether to exercise discretion in the appellant's  favour  or
    not.


13. For these reasons, I am satisfied that the judge  did  err  in  law  in
    relation to his assessment of whether the appellant had  been  able  to
    show that she was married as claimed and the decision is set  aside  on
    this issue. The judge was, however, entitled to find that there  was  a
    durable relationship and on the basis of that finding the appeal should
    have been allowed but only to the extent that the decision was  not  in
    accordance with the law as discretion has not yet been exercised by the
    respondent.

Decision

14. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law. I set aside the decision.  I  re-
    make the decision by dismissing the appeal under reg 7 but allowing  it
    under reg 8 on the basis that the appellant established  that  she  and
    her partner were in a durable relationship. The   decision  is  not  in
    accordance with the law: the discretion under reg 17 (4) remains to  be
    exercised by the respondent.












Signed                                        Date 28 September 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
