
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39835/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent            |
|On 5 March 2015                               |On 12 March 2015              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                            Alut Luke Lueth Dueny
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Rashid, Counsel instructed by David A Grand
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a Sudanese citizen who appeals with permission against
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Martins,  who  dismissed  her
    appeal against the respondent's refusal to issue her with  a  residence
    permit under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006
    (as amended) as the spouse  of  a  French  national  exercising  Treaty
    rights in the United Kingdom.

Background

 2. The applicant is married to the sponsor and came to the United  Kingdom
    using a family permit issued on 6 August 2012 under Regulation 7 of the
    EEA  Regulations,  there  being  at  that  point  no  question  of  the
    genuineness  of  the  marriage  or  whether  it  was  a   marriage   of
    convenience.  The family permit was valid until  6  February  2013  and
    continued without revocation until its expiry.

 3. On 10 January 2013,  during  the  period  of  the  family  permit,  the
    appellant applied for a residence card as a confirmation of  her  right
    to reside in the United Kingdom.  The appellant and  her  husband  were
    interviewed on 8  May  2013  at  the  Home  Office  in  Liverpool.  The
    interviewer was not satisfied by the  answers  which  the  couple  gave
    during the interview, which is  set  out  in  the  refusal  letter  but
    without  further  explanation  as  to  the  matters  which  caused  the
    respondent to conclude that the claimed relationship was  not  genuine,
    and that she now doubted  the  validity  of  some  of  the  appellant's
    documents.

 4. On 4 June 2013, the respondent refused the application for a  residence
    card and gave the appellant notice that as the marriage was  considered
    to be one of convenience,  she  did  not  consider  that  her  decision
    breached Article 8 ECHR.  No detailed analysis of Article 8 appears  in
    either the refusal letter or the notice of immigration decision.

 5. The appellant appealed against that decision.

First-tier Tribunal determination

 6. In her decision, First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Martins,  who  had  heard
    evidence from the appellant and her sponsor husband,  found  that  they
    were not credible.  However, applying the case law  on  the  point,  in
    particular, Papajorgji v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2012] UKUT 0038 (IAC) and IS  (Serbia)  [2008]  UKAIT  31,  the  judge
    directed herself that the assessment of whether a marriage was  one  of
    convenience, that is to say, whether it was entered  into  without  the
    intention of cohabitation and primarily to secure  admission  into  the
    country, was restricted to  the  actual  time  of  the  marriage.   The
    assessment concerned the motive for, not the quality of, the  marriage.



 7. At paragraph 46 of her decision, the judge said this:

         "46. I find that on the  issue  of  their  marriage  being  one  of
         convenience, on the case law on this matter, I find that  I  am  in
         agreement with  Mr  Rashid's  submissions.   At  the  time  of  the
         application for entry clearance  for  the  appellant  to  join  the
         sponsor in the United  Kingdom  as  a  spouse,  she  submitted  the
         evidence  requested  of  her,  the  respondent  saw  no  reason  to
         investigate  the  marriage  and  therefore  properly   issued   the
         appellant with a family permit to join her EEA national sponsor  in
         the United Kingdom.  If the Secretary of State subsequently  as  it
         appears, from their interview in this  country  in  Liverpool,  had
         concerns about the genuineness of the marriage, then it was open to
         her to revoke the family permit, which she  did  not.   Having  not
         done so, I find that the only basis  on  which  the  issue  of  the
         residence card can be questioned, is whether this couple are  in  a
         durable relationship in accordance with regulation 8(5)."

 8. The judge  then  considered  the  durability  of  the  relationship  at
    paragraph 47-50.  She was  not  satisfied  that  the  relationship  was
    durable, and she dismissed the appeal.

Permission to appeal

 9. The appellant appealed, arguing that in referring to  regulation  8(5),
    the First-tier Tribunal judge had  misdirected  herself,  in  that  the
    durable  relationship  test  applied   only   to   unmarried   couples.
    Alternatively, she contended that the questions which the appellant and
    sponsor had been asked, and which were set out in the  interview,  were
    insufficient to disprove the durable nature of the relationship.  There
    was evidence of correspondence and communication  between  the  parties
    before the appellant came to the United Kingdom, as well as evidence of
    financial remittances by the husband  to  the  appellant  from  January
    2012, and four visits made by him  to  visit  the  appellant  in  Sudan
    before she came to the United Kingdom.

10. On 9 January 2015, First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes granted  permission
    to appeal on that basis, noting that the family  permit  had  not  been
    revoked, and that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had  failed  to  direct
    herself by reference to the guidance on the proper  approach  given  in
    Samsam (EEA: Revocation and Retained Rights) Syria  [2011]  UKUT  00165
    (IAC) and Ewulo (effect of family  permit  -  OFM)  [2012]  UKUT  00238
    (IAC), to which it appears that she was not  specifically  directed  by
    Counsel for the appellant at the hearing.

11. He considered that the judge had arguably erred in seeking to go behind
    the original family permit and evaluate whether the marriage was one of
    convenience ab initio, and in addition, that it  was  unclear  on  what
    basis the judge sought to evaluate whether the  couple  had  a  durable
    relationship:   either  they  were  married,  or  they  were  not.   He
    considered it arguable that such confusion had tainted the  credibility
    finding in the First-tier Tribunal decision, since they were  not  made
    in  relation  to  the  narrow  issue  which  should  have  been   under
    consideration, following Ewulo, that is to say,  whether  there  was  a
    change in circumstances since the appellant had joined the  sponsor  in
    the United Kingdom.

12. That was the basis on which this appeal came before me for an error  of
    law hearing.

The law

13. Regulation 17 defines the circumstances in which a residence card  must
    be issued:

          "17.- Issue of residence card
         (1) The Secretary of State must issue a residence card to a  person
         who is not an EEA national and is the family member of a  qualified
         person or of an EEA national with a permanent  right  of  residence
         under regulation 15 on application and production of-
             (a) a valid passport; and
             (b) proof that the applicant is such a family member."

14. Where a family permit has been  issued,  applying  Ewulo,  the  non-EEA
    national has already demonstrated that they are  a  family  member,  or
    extended family member, as appropriate.  In Ewulo, the  Upper  Tribunal
    gave guidance on the approach to a residence card application following
    the issue of a  family  permit  to  an  extended  family  member.   The
    judicial headnote summarises the guidance given:

         "i)  Where a family permit has been issued by an ECO after  inquiry
         pursuant to regulation 12 of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
         Area) Regulations 2006 and is used to enter the  United  Kingdom  a
         subsequent application for a residence card  is  to  be  determined
         under regulation 7(3) of the Regulations.
         ii)  Where the validity of the issue of the family  permit  is  not
         contested by the Secretary of State and the  permit  has  not  been
         revoked, the issue is whether there has been a material  change  of
         circumstances since arrival with the consequence that the  claimant
         no longer qualifies as an extended family member."

Discussion

15. There is no real dispute about the facts of this appeal.  The appellant
    entered as her husband's spouse; the family permit was allowed  to  run
    for its full duration; and the respondent has not demonstrated that the
    parties have ended their marriage or that  there  is  any  other  post-
    arrival material change of circumstances.

16. Where the family permit has not been revoked, applying Ewulo,  that  is
    determinative  of  the  question  whether  the  marriage  is   one   of
    convenience.  The First-tier Tribunal got  that  right.   However,  the
    judge misdirected herself by applying regulation 8, which is  concerned
    only with extended family members, that is, those who  are  not  family
    members as defined.  The definition of 'family  member'  at  regulation
    7(1)(a) includes a person's spouse.

17. The question of the state of the parties' marriage is  nothing  to  the
    point in the consideration of the correct test under  Regulation  7(1).
    The interview questions which are recited in the refusal letter are not
    followed by any reasoning as to what  is  said  to  be  the  change  of
    circumstances since arrival, and indeed, of the 32 questions which were
    asked, only the final 11 questions have any relevance to their life  in
    the United Kingdom.  The refusal letter does not explain why  questions
    as to the working hours, salary, place of work, availability of Sky TV,
    and the colours of the rubbish bins and rubbish collection dates at the
    property where they live indicate a change in circumstances  since  the
    marriage such that the appellant is not entitled to  a  residence  card
    based on her status as her husband's spouse.

18. There being no  other  reason  advanced  for  not  complying  with  the
    mandatory terms of regulation 17, I allowed the appeal at  the  hearing
    and directed the issue of a residence card.

Conclusions

19. The First-tier Tribunal did make a material error of law in the  making
    of its decision.

20. I set aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision and allow the appeal.

21. I direct that the respondent issue the appellant with a residence card.



Signed        Date:  11 March 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

