
[pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/39832/2014
                                                               IA/39840/2014
                                                               IA/39839/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 September 2015                  |On 6 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                     BDP
                                     RBP
                                     RP
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr G Davison, instructed by Sangat Advice Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of India.  The first and second  appellants
    are husband and wife and the third appellant is  their  child  who  was
    born in 2006.  The  appellants  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge  Thomas)  against  the  decision  of  the  respondent  dated  28
    September 2014 to refuse them leave to remain in the United Kingdom  on
    grounds outside the Immigration Rules.  The First-tier  Tribunal  in  a
    decision dated 16 January 2015, dismissed the appeals.  The  appellants
    now appeal, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal proceeded on  the  ground  of
    Article 8 ECHR only; the appellants  are  not  entitled  for  leave  to
    remain under the Immigration Rules.  The third appellant  was  born  in
    the United Kingdom and has lived in the United Kingdom continuously for
    seven  years  but,  having  regard  to  Section  55  of  the   Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009, the respondent considered that it
    was reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom with the
    first and second appellants.  Judge  Thomas  heard  oral  evidence  and
    considered the documentary evidence before him.  At [14 - 24] he made a
    series of findings of fact.  He did not accept evidence from the  first
    and second appellants that they had been told by an agent that  further
    applications had been made for them to remain in  the  United  Kingdom.
    He found that the appellants had entered  as  visitors  and  were  well
    aware that leave was required in order to continue living here legally.
     He observed that the onus was on the appellants to ensure  that  their
    immigration status remained in accordance with the law.  The fact  that
    the appellants had remained without status  for  a  further  six  years
    undermined their credibility as witnesses.  The judge also  noted  [15]
    that the appellants gave contradictory evidence regarding contact  with
    the  first  appellant's  parents.   The  judge  found  that  the  first
    appellant's parents are not settled in the United States of America  as
    he claimed.  The judge found that there was a home  or  land  in  India
    which could offer a means of support for the appellants  if  they  were
    removed to that country.  The judge found there was  "no  evidence"  to
    prove that it was not reasonable to expect the third appellant to  live
    in India with his parents.  The  third  appellant  had  benefited  from
    education in the United Kingdom and, although he may not speak Gujarati
    very well, he would have every  opportunity  to  develop  his  language
    skills upon return to India.  The judge found that the third  appellant
    was not of a "particularly crucial examination stage of his education."
     He observed that  the  third  appellant  was  not  a  British  citizen
    although he had been born here and neither he nor his parents  had  any
    clear entitlement to remain in the country.  He gave little  weight  to
    the private life of the appellants developed in this country at a  time
    when they had no right to be here.

 3. The grounds of appeal make reference to the guidance document  produced
    by the respondent.  This document provides guidance  for  case  workers
    concerned with the application of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.
     In the guidance at 11.2.4, it is stated that "strong reasons  will  be
    required in order to refuse a case with continuous  residence  of  more
    than seven years."  Mr Davison, for the appellants, submitted  that  no
    strong reasons had been established in this case for removing the third
    appellant who had lived his life in this country and  was  now  aged  9
    years.  Mr  Davison  referred  to  an  Immigration  Minister's  written
    response to the Joint Committee on Human Rights during the  passage  of
    the Immigration Act 2014.  Both the decision of the Court of Appeal  in
    EA (Nigeria) and the minister's response drew  attention  to  the  fact
    that, when a child has lived in a country of his birth for 7 years,  he
    may well have developed ties within the wider community and beyond  the
    family life of his own home.  Mr Davison submitted that the  judge  had
    failed to deal with these important aspects of the case  and  that  the
    decision should be set aside.

 4. I do not agree with Mr Davison's submission.  Judge Thomas' decision is
    a model of concise analysis.  It is true that he has  not  referred  to
    the respondent's guidance  but,  equally,  there  is  nothing  whatever
    perverse regarding the judge's decision to agree with the reasons given
    in the refusal letter by the Secretary of State for refusing  leave  to
    remain to these  appellants  under  Article  8  ECHR.   The  judge  has
    properly considered the public interest [22] and, in doing so, has  had
    regard to the findings of fact, many of which are not favourable to the
    appellants' credibility, which he made at [14] et seq.  The judge might
    well have added there is a strong public interest  concerned  with  the
    removal of adult individuals who have entered  the  United  Kingdom  as
    visitors and who have sought to give untruthful evidence regarding  the
    absence of ties with family members abroad in order to seek  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom.   The  judge  made  reference  to  the  relevant
    jurisprudence (EV (Philippines)  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874).  Furthermore,
    although the judge had before  him  evidence  showing  that  the  third
    appellant was well settled and doing extremely well  at  school,  there
    was no specific evidence which indicated that the third  appellant  had
    established ties in a community beyond his own family  to  require  the
    protection of Article 8.  So far as his own  education  was  concerned,
    the fact that he is doing well at school  is  not  enough  to  make  it
    unreasonable for the third appellant to transfer that education  abroad
    and the judge was right to point out at the trial that  the  child  had
    not reached a particularly crucial stage of his education; it  will  be
    several years before he takes any public examinations.   I  acknowledge
    that there is some tension between the "strong reasons" referred to  in
    the respondent's guidance paper and the "reasonableness" of expecting a
    child to move abroad with his or her parents when there are no  obvious
    obstacles in the way to such a course of action.   However,  ultimately
    there is nothing whatever regarding this judge's decision  which  might
    be described as perverse either by reference  to  the  facts  which  he
    found or to the relevant law.  Another Tribunal may, on the same facts,
    have reached a different outcome but that is not the point.  The  Upper
    Tribunal should hesitate before interfering with the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal  which  is  in  accordance  with  statute  law  and
    jurisprudence and which is supported by clear cogent reasoning.  I find
    that is the case here.  In the circumstances, therefore, these  appeals
    are dismissed.

Notice of Decision

These appeals are dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 10 December 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 10 December 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
