
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39626/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 July 2016                      |On 05 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

                                MOHAMMAD SAFI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss K McCarthy, Counsel, Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Afghanistan aged 21. He claims  to  have
    arrived illegally in the UK in 2008 when he was  aged  13.  He  claimed
    asylum. On 3 March 2009 the respondent  refused  that  application  but
    granted him DL under its policy on unaccompanied minors. In March  2012
    he applied for an extension of leave.  This  was  refused  in  November
    2012. His appeal was dismissed in May 2013.  Following his arrest as an
    overstayer  in  December  2013  and  February  2014  he  made  a   full
    application for leave to remain on family  and  private  life  grounds.
    Both were refused, the latter on 19 September  2014.   The  appellant's
    appeal came before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  (FtJ)  Traynor.   In  a
    decision dated 25 November 2015 FtT Judge Traynor dismissed his  appeal
    on asylum, humanitarian protection, Article 3 ECHR and also  under  the
    Immigration Rules and Article 8.

2.   The grounds of appeal were four in number.  First it  was  argued  that
    the judge had erred in departing from expert  evidence  without  giving
    cogent  reasons  when  considering  "very  significant  obstacles   "to
    reintegration under para 276ADE(vi).  The grounds pointed out that  the
    judge had before him two expert reports, one  from  Dr  Giustozzi,  the
    other from Mr Tim Foxley, both of whom had highlighted the difficulties
    on return of a single male without family support.   Second  the  judge
    erred in speculating  that  the  SSHD  would  give  assistance  to  the
    appellant in Kabul. Third, it was submitted that  he  had  irrationally
    rejected the medical evidence that the  appellant  was  suffering  from
    depression.  Fourthly,  the  judge  had  mistakenly  assumed  that  the
    appellant would be able on return to Kabul to fend for himself  because
    he had "IT skills" and "technical skills", even  though  the  appellant
    had not commenced studies in IT because of his health difficulties.

3.   I should note at the outset that at the hearing before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge there was an issue as to whether  the  appellant's  case
    stood to be considered not just under the Immigration Rules para 276 in
    particular, but also on asylum  and  humanitarian  protection  grounds.
    The judge's conclusion was that as the appellant had made no attempt to
    put forward a fresh asylum claim based on fresh evidence he would adopt
    the findings of the previous Tribunal. The appellant has not sought  to
    challenge this aspect of the judge's decision.

4.   I am not persuaded that the grounds disclose a material error of law.

5.   As regards the judge's treatment of the expert evidence it is first  of
    all clear that he gave careful considerations to Dr Giustozzi's report,
    stating at [89] that:

         "It is further contended that under the terms of Article 15(c)  the
         appellant will be at risk of serious harm. Counsel on behalf of the
         appellant contends that, since the  decision  was  reached  in  the
         previous appeal in 2013, events on the grounds in Afghanistan  have
         changed in that the country is less secure and that there is now  a
         great risk that the appellant will face serious harm because he  is
         a particularly vulnerable young man. Once again,  I  do  not  agree
         with  that  submission  or  find  that  it   carries   any   merit,
         notwithstanding the reliance upon the reports of both Dr  Giustozzi
         and Tim Foxley.  In the case of Dr Giustozzi, I accept  his  report
         provides illustrations for difficulties faced by young persons  who
         have returned to Afghanistan. Nevertheless, little regard has  been
         taken on the fact that when the appellant returns to  that  country
         it has to be in the context that neither the previous Tribunal  nor
         myself accept that he no longer has  the  ability  to  contact  his
         family.  I entirely discount  the  submission  of  the  appellant's
         representatives that the respondent is under any further obligation
         to attempt to trace  the  appellant's  family.  The  appellant  has
         produced a letter dated February 2015 from British Red Cross and as
         suggested t there is additional evidence to  show  that  they  have
         required further information from him and that he is  now  awaiting
         to hear from them. Despite the fact that some months  have  elapsed
         since the appellant produced that information to them, he  has  not
         provided  any  document  from  British  Red  Cross  to  update  the
         position.  Where the appellant was  not  found  to  be  a  credible
         claimant by the First-tier Tribunal, and where I will not interfere
         with those findings, then I must conclude that I cannot accept that
         he no longer has any knowledge of the whereabouts of his family  or
         how he can contact them."

6.    Miss  McCarthy  has  submitted  that  the  judge's  assessment  of  Dr
    Giustozzi employed a false premise since the evidence did not establish
    that the appellant would have  family  support  in  Afghanistan.   This
    submission suffers from a serious  initial  difficulty  -  it  was  not
    advanced in the grounds.  it is also  impossible  to  square  with  the
    judge's specific findings that the appellant had family in  Afghanistan
    and an ability to contact them, a finding reaffirming that  made  by  a
    previous  Tribunal.    Miss  McCarthy  has  argued  that  because   the
    appellant's family lived in his home area of Baghlan and the background
    evidence (including the report of Tim  Foxley) demonstrated that people
    cannot travel in safety between there and Kabul, this finding does  not
    establish that the appellant would have family support available to him
    in Kabul. However,  given  the  extended  family  system  prevalent  in
    Afghanistan the judge was entitled to assume that he  would  have  such
    support available and I note that neither of the country expert reports
    considered that this was not a real possibility.

7.   In relation to the report of Tim Foxley, I would accept that the  judge
    did not  set  out  any  distinct  reasons  for  finding  it  of  little
    relevance, but he was clearly aware of its content of  the  report  and
    what it was said to prove by the appellants: see [76].  Further, as  is
    clear from the quotations made  from  his  report  in  the  appellant's
    grounds the principal thrust of that report was that there was  a  real
    risk of serious harm on return to Kabul  for  single  young  men.  Miss
    McCarthy  has  sought  that  argue  that  Tim   Foxley's  report   also
    demonstrates risk on return to young  men  even  if  they  have  family
    support but   it  is  quite  clear  that  the  evidence  presented  and
    marshalled in this report relates to young and vulnerable men  with  no
    family or social support. Accordingly, as is made clear in  [89]  cited
    earlier, the judge's stated reasons for finding Dr  Giustozzi's  report
    of limited relevance also applied to Tim Foxley's report  and  did  not
    require distinct elaboration.

8.   I do not agree with  the  grounds  that  the  judge  assumed  that  the
    appellant "will be returned to Afghanistan .. in circumstances where he
    will be given assistance by the United Kingdom authorities ".  Far from
    being speculation that assessment was based  on  the  country  guidance
    provided by the Tribunal in AK (Afghanistan) [2012] UKUT 00163 and  the
    appellant had not adduced any evidence to indicate that the Home Office
    had changed its practice of providing forced returnees  to  Afghanistan
    with returns and reintegration packages.  In AK at [224]  the  UT  made
    clear that the importance of such packages was not  to  be  exaggerated
    but made clear nonetheless  that  as  well  as  assisting  with  skills
    training and employment opportunities, they did position returnees from
    the UK advantageously compared to IDPs.

9.   Although not identified as a separate ground Miss  McCarthy  sought  to
    argue that one aspect of the judge's deficient treatment of the  expert
    evidence was that he overlooked what was  said  in  the  reports  about
    risks to returning young adults perceived to be Westernised, but  since
    the expert evidence itself made clear this was only be in  the  context
    of return to rural areas, and would not apply in Afghanistan, I see  no
    merit in this additional point either.

10.  This is a convenient  point  to  deal  with  the  fourth  ground  which
    contends that the judge mistakenly assumed the appellant had IT skills.
    I would accept that he may have misunderstood the appellant's  existing
    educational qualifications which do not  include  an  IT  qualification
    (only enrolment on an IT course). However, it is clear from the judge's
    decision read as a whole that he considered that by having successfully
    commenced living an independent life away from his foster family and in
    light of activities he had undertaken  whilst  living  in  the  UK  the
    appellant  has  acquired  "linguistic  and  life  skills  as  well   as
    significant academic achievements and skills which will  stand  him  in
    good stead." That assessment was based squarely on the appellant's  own
    evidence as set out in [29].

11.  Miss McCarthy contends, by reference to the  third  ground  of  appeal,
    that the judge's assessment of the appellant  as  an  active  and  able
    young man with life skills wrongly  disregarded  the  medical  evidence
    according   to   which   the   appellant   suffers   from   depression,
    sleeplessness, feeling  lazy  and  hopeless  and  being  made  to  keep
    appointments and to wake up.  The appellant produced evidence  that  he
    had been seeing a counsellor and he also produced  a  letter  from  his
    G.P.  I see no merit in this contention. The appellant has been asked a
    number of questions regarding the medical evidence,  including  by  the
    judge: see [53].  Indeed, because at that stage the G.P. letter was not
    to hand, the judge agreed to accept it later. The judge considered  the
    medical evidence, including the G.P. letter at [101].

12.  From this paragraph it can be seen that the reasons given by the  judge
    for concluding that the appellant was  not  psychologically  vulnerable
    were well within the range of reasonable responses to the evidence.  In
    particular, the judge was quite entitled to attach  significant  weight
    to the fact that it was only relatively recently that the appellant had
    decided to see a G.P.   There is no reason to consider that  the  judge
    assessment did not take into account the evidence  from  the  appellant
    himself and, from his support workers. It must also be  said  that  the
    G.P letter did not  confirm  a  clinical  finding  of  depression;  the
    G.P.'s language is  limited  to  a  description  of  the  symptoms  the
    appellant described  to  the  G.P.  and  noted  that  the  decision  to
    prescribe the appellant Mirtazapine came about after a specific request
    made by the appellant for an antidepressant: see [37]. I  also  observe
    that on the appellant's account a significant cause  of  his  anxieties
    was the uncertain nature of his immigration status and once the  appeal
    process is completed so will that uncertainty.


Notice of Decision


13.  For the above reasons I am satisfied  that  the  judge's  decision  was
    legally sound and that accordingly it should stand.

14.  No anonymity direction is made.


               [pic]
Signed                          Date: 2 September 2016

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


