
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39558/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 24 February 2016                      |On 14 March 2016                  |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MR MD TANIME HOSSAIN
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Not present or represented


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal brought by the Secretary of State in  relation  to  a
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Rodger promulgated on  13  August
    2015.  The issue which had to be determined by the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge was whether an English language test conducted had been  obtained
    fraudulently and in particular whether  the  individual  concerned  had
    made use of a proxy.  The judge was critical of the  lack  of  original
    evidence in relation to the test and in particular the audio recordings
    themselves. The judge was of the  view  that  the  original  recordings
    should be provided and, in paragraph 30, was critical of the  reference
    to 'infallible' software and the absence of robust evidence to rule out
    'false positives'.

2.   The judge  appeared  dismissive  of  what  was  styled  (paragraph  26)
    "generic  witness  statements"  from  Rebecca  Collings,   from   Peter
    Millington and from Matthew Harold setting out the practice adopted  by
    ETS. The judge considered this unpersuasive in determining whether  the
    alleged fraud could be proved.

3.   I consider those criticisms of the Secretary of State's evidence to  be
    misplaced.  The evidence very fully dealt  with  the  manner  in  which
    recordings were tested and compared and it led to a clear conclusion in
    this specific case a proxy had been used.  The  judge  seemed  to  give
    undue weight to her view that there would have been  no  need  for  the
    individual to use a proxy since in her assessment, albeit  at  a  later
    point in time, the fluency of his oral English was adequate.

3.   The first ground of appeal advanced by the Secretary of  State  is  the
    failure to give reasons and I am  satisfied  that  this  is  made  out.
    There is no clear or sufficient reason given for the view expressed  by
    the judge that the individual would have had  no  reason  to  secure  a
    certificate by neither deception nor are there reasons  given  for  the
    wholesale rejection of the substantial body of evidence  relied  on  by
    the Secretary of State.

4.   The second ground pursued alleges a material misdirection of  law  this
    too is made out. The requisite standard which must be  applied  is  the
    balance of probabilities, albeit the exercise must  take  into  account
    the seriousness of the allegations which are being  made.  Although  in
    paragraph 14 the judge refers, correctly, to  the  standard  being  the
    balance of probabilities, it would appear from later  references,  such
    as paragraph 25, and reading the analysis holistically that in  reality
    the judge applied a somewhat higher standard. Requiring filing  of  the
    digital recordings, for example, as the judge suggests in paragraph  26
    or direct evidence from an expert who has listened  to  the  recordings
    (paragraph 27) seeks to impose an impermissibly high  standard  on  the
    Secretary of State.

5.   The Secretary of State having succeeded on both  grounds,  this  appeal
    must be allowed.  Mr Staunton, for the  Secretary  of  State,  properly
    concedes that there is a substantive issue on credibility  which  needs
    to be determined and the only proper course  is  for  the  case  to  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a re-hearing.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

Matter remitted to First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed        Mark Hill                          Date     3 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC

