
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/39519/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 August 2015                    |On 20 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       mr mohammad dawan pannan sazzad
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Rahman, Legal Representative from MQ Hassan
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. For ease of reference, I shall refer to the Appellant as the  Secretary
    of State, and the Respondent as the claimant.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Narayan (Judge Narayan),  promulgated  on  15
    January 2015, in which he allowed the claimant's  appeal.  That  appeal
    was against the Secretary of State's decision, dated 18 September 2014,
    to refuse to vary the claimant's leave to remain as a Tier  4  Student,
    and to remove him from the United  Kingdom  under  section  47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 3. The claimant is a national of Bangladesh and was born on 1  June  1980.
    He has been in this country since 19 February 2008, always  with  leave
    as either a Tier 4 Student  or  a  Tier  1  Highly  Skilled  Post-Study
    Migrant. On 16 August 2014 he made an application for further leave  to
    remain as a Tier 4 Student. The funds relied upon derived from  a  loan
    provided to the claimant by  the  National  Credit  and  Commerce  Bank
    Limited. A letter from  that  institution,  dated  6  August  2014  and
    confirming the  loan  and  the  availability  of  2,000,000  taka,  was
    submitted with the application.

 4. The Secretary of State refused the application because it was concluded
    that the loan was  not  one  provided  by  a  source  identified  under
    Paragraph 1B(d)(7) of Appendix C to the Immigration Rules. As a result,
    the Appellant could not be awarded any points under Appendix C and  the
    application fell to be refused under Paragraph 245ZX(d) of the Rules.

 5. The claimant is married, and his wife has been a dependent on him since
    her arrival in the United Kingdom on 28 September 2013. She too applied
    for an extension of leave. She too was refused, on the ground that  the
    claimant's application had been unsuccessful.

The decision of Judge Narayan

 6. Before Judge Narayan, the thrust  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  case
    appears to have been that the claimant should have  provided  a  letter
    from the national regulator of the National Credit  and  Commerce  Bank
    Limited, that being the Bank of Bangladesh. The claimant argued that no
    such letter was required under Appendix C. Judge Narayan concluded that
    a letter from the national regulator was not in fact required, and that
    the letter provided by the claimant was sufficient to satisfy Paragraph
    1B(d) of Appendix C (see paragraph 19 of the decision). This being  the
    only live issue before him, the appeal was duly allowed.

 7. The claimant's wife's appeal was  linked  to  his,  and  Judge  Narayan
    allowed her appeal as well.

 8. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the basis that  a
    letter from the national regulator was required. On the  basis  of  the
    grounds, permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    McDade on 12 March 2015. It is to be noted that for some unknown reason
    only the decision in the claimant's appeal was challenged.

The hearing before me: application to amend the grounds of appeal

 9. Mr Duffy made an application to amend the Secretary of State's grounds.
    He accepted that the original grounds were misconceived: there  was  no
    requirement under Paragraph 1B(d) of Appendix C for a letter  from  the
    national regulator. His amended ground, drafted only a day prior to the
    hearing, relied instead on the  requirement  under  Paragraph  1B(d)(7)
    that any loan must be, "provided by the national government, the  state
    or regional government or a government sponsored  student  loan  or  is
    part of an academic or educational loans scheme." The  claimant's  loan
    was a commercial one only, and as such did not satisfy the requirement.

10. Mr Duffy apologised for the lateness of the application, but  explained
    that he had only received the file  the  day  before.  Nonetheless,  he
    submitted that the amended ground had real merit,  and  the  point  had
    been raised in the Secretary of State's original decision letter.

11. Prior to deciding on the application, I gave Mr Rahman time to read the
    amended ground and to consider his position.

12. Mr Rahman opposed the application. The Secretary of State was accepting
    that the original ground of appeal, upon which permission to appeal was
    granted, was flawed. He was unsure whether rule 5(3)(c)  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal's Procedure Rules allowed for the amendment of grounds in  the
    manner sought by Mr Duffy. He confirmed that he was  prepared  to  deal
    with the substance of the new ground if required to do so.

13. I granted Mr Duffy's application and permitted that  amendment  of  the
    grounds of appeal,  pursuant  to  my  discretionary  power  under  rule
    5(3)(c) of the Upper Tribunal's Procedure Rules,  in  conjunction  with
    rule 2 of those rules. My reasons for this are as follows.

14. First, the amended ground has clear merit.  The  requirement  that  the
    loan was derived through a specified source is a mandatory  one  rather
    than a matter of  discretionary  judgment,  and  on  the  face  of  the
    evidence it is at the very least strongly arguable that the requirement
    was not met.

15. Second, the provision was in place as at the  date  of  the  claimant's
    application and the hearing before Judge Narayan.  It  was  the  single
    basis of refusal in the Secretary of State's decision letter.  To  this
    extent, the point had been raised previously and was,  in  reality,  an
    obvious one.

16. Third, I fully appreciate that the original grounds of appeal relied on
    by  the  Secretary  of  State  were,  as  acknowledged  by  Mr   Duffy,
    misconceived. To that extent, permission to appeal  was  granted  on  a
    mistaken premise. However, this does not  deprive  me  of  jurisdiction
    insofar as rule 5(3)(c) of the Procedure Rules  is  concerned.  What  I
    must do of  course  is  to  exercise  that  discretion  justly  and  in
    accordance  with  the  overriding  objective  and  all  other  relevant
    factors. This I have sought to do  within  the  reasons  given  for  my
    decision to permit the amendement.

17. Fourth, Mr Rahman had time to consider his position and confirmed  that
    he was prepared to deal with the substance of the new grounds.  He  has
    not sought an adjournment. Thus, I conclude that there is no  prejudice
    to him or the claimant in allowing the amendment insofar as fairness at
    the hearing is concerned.

The hearing before me: submissions on the amended grounds of appeal

18. Mr  Duffy  relied  on  his  amended  grounds.  The  policy  behind  the
    requirement in Paragraph 1B(d)(7) of  Appendix  C  was  that  the  loan
    should not be an additional immediate drain on the  applicant's  funds.
    The loan must be part of a scheme, much  like  that  in  place  in  the
    United Kingdom. In the present  case,  the  Appellant's  loan  did  not
    satisfy the requirement of  the  Rules  and  Judge  Narayan  materially
    misdirected himself by concluding that it did, or at least  failing  to
    deal with the issue at all.

19. Mr Rahman submitted that  the  letter  from  the  National  Credit  and
    Commerce Bank Limited stated that the loan was "an education loan", and
    therefore satisfied Paragraph 1B(d)(7) of  Appendix  C.  There  was  no
    error by Judge Narayan.

Decision on error of law

20. Whilst I have some sympathy for Judge Narayan, I conclude that  he  did
    materially err in law by failing to  consider  the  specific  mandatory
    requirement of Paragraph 1B(d)(7) of Appendix, or implicitly concluding
    that the claimant's loan did satisfy that requirement.

21. Paragraph 1B(d)(7) read, as at the date of decision:

       "(7) the loan is provided by the national government, the state or
       regional government or a government sponsored student loan company or
       is part of an academic or educational loans scheme."

22. Applying the natural and ordinary meaning of the  words  used  in  that
    mandatory provision, it is clear to me that the  loan  relied  on  must
    emanate from one of the specified sources.  A  purely  commercial  loan
    from a bank, even if stated by that institution to be for the  purposes
    of education, is not sufficient to satisfy the requirement.

23. Judge Narayan, whilst  distracted  from  this  core  provision  by  the
    submissions of the Presenting Officer, nonetheless was fully  aware  of
    the contents of the Secretary of State's decision letter (see paragraph
    5) and was bound to assess whether the claimant satisfied  the  various
    mandatory requirements of Appendix C. He clearly failed to specifically
    address Paragraph 1B(d)(7) in his conclusions.  Alternatively,  he  may
    have implicitly decided that the loan did satisfy  that  provision.  On
    either scenario, he materially erred. This is  because  the  claimant's
    loan simply could not satisfy the requirement  in  question.  The  loan
    came from the National Credit and Commerce bank Limited, but it clearly
    was not provided under an "educational loans scheme",  as  required  by
    Paragraph 1B(d)(7). The loan was, in reality, a purely commercial loan,
    albeit one which was based upon the claimant's intention to use it  for
    educational purposes.

24. In light of the above, I set aside the decision of Judge Narayan.



Re-make decision

25. Both representatives were agreed that I should go on  and  re-make  the
    decision on the evidence before me.

26. In doing so, I refer back to what I have said in paragraph  23,  above.
    The claimant's loan is not one that could satisfy the  requirements  of
    Paragraph 1B(d)(7) of Appendix C. Therefore,  he  is  not  entitled  to
    points under that appendix. In turn, he cannot meet the requirements of
    Paragraph 245ZX(d) of the Rules.

27. The appeal must fail under the Rules.

28. There is no other ground upon which the claimant relies in  his  appeal
    before me.

29. In respect of the claimant's wife, her successful appeal  before  Judge
    Narayan stands at the present time, as it has not been challenged. What
    the Secretary of State does next is entirely a matter for her.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I re-make the decision by dismissing the appeal under the Immigration  Rules



Signed      Date: 17 August 2015

H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed      Date: 17 August 2015

Judge H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

