
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/39233/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Taylor House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 October 2015                    |On 9 October 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                                IRFAN RAMZAN
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

      1. The respondent notified the appellant of her refusal to  issue  him
         with an EEA residence card as confirmation of a right of  residence
         under European Community law as the  spouse  of  Lesley  Christelle
         Moeson, a French national exercising treat  rights  in  the  United
         Kingdom, on 5 October 2014 due to  his  failure  to  produce  valid
         evidence  of  their  marriage   or   involvement   in   a   durable
         relationship.

      2. His appeal against  that  decision  was  dismissed  by  First  Tier
         Tribunal Judge Mozolowski ("the Judge") following a hearing  on  16
         January 2015. This is an appeal against that decision.

      3. On 7 October 2015 the appellant applied to adjourn the  hearing  as
         he and his wife have such personal problems they cannot attend  the
         hearing. The application was refused that  day  by  Upper  Tribunal
         Judge Dawson as no reasons were given as to why attendance was  not
         possible. The  application  was  not  renewed  before  me.  No  one
         attended the hearing. The hearing had  originally  been  listed  to
         take place at Field House. A notice to that effect was sent out  by
         the Tribunal on 15 September 2015. I was informed by the respondent
         that the parties had been notified by the  Tribunal  by  way  of  a
         notice of the change of venue on  22  September  2015,  that  being
         confirmed by the History Report printout I caused  to  be  obtained
         from the Tribunal.

      4. I decided to proceed in the absence of the  appellant  as  no  good
         reason had been given for  the  failure  to  attend,  none  of  the
         matters of concern to Upper Tribunal  Judge  Kopieczek  (see  below
         [6]) when he granted permission to appeal have been addressed,  and
         it appeared to me that it would be unfair not to proceed given  the
         long standing failure by the appellant to  meaningfully  engage  at
         any stage  with  the  appeal  process  through  the  production  of
         documents or attendance at hearings.  I cannot help but  note  that
         the application to adjourn has once again been  made  at  the  very
         last minute and that every other appellant  and  representative  in
         the 3 other cases in my list that day attended having received  the
         hearing venue alteration notification.

The grounds of this application

      5. The grounds of this application are that the Judge wrongly  refused
         to adjourn to enable the Appellant's wife to  attend  the  hearing,
         and failed to consider documents.

The grant of permission

      6. Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek granted  permission  to  appeal  (14
         July 2015), it having been refused by  Designated  Judge  Macdonald
         (23 March 2015). Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek stated that

             "Although all the circumstances are not at the  moment  clear,
             it appears that on 12 January 2015, prior to the hearing,  the
             appellant sought an adjournment on the basis that  his  "wife"
             was out of the country. I cannot see any indication  from  the
             Tribunal's file that that application was ever dealt with. The
             appellant failed to attend the hearing before  the  First-tier
             Tribunal on 15 January 2015. The First-tier judge  decided  to
             proceed to deal with the appeal on the basis of the absence of
             the appellant from the hearing, but not apparently considering
             the earlier adjournment request on the basis  of  the  claimed
             absence of his wife from the UK.

             It is to be noted that on 9 January the appellant's solicitors
             withdrew representation (at the appellant's  request)  so  the
             appellant was not represented on 15 January.

             It is also to be noted that there is  an  endorsement  on  the
             Tribunal file flap as follows "Adjourned prior to hearing  due
             to lack  of  judiciary",  and  dated  13  January  2015.  That
             endorsement may be irrelevant since the appeal was in fact put
             before the First-tier judge on 15 January, but it is a  matter
             that may require further exploration.

             Aside from the question  of  the  adjournment,  the  appellant
             complains that the First-tier judge "ignored all the  evidence
             and   supported   (sic)   documents   regarding    proof    of
             relationship", although it is not apparent that there was much
             by way of evidence before the First-tier judge.  In  addition,
             the appellant would have to have established the  validity  of
             his marriage with reference to reliable  evidence,  which  the
             judge was not satisfied had been done.

             Nevertheless, I consider it arguable that there was procedural
             unfairness in the First-tier judge proceeding to determine the
             appeal in the absence  of  the  appellant  given  the  matters
             highlighted above. The appellant will need to explain however,
             why he did not attend when he seems to have  known  about  the
             hearing, why his wife left  the  country  when  there  was  an
             appeal pending, as well as proof that she was in fact  out  of
             the country. It will also  need  to  be  established  how  the
             judge's decision could have been any different even if both he
             and his wife had attended."

Respondent's position

      7. The respondent asserted in her reply (11 August  2015)  in  essence
         that;

          1) The Judge directed herself appropriately,

          2) It is unclear whether  the  Judge  would  have  adjourned  the
             hearing and therefore the appellant ought to have attended the
             hearing, and

          3) The respondent has not seen the documents allegedly  submitted
             regarding the relationship and  reserves  her  position  until
             those documents have been reviewed.

      8. Mr Nath submitted that whatever the  merits  of  the  grounds,  the
         application could not succeed in any  event  given  TA  and  Others
         (Kareem explained) Ghana [2014] UKUT 00316 (IAC) (see below [15]).

      9. I note here that the only documents ever submitted by the appellant
         were listed in the application as including 2  photographs  of  the
         appellant, 5 photographs  of  the  wife,  the  wife's  passport,  a
         contract of employment/employer's letter, 2 wage slips,  a  utility
         bill, a marriage certificate together with  translation,  a  letter
         from the Ambassador of the Republic of Guinea, a TV license, and  a
         tenancy agreement.

Findings and conclusions

Ground 1 - Refusal to adjourn

     10. I bear in mind Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness)  [2014]  UKUT  00418
         (IAC) which guides me to the view that where an adjournment refusal
         is challenged on fairness grounds, it  is  important  to  recognise
         that the question for the Upper Tribunal is not whether the  First-
         tier Tribunal acted reasonably.  Rather, the test to be applied  is
         that of fairness:   was  there  any  deprivation  of  the  affected
         party's right to a fair hearing.

     11. Despite the observations of Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek I  still
         have no information as to "why he did not attend when he  seems  to
         have known about the hearing, why his wife left  the  country  when
         there was an appeal pending, as well as proof that she was in  fact
         out of the country." I also have no submission from  the  appellant
         as to "how the judge's decision could have been any different  even
         if both he and his wife had attended". I am not satisfied  that  it
         has been established that the appellant  was  deprived  of  a  fair
         hearing as he chose not to attend a hearing he could  not  possibly
         succeed in (see below [15]) and has given no cogent reason for  his
         failure to do. The fact that the adjournment application made on 12
         January 2015 does not appear  to  have  been  considered  does  not
         absolve the appellant of his obligation to attend  the  hearing  or
         give explanations for the matters of concern  helpfully  raised  by
         Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek.

     12. In my judgement there was therefore no material error of law in the
         Judge refusing to adjourn.

Ground 2 - non consideration of documents

     13. The Judge noted [5] that she  took  into  account  the  appellant's
         grounds of appeal and the  respondent's  bundle  of  documents.  No
         other documents appear to have ever been filed. The Judge does  not
         have to slavishly list every document received and  considered.  At
         [8] the Judge summarised the grounds of appeal. At [9] she referred
         to the letter from the Ambassador of Guinea. At [15]  she  referred
         to the lease and TV license, those being the only ones other than a
         copy of the passport in the Respondent's bundle. It is unclear  how
         the individual identification of  any  other  documents  that  were
         submitted could possibly have made a difference to the outcome. The
         photographs are of individuals as opposed to a couple, and the work
         related  documents  are  not  evidence  of  co-habitation  but   of
         employment.

     14. In my judgement there was therefore no material error of law in the
         manner in which the Judge dealt with the documents.





Other matters

     15. I note the observation  made  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kopieczek
         regarding the Tribunal file flap note "Adjourned prior  to  hearing
         due to lack of judiciary" dated 13 January 2015. I am not satisfied
         that this has any bearing on the matter as there is no  evidence  I
         can see that the appellant was ever aware that there  may  have  at
         some point been an adjournment (that was  obviously  rescinded)  on
         that or any other basis or notified of it. It appears that whatever
         temporary listing problem there may have been was speedily resolved
         without the parties being notified there was ever a problem.

     16. In any event, the appeal could not possibly have succeeded given TA
         which guides me to the view following Kareem (Proxy marriages -  EU
         law) [2014] UKUT 00024 (IAC), that  the  determination  of  whether
         there is a marital relationship for the purposes of the Immigration
         (EEA) Regulations 2006 must be examined in accordance with the laws
         of  the  Member  State  from  which  the  Union   citizen   obtains
         nationality.  This  was  clearly  in  the  Judges  mind  given  her
         reference to its guidance  in  [13]  of  her  determination.  Upper
         Tribunal Judge Kopieczek helpfully reminded the appellant  of  this
         requirement  when  he  said  "the  appellant  would  have  to  have
         established the validity of his marriage with reference to reliable
         evidence". Despite that,  there  is  still  no  evidence  that  the
         marriage is recognised as being valid in France.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set aside the decision.


Signed:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
9 October 2015

