
[pic]


Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/39460/2014

                                                 IA/39467/2014

                                                 IA/39472/2014

                                                 IA/39473/2014





|At  Field House                    |            Decision & Reasons     |
|On 3rd July  2015                  |Promulgated                        |
|                                   |On 4th September 2015              |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY


                                   Between

                             MR A.S.B and others
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)

                                                          Appellant

                                     And


               THE  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                          Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim,Counsel, instructed by MA Consultants.
For the Respondent:  Ms Julie Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS



    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.




Introduction


1. The proceedings before the First tier Tribunal were anonymised. No
   application has been made to change this and so this should be
   maintained. I am influenced by the fact that there are children affected
   by this decision.

2. Although it is the respondent who is appealing for convenience I will
   continue to refer to the parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

3. The basic facts are not in contention. All of the appellants are
   Nigerian nationals. The first appellant came to the United Kingdom on 1
   June 2002 on a visit visa valid until 9 October 2002. He overstayed. The
   second appellant came to the United Kingdom in 2004 on a visit visa. They
   subsequently met and married here. They have two children, C, born in
   2007 and S, born in 2008. The second appellant is expecting their third
   child. The children were born in the United Kingdom and have lived all
   their lives here.

4. Various applications were made by the first named appellant from 2004 to
   secure an immigration status, all of which were unsuccessful.

5. On 27 August 2014 he applied for leave to remain on the basis of family
   and private life. He referred to various medical conditions and the
   danger posed by the Ebola virus in Nigeria. This application was refused
   on 15 September 2014 and a decision to remove the family was made.

The First tier Tribunal

6. Their appeals were heard by First-tier Immigration Judge Dickinson on 30
   January 2015. At the hearing it was accepted on behalf of the appellants
   that appendix FM could not be satisfied. C's appeal was allowed under
   rule 276 ADE of the immigration rules and the appeals of the other family
   members under article 8.

7. The judge focused on the position of C and rule 276 ADE (iv).At the date
   of application she had been in the United Kingdom for more than seven
   years. At paragraph 17 of the decision the judge said the issue was
   whether it would be reasonable to expect her to leave.

8.  At paragraph 18 the judge referred to taking into account her age, the
   length of time she had been in the United Kingdom, her education and her
   connection with and ability to adapt to life in Nigeria. The conclusion
   was that it would be unreasonable to expect her to leave. Paragraphs 19
   to 21 contain the Judge's reasons:

         19. Firstly, the third appellant has lived in the United Kingdom
         since May 2007 and as a matter of common sense, is not in the
         category of a child entering the United Kingdom as a baby and
         spending her early years here, emotional attached only to her
         family with their knowledge of the world seen through that prism.
         She has been wholly educated in the United Kingdom and for example
         through friendships, with school friends will have started to
         develop significant ties with the United Kingdom outside of the
         family unit.


         20. Secondly, I am not satisfied that it would be in her best
         interests to transfer from the current educational system which she
         has been accustomed because she clearly is benefiting from the
         same, as highlighted by her performances. Further whilst she is
         only seven years of age and thereby still at the early stages of
         her education I do not accept that she will benefit from engaging
         in another educational system and I am satisfied  that by doing so
         this could hinder her future educational development.


         21. Thirdly, whilst I accept that English is a commonly spoken
         language in Nigeria and that the 3rd appellant will therefore have
         little difficulty in communicating with others I am not satisfied
         that even with the support of her parents and sibling she would be
         able to readily adjust to the culture of the country because she
         has been in the United Kingdom since 2007 and as such will have
         become integrated into a totally different way of life and culture.
         Whilst she has never visited Nigeria and to all intents and
         purposes her outlook is British.


9. Considering article 8, the judge followed  the sequential approach of
   Razgar.On the proportionality question :

         32. I have weighed in the balance the need to maintain the
         integrity of the system of immigration control as being a means of
         protecting the economic well-being of the country and that this in
         itself might justify an interference with family life. I remind
         myself of Huang (at paragraph 6 ) that I as the decision-maker
         should bear in mind several factors , including "the general
         administrative desirability of applying known rules. If a system of
         immigration control was to be workable, predictable, consistent and
         fair as between one claimant and another ..."


         33. Factors weighing against the first appellant is the fact that
         he entered into the United Kingdom on a temporary basis, and as
         such, would have always known that his immigration status in the
         United Kingdom was limited. However "HL must not be blamed for
         matters for which he or she is not responsible, such as the conduct
         of a parent "(Zoumbas).


         34. Primary consideration is given to the interests of the children
         and welfare -S.55 Borders Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009. The
         appellant's childrens' best interests are served by them remaining
         /living with their parents .


         35. It is clearly in the best interests of the third appellant that
         he should remain in a family unit with her parents and younger
         brother and as I have found that she is entitled to remain in the
         United Kingdom under paragraph 276 ADE, I have little difficulty in
         finding that it would be a disproportionate interference with the
         family life of the third appellant to separate her from her parents
         and brother. Accordingly all these three appeals succeed under
         article 8 ECHR.

10. The decision does not mention section 117B of the 2002 Act as amended
   but in the final paragraph the judge states:

         36. I acknowledge that there will be an undermining of immigration
         control in allowing the appeals. However, on balance, the need to
         maintain family life in the United Kingdom for the reasons given
         above outweighs the economic well-being of the country.




The Upper Tribunal

11. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on the basis it
   was arguable the judge gave insufficient reasons as to why it was
   unreasonable for the family to return to Nigeria.

12. At hearing, Miss. Isherwood continued to rely upon the grounds in the
   application for leave. The application stated that the assessment by the
   judge of the reasonableness of expecting C to leave was flawed. The focus
   was upon her current studies rather than placing her situation in the
   context of the family's immigration status. It was contended the judge
   had not adequately considered the possibility of her returning to Nigeria
   with her parents and availing of the educational system in place there.
   On return she would have the support of her family and that the culture
   in Nigeria would not be totally alien given her parent's background. It
   was contended the public interest lay in the family's removal. She
   submitted this was a close family unit who could all return together.Ms
   Isherwood referred to the lack of detail in relation to the medical
   conditions referred to but in any event, as with education, the family
   had no right to medical treatment because of their lack of status.

13. Ms Isherwood submitted that the judge's conclusions were at odds with
   the relevant case law. On the facts of those cases the children were
   older than C and had not succeeded. She argued that the judge had failed
   to look at the whole position; to adequately consider the public interest
   in immigration control and that the family have abused immigration
   control. She referred me to paragraph 13 of AM(S.117 B)Malawi [2015] UKUT
   260(IAC):

         ... The mere presence of the children in the United Kingdom, and
         their academic success, was not a" Trump card" which their parents
         could deploy to demand immigration status for the whole family...


14. Mr Karim submitted that the respondent was simply dissatisfied with the
   outcome and was seeking to have the decision looked at again on its
   merits. He acknowledged that a different judge might have reached a
   different conclusion on the same facts but this was not the issue. He
   submitted it was not so much the age of the children that was relevant
   but the length of time they had spent here. He submitted that what was
   reasonable for the purposes of 276ADE (iv) amounted to a modest
   threshold. He referred to paragraph 18 were the judge set out the factors
   taken into consideration. He submitted the educational system in Nigeria
   was inferior. He pointed out the judge referred to the difficulties the
   children would face with integration into Nigeria, having lived in the
   United Kingdom all their lives. Referring to section 117 B (6) he
   submitted it was not in the public interest to remove the parents given
   C's situation.

15. In response, Ms Isherwood pointed out the issue was not the quality of
   the educational systems in the United Kingdom and Nigeria or the medical
   facilities. The family had no right to be here and they were
   `piggybacking' on C's position. She highlighted that section 117 B(6)
   requires not only that there is a genuine and subsisting parental
   responsibility with the qualifying child but also that it would not be
   reasonable to expect the child to leave .

16. I indicated I was reserving my decision and asked for views about
   disposal should I find an error of law. Ms Isherwood suggested I could
   progress to determine the merits of the appeal without reconvening and
   she submitted the outcome should be a dismissal. Mr Karim suggested that
   the matter should be remitted for a de novo hearing. He said this would
   facilitate presentation of any new evidence, particularly as there will
   be another child.

Consideration

17. I was assisted by the representatives and the cases cited provided
   invaluable guidance on the approach to be taken when considering the
   issues arising in the present appeal. I refer firstly to Zoumbas -v- SSHD
   [2013] UKSC74.The parents were described as having an unedifying
   immigration history. The father had been illegally in the United Kingdom
   since 2001 and was joined by his wife in 2002. They had a child in 2004.
   His wife and their child were removed in 2005 and returned illegally the
   following year. Refugee claims were unsuccessful. They went on to have a
   second child in 2007 and a third child in 2011. The appellant's
   representative argued that what is determined to be in a child's best
   interests should customarily dictate the outcome of the case and it would
   require substantial moment for a different result. The Supreme Court,
   referring to ZH (Tanzania) ,pointed out that the children there were
   British and the benefits of British citizenship was an important factor
   in assessing whether it was reasonable to expect a child with such
   citizenship to live in another country. Lord Hodge at paragraph 13 of his
   judgement in Zoumbas referred to the need to assess the question of
   proportionality in the particular circumstances in which the decision is
   made. There was no hard edged or bright line rule. Paragraph 24 of the
   judgement is very relevant to the circumstances in the present appeal:

         24. There is no irrationality in the conclusion that it was in the
         children's best interests to go with their parents to the Republic
         of Congo. No doubt it would have been possible to have stated that,
         other things being equal, it was in the best interests of children
         that they and their parents stayed in the United Kingdom so that
         they could obtain such benefits as healthcare and education which
         the decision maker recognised might be of a higher standard than
         would be available in the Congo. But other things were not equal.
         They were not British citizens. They had no right to future
         education and healthcare in this country. They were part of a close-
         knit family with highly educated parents and were of an age when
         their emotional needs could only be fully met within the immediate
         family unit. Such integration as had occurred into United Kingdom
         society would have been predominantly in the context of that family
         unit. Most significantly, the decision-maker concluded that they
         could be removed to the Republic of Congo in the care of their
         parents without serious detriment to their well-being.


18. In the present appeal the children have the benefit of the educational;
   health facilities; and future employment that this country offers. All
   thing being equal, it is possible to say that their best interests are
   served by remaining here with their parents. However, the children are
   not British. Their parents do not have any right to be here. It is in
   their best interest to be with their parents. If their parents cannot
   remain here in the interests of immigration control then the next best
   for the children is for them to leave as a family unit.

19. Similar considerations arose in EV(Philippines and others -v- SSHD
   [2014] EWCA Civ 874. The Court of Appeal considered how a tribunal should
   approach the proportionality question in cases involving the best
   interests of children. It had been argued that once the tribunal had
   found that the best interests of the children lay in their continuing
   with their education only the most cogent countervailing considerations
   could justify the removal of the family. Paragraph 35 of the judgement
   sets out factors in evaluating the best interests of the children, which
   include their age, the length of time here, how long they have been in
   education, what stage their education is at and their ties with the
   country to which they may be returned and any linguistic, medical or
   other difficulties in adapting. Similar factors are referred to in the
   present appeal at paragraph 18 in relation to C.

20. In EV(Philippines and others -v- SSHD the first appellant came to the
   United Kingdom in June 2007 under the work permit scheme. The following
   year she was joined by her husband as her dependant. They were then
   joined by their three children who that stage where eight, seven and
   five. The first appellant's leave was to expire in February 2011. She was
   unsuccessful in obtaining further leave to remain. Her employers had been
   underpaying her and she could not meet the rules. Unlike the present case
   the family had an initial legal basis for being together in this country.
   As here, the children were doing well at school. The First-tier Judge
   found that the best interests of the children lay in remaining with their
   parents and continuing their education in the United Kingdom. However,
   the need to maintain immigration control outweighed this. The judge bore
   in mind the parents would be employable in their home country; the family
   would not be homeless; there was an extended family; and the children had
   only been in the United Kingdom for a limited time. There was also
   education in the Philippines: the fact it was not to the same standard
   was not determinative. There are differences in the background facts from
   the present case but the approach of the First-tier Tribunal was not
   faulted in the Court of Appeal.

21.  Lord Justice Lewison at paragraph 49 stated :

         ... In the real world, the appellant is almost always a parent who
         has no right to remain in the UK. The pair thus relies on the best
         interests of his or her children in order to "piggy -back" on their
         rights.


   In the present appeal this is precisely what occurred. The decision
   indicates the only reason the appeal was allowed under article 8 for the
   remaining appellant's was because C was succeeding. Paragraph 58 of Lord
   Justice Lewison's
   judgement states:


                  In my judgement, therefore, the assessment of the best
         interests of the children must be made on the basis that the facts
         are as they are in the real world. If one parent has no right to
         remain, but the other parent does, that is the background against
         which the assessment is conducted. If neither parent has the right
         to remain, then that is the background against which the assessment
         is conducted. Thus, the ultimate question will be: is it reasonable
         to expect the charges follow the parent with no right to remain in
         the country of origin?


         60.... None of the family is a British citizen. None has the right
         to remain in this country. If the mother is removed, the father has
         no independent right to remain. If the parents are removed, then it
         is entirely reasonable to expect the children to go with them. As
         the immigration judge found it is obviously in their best interest
         to remain with their parents. Although it is, of course a question
         of fact for the tribunal, I cannot see that the desirability of
         being educated at public expense in the UK can outweigh the benefit
         to the children of remaining with their parents. Just as we cannot
         provide medical treatment for the world, so we cannot educate the
         world.

     These comments are particularly pertinent to the present appeal.

22. Judge Dickinson does not refer to section 117 B of the 2002 Act. In
   Dube (ss.117A-117D) [2015]UKUT 90 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal pointed out
   the statutory obligation to have regard to the  considerations set out in
   the section. These considerations are not exhaustive. The Upper Tribunal
   said that what mattered was substance not form and it was not an error of
   law to fail to refer to the sections. Ii is not apparent from the
   decision in the present appeal that the judge took into account these
   considerations when allowing the appeals under article 8. Rather, the
   decision indicates that the article 8 appeals succeeded by `piggybacking'
   on the allowance of C's appeal.

23.  I was also referred to AM(S117B) Malawi [2015]UKUT 260 (IAC).This
   decision is particularly relevant in relation to C's appeal because of
   the comparison of section 117 B(6) and 276ADE(1) (iv) . In that case the
   father came with entry clearance as a student in September 2006 and was
   joined by his wife and elder daughter the following year. A second child
   was born in 2011. His leave expired on December 2012 and he overstayed
   and made various unsuccessful applications. In an unsuccessful asylum
   claim the focus was upon the consequences of return on his elder
   daughter's education. His appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was
   unsuccessful. Amongst other matters, the Upper Tribunal considered his
   daughter's situation. The Upper Tribunal pointed out that paragraph 276
   ADE(1)(iv) and section 176 B (6) raise the same question, and repeated
   that the mere presence of a child in the United Kingdom and their
   academic success was not a trump card which the parents could deploy to
   demand immigration status for the whole family. At paragraph 39 the Upper
   Tribunal stated:

         ... There was no reason to infer that any interruption to the
         education of the elder child upon return to Malawi would be any
         more significant than that faced by any child forced to move from
         one country to another by virtue of the careers of their parents.
         Nor should the difficulties of a move from one school to another
         become unduly exaggerated. It would be highly unusual for a child
         in the UK to complete the entirety of their education within one
         school. The trauma, or excitement, of a new school, new classmates
         and new teachers is an integral part of growing up. In too many
         appeals to the FtT is presented arguments whose basic premise is
         that to change a school is to submit a child to a cruel and unduly
         harsh experience....

Conclusions.

24. It is clear from reading the decision of Judge Dickinson that the
   position of C was central. Having allowed her appeal on the basis it was
   not reasonable to expect her to return to Nigeria the appeals of the
   other family members were allowed under section 8 because of this. There
   is no elaboration of any other features in relation to section 8.There
   was  no reference to or a setting out of the factors to be considered in
   section 117.

25.  In relation to C the judge refers to general considerations at
   paragraph 18. The specific features are that she has been living in the
   United Kingdom from her birth for over seven years. There is a reference
   to her education, with the conclusion at paragraph 20 that it would not
   be in her best interests to transfer to another educational system. At
   paragraph 21 the judge refers to her integration into the United Kingdom
   and concludes she could not readjust to living in Nigeria. No explanation
   as to why not is given beyond stating she has never visited there.

26.  Having looked at the decision as a whole my conclusion is that it must
   be set aside as it materially errs in law. This is not a situation where
   the outcome was justified, albeit a different judge could have come to a
   different conclusion. The decision places excessive weight upon the
   situation of C and does not adequately balance the other relevant
   considerations. Article 8 is not a general dispensing power. The judge
   did not indicate adequate consideration of the family's immigration
   history and the need for immigration control. Bearing in mind the case
   law above, the judge has given insufficient reasons for concluding it
   would be unreasonable for C to return to Nigeria with her parents or why
   their appeals and that of her brother should be allowed under article 8.
   There has been a failure to set out adequate reasons to justify allowing
   the appeals on the largely undisputed facts.

Disposal

27. Given that there is no dispute about the factual matrix I see no need
   to reconvene or remit. I remake the decision. The appellant's immigration
   history is accepted. The children are progressing at school. There has
   been mention of health considerations but the evidence is limited and
   does not indicate any major health issues. For instance, there is
   reference to the first appellant being borderline hypertensive and an
   issue about his cholesterol. Whilst important health factors they are not
   urgent. C has been referred for an orthotic appointment and referred to
   the paediatric ophthalmology department. There is no indication of any
   major medical issues.
28. As has been pointed out the issue is not whether the United Kingdom has
   better medical or health facilities. The refusal letter contains
   information about the educational system in Nigeria and that education
   from 6 to 15 years of age is free and compulsory. The poor attendance is
   attributed in many cases to children being kept at home by their parents.



29. There is nothing to indicate a claim of any weight based upon medical
   conditions. Information was provided about the medical treatment
   available in Nigeria and this includes public hospitals.

30. Regarding Ebola, the World Health Organisation not recommend travel
   restrictions and the respondent concluded that the risk of contracting
   the virus was outweighed by the need for immigration control. The first
   appellant provided a statement in which he states his wife's family have
   disowned her for marrying him and that he has no family left in Nigeria.
   However, there is no apparent reason why he and his wife could not
   provide for themselves and their family in Nigeria.

31. The first appellant came for a temporary purpose, namely a visit and
   then overstayed. His future wife subsequently came to this country on a
   temporary basis. They had no reason to believe they would be entitled to
   remain. There are various applications were unsuccessful. The lives they
   have established here were against this background. Meantime, their
   children have availed of the benefits of education and healthcare. These
   are not rights available to them. The parents are from Nigeria and have
   an awareness of life there. There children must have some understanding
   of their parent's home country through them. They are at an age when they
   can adapt. Whilst they have their own friendships the centre of their
   life is their parents. No evidence was learned that the family would not
   be a burden upon the State.

32. It is not unreasonable for C and her family to be returned to Nigeria.
   I find that she cannot succeed under paragraph 276 ADE and the family
   cannot succeed under the immigration rules. It is in the children's best
   interests that they are returned to Nigeria with their parents. Regarding
   article 8, it is accepted that the determinative question relates to the
   proportionality of the decision. I have born in mind the factors set out
   in section 117.My conclusion is that no breach of article 8 occurs.

33. The Secretary of State's appeal in the present proceeding is allowed. I
   set aside the decision of Judge Dickinson and remake the decision,
   dismissing the appeals of all the family members.




Decision.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of a
material error of law.

I set aside the decision.

I remake the decision dismissing the family's appeals.

Signed

 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly


Anonymity is maintained.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly
1st September 2015


























