
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/39967/2014
     IA/39972/2014
     IA/39983/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14th March 2016                            |On 25th April 2016            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                Jaison B Joy
                           Neelima Latha Yohannan
                                Joanna Jaison
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr S Bellaria, Legend Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of India born on 10th March 1985 and on 28th
    March 2014 he made an application for leave to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant with a view  to  studying
    at the Sanjari College.  He produced a CAS and a loan  sanction  letter
    dated 19th March 2014 from the Indian Bank.  His wife and child are the
    second and third appellants and are dependents of the first  appellant.
    Their appeals stand or fall with that  of  the  first  appellant.   The
    second appellant's appeal  was  refused  under  Paragraph  319C(b)  and
    319C(g) whilst the third appellant's appeal was refused under Paragraph
    319H(b) and 319H(g) (both, in effect, because the  application  of  the
    first appellant was refused).

 2. On 23rd September 2014 that application  was  refused  under  paragraph
    322(1A) which states :

         "(1A)    Where  false  representations  have  been  made  or  false
                documents or information have been submitted (whether or not
                material to the application,  and  whether  or  not  to  the
                applicant's knowledge), or  material  facts  have  not  been
                disclosed, in relation to the application  or  in  order  to
                obtain documents from the Secretary  of  State  or  a  third
                party required in support of the application,

         ...

         the application must be refused."

 3. The basis of the refusal was that the appellant had  produced  a  false
    document.  His loan sanction letter was sent for verification  and  the
    reasons for  refusal  letter  stated,  (and  I  cite  the  decision  as
    presented both syntactically and grammatically):

         "I am satisfied that the documents was false because  the  document
         was sent for verification and Indian Bank verified the document  as
         false  because  the  savings  account  was  closed  and  the  money
         withdrawn, therefore no dispersal of loan was done to  the  savings
         account."

 4. The letter proceeded:

         "However the Secretary of State is not satisfied that  you  have  a
         valid CAS because the Tier 4 Sponsor Register was checked  on  18th
         September 2014 but Sanjari International College was not listed  as
         of this date.  Therefore you have not met the  requirements  to  be
         awarded 30 points under Appendix A of the Immigration Rules."

    The application was also, therefore  and  as  a  consequence,  rejected
    under paragraph 245ZX(c) with reference to paragraph 116(e) of Appendix
    A and paragraph 245ZX(d).  It  was  stated  that  the  Tier  4  Sponsor
    Register was checked on 18th September 2014 and Sanjari College was not
    listed as the Tier 4 sponsor as at that date.  He was therefore awarded
    no points.

 5. The matter then came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese  on  4th
    August 2015 and in a decision issued on 10th September 2015  the  judge
    found at paragraph 11 that the verification report asked the  bank  for
    verification of the documents that were submitted  in  respect  of  the
    loan application and:

         "The bank in their response to the email and  also  in  the  letter
         dated 19th March 2014 do not comment on  the  authenticity  of  the
         documents which were submitted by the first appellant in support of
         his application only that the loan was sanctioned, purpose  of  the
         loan, terms of the loan.  The appellant withdrew  the  full  amount
         immediately after the granting of the  loan.   The  Tribunal  finds
         that the bank themselves are not  questioning  the  documents  that
         were submitted in support of the application and they do  not  take
         the view that the documents provided to them by the  appellant  was
         false."

    However the judge went on to state at paragraph 13 that at the time the
    application was made the appellant had a  valid  CAS  and  he  was  not
    informed of the loss of the licence of the College.   The  Judge  found
    that there 'was no evidence that the  respondent  did  not  follow  the
    appropriate procedures either before or after the loss of the  licence'
    and proceeded to dismiss the appellant's appeal.

 6. An application for permission to appeal was made on the basis that  the
    judge failed to consider the  principles  of  common  law  fairness  in
    particular Patel (Revocation  of  sponsor  licence  -  fairness)  India
    [2011] UKUT 00211 and Thakur  (PBS  decision  -  common  law  fairness)
    Bangladesh [2011] UKUT 00151.  The Secretary of  State  had  not  acted
    fairly in deciding the application and the fact that the Tier 4 sponsor
    licence was revoked during the pending application should  have  caused
    the respondent to allow the appellant more time to find an  alternative
    college.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Astle  who  stated  that  the
    judge did not engage with the appellant's argument that the  respondent
    failed to apply her own policy.  There was no  apparent  evidence  that
    the appellant was notified of the problem before the decision was  made
    and given the usual period to find an alternative  institution  and  it
    was arguable that this amounted to an error of law on the part  of  the
    judge.

 8. A response under Rule 24 of the Immigration Rules  was  served  stating
    that in the case of Raza, R (On the application of) v the Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 36 it  was  concluded  at
    paragraph 37 that:

         "The fact that there is in general no duty to give notice  of  what
         is believed to be a deficiency in the CAS before making an  adverse
         decision does not mean that there  may  not  be  some  cases  where
         fairness demands that the Secretary of State should not refuse  the
         application without further enquiry."

 9. It was submitted that it was open to the judge to make the findings  at
    paragraph 13.

10. At the hearing before  me  Mr  Whitwell  conceded,  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State, that there was indeed no challenge to  the  judge's
    finding in relation to the bank letter  and  in  the  circumstances  as
    Patel was still good law it appeared that the licence  of  the  college
    had been  revoked  without  the  appellant's  knowledge  following  his
    application.  He concurred with the analysis of  Mr  Bellaria  and  the
    matter should be remitted back to the Secretary of State in  line  with
    policy and so that the Secretary of State may  give  the  appellant  60
    days within which to find an alternative college.

11. In the light of this concession and in my analysis I  agree  with  that
    concession following Patel was properly made, I set aside the  findings
    at paragraph 13  and  remake  the  decision.   The  appellant  made  an
    application on 28th March 2014 and that  application  was  not  decided
    until 23rd September 2014.  The appellant was continuing  to  study  at
    the college and he confirmed that he did not know that the college  had
    lost its sponsorship licence until the refusal letter.   There  was  no
    suggestion that the appellant had been complicit  in  any  way  in  the
    withdrawal of his CAS.

12. In the light of this I find that the matter should be remitted back  to
    the Secretary of State for lawful decisions and that the  Secretary  of
    State should allow the appellant  60  days  within  which  to  find  an
    alternative college in line with Patel.

No anonymity direction is made.

Order

    The appeal of the first second and third appellants are allowed to  the
    extent outlined above.



Signed                                  Date 22nd April 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
because the appeal was allowed only to the extent outlined above.





Signed                                  Date 22nd April 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
