
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/39408/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 August 2015                    |On 21 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L MURRAY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MR ALVIND KUMAR HURKOO
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State was granted permission  to  appeal  against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Pears, promulgated  on  15  April
    2015, allowing the Claimant's appeal against her decision to refuse him
    a residence card under Regulation 17 with reference to Regulation 15 of
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (as amended).
    The Claimant was refused a residence card as an extended family  member
    on the basis that it  was  not  accepted  that  he  was  in  a  durable
    relationship with an EEA national.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted  that  the  Claimant  was  in  a
    durable relationship with an EEA national. The Secretary of State  does
    not challenge that finding.

 3. Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Heynes on the basis
    that the issue of a residence card to  an  extended  family  member  is
    subject to  the  discretion  of  the  Secretary  of  State.   Where  an
    applicant, or the Claimant in this case, is found to be  in  a  durable
    relationship but that discretion has not  been  exercised,  the  proper
    course is to allow the appeal on the basis that the decision is not  in
    accordance with the law and remit the application to the  Secretary  of
    State.

 4. Regulation 17 (4) of the Immigration (EEA)  Regulations  2006  provides
    that the Secretary of State may issue a residence card to  an  extended
    family member not falling within regulation 7(3)  who  is  not  an  EEA
    national on application if - (a) the relevant EEA national in  relation
    to the extended family member is a qualified person or an EEA  national
    with a permanent right of residence under regulation 15; and (b) in all
    the circumstances it appears to the Secretary of State  appropriate  to
    issue the residence card.

 5. First-tier Tribunal Judge Pears found at paragraph 15 of  the  decision
    that the Claimant was in a durable relationship with  an  EEA  national
    which had existed for considerably more than 2 years and  that  he  met
    the requirements of regulation 8 (5) of  the  EEA  Regulations.  Having
    regard to the decision of the First-tier Tribunal that the Claimant  is
    indeed in a durable relationship, which is  undisputed,  there  was  no
    error in finding that he meets the requirements of  regulation  8  (5).
    The Judge allowed the appeal outright. It is clear both from regulation
    17 (4) and from the cases of MR & Ors  (EEA  extended  family  members)
    Bangladesh [2010] UKUT 449 and Ihemedu (OFMs - meaning) Nigeria  [2011]
    UKUT 00340(IAC) that regulation 17 (4) makes the issue of  a  residence
    card to an extended family member a matter of discretion.

 6. Where the Secretary of State has not yet exercised that discretion  the
    proper course is to set the decision aside and remake it, allowing  the
    appeal to the extent that the claimant's application  for  a  residence
    card as an  extended  family  member  remains  outstanding  before  the
    Secretary of State for a lawful decision.

Notice of decision

We therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remake
the decision. This appeal is allowed to the extent that the question
whether a residence card should be issued to the claimant is outstanding
before the Secretary of State for a lawful decision thereon.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed      Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L Murray
