
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39869/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 July 2015                      |On 5 August 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          OLASOJI OLAJIDE ATOLAGBE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss E Ikiriko, Solicitor, Melrose Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an error of law hearing. The claimant is a citizen  of  Nigeria
    and his date of birth is 22 October 1975.  He applied for  a  residence
    card as the spouse of an EEA national exercising Treaty rights  in  the
    UK, under Regulation 7 of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006.   In a determination on  the  papers  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Grant-Hutchinson) allowed  the  appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 22 January 2015.  The Secretary of  State  has  appealed
    the decision.

First-tier determination

2.   The Tribunal considered the reasons for refusal that the  Claimant  had
    not provided evidence to demonstrate that he registered  his  customary
    marriage within 60 days stipulated by the laws  of  the  Federation  of
    Nigeria and that it was not therefore recognised as a valid marriage in
    Nigeria. [7]

4.   At [8] the Tribunal relied on written  submissions  on  behalf  of  the
    Claimant that the "form CM1" was completed as part of the  registration
    process and that the  marriage  certificate  was  the  final  proof  of
    registration itself.  It was alternatively submitted that the  Claimant
    had provided documentary evidence to show that  he  was  in  a  durable
    relationship with his EEA partner.

5.   The Tribunal at [11] refered to  a  document  identified  by  a  yellow
    sticker as a form CM1 which it  found  showed  that  the  marriage  was
    registered on 21 June 2012, thus  within the required 60 days. At  [12]
    the Tribunal found that there was a valid and legally registered  proxy
    marriage. The Tribunal did not go on to consider whether the   Claimant
    was in a durable relationship.

Grounds of Application

6.   The Secretary of State contends  that  the  Tribunal  made  a  material
    misdirection in law by failing to have regard to the  decision  of  the
    Upper Tribunal in Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) Nigeria [2014] UKUT
    24 in particular with reference to paragraphs 14 and 16.  The  Tribunal
    ought to have considered firstly, whether a proxy marriage  in  Nigeria
    was recognised as valid in France, the relevant EEA country.

7.   Further, the Secretary of State contends that  with  reference  to  the
    French civil code proxy marriages are incompatible with Article  146-1.



Permission to Appeal

8.   Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Brunnen on 4  March
    2015 who found that it was arguable that the First-tier Tribunal failed
    to have regard to Kareem and TA [2014] UKUT 316  (IAC).   The  Tribunal
    failed to consider if the proxy marriage was recognised under  the  law
    of France.

Error of law hearing

Submissions

9.   Mr Tarlow relied on the grounds  and  produced  Kareem.   Miss  Ikiriko
    produced  a  skeleton  argument  and  expanded  on  the  same  in   her
    submissions.  In short, she submitted that the guidance in  Kareem  was
    not intended to have  a  blanket  application  to  all  proxy  marriage
    applications and only in cases  where  there  were  concerns  that  the
    marriage had not been properly conducted and/or registered.



Discussion and Decision

10.  I find there was a material error of law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision by a misdirection in law in failing apply Kareem and TA.  I do
    not accept the submissions made on behalf of the Claimant as set out in
    the skeleton argument and as pursued at the  hearing  before  me.   The
    scope and ambit of Kareem is clearly explained in the further  decision
    of TA where the Upper Tribunal  confirmed  that  the  determination  of
    whether there is  a  marital  relationship  for  the  purposes  of  the
    Immigration Regulations must always be examined in accordance with  the
    laws  of  the  member  State  from  which  the  Union  citizen  obtains
    nationality.  I am satisfied that the Tribunal erred  in  its  approach
    having regard to the doubts expressed by the Secretary of State in  the
    refusal letter as to the validity of the marriage. The  starting  point
    for  the  Tribunal  should  have  been  whether  or  not  the  marriage
    contracted between  the  claimant  and  the  qualified  person  was  in
    accordance with the national law of the EEA country  of  the  qualified
    person's nationality, in this instance France.

Decision

11.  There is a material error of law in the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
    which shall be set aide.

Remaking decision

12.  I remake that decision with reference to the evidence that  was  before
    the First-tier Tribunal. The Secretary of State clearly  raised  issues
    concerning the validity of the marriage, in particular whether  or  not
    the marriage had been registered within the required period of 60 days.
    I find no evidence to establish that the relevant EEA  country,  namely
    France, legally recognises a proxy marriage in Nigeria.

13.  The First-tier Tribunal did not go on to consider the issue of  whether
    or not the parties are in a durable relationship under Regulation  8(5)
    of the Regulations.  I have considered the evidence provided  with  the
    application and I find that whilst some  bank  statements  and  utility
    bills bear the same address, there is no documentary evidence  to  show
    the joint names and the same address together.  There is no evidence to
    show that the parties have cohabited at  the  same  address  and  in  a
    subsisting relationship for  over  two  years.   I  conclude  that  the
    claimant has failed  to  discharge  the  burden  of  proof  on  him  to
    establish sufficient evidence to s  how  that  the  parties  are  in  a
    durable and subsisting relationship.  No issue was  raised  as  regards
    Article 8 ECHR.

Decision

14.  I dismiss the appeal on immigration grounds.

Notice of Decision

15.  The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed.

There are material errors of law.  The decision is set aside.

I substitute a decision that the appeal is dismissed on immigration  grounds
under Regulations 7 and 8 EEA Regulations.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date 30.7.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

