
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39262/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |             Determination        |
|                                         |Promulgated                       |
|On 1 April 2015                          |             On 10 April 2015     |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Md Khairul Alam
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                    Claimant

Representation:
For the claimant: Ms C Magrath, instructed by ICS Legal
For the appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State against  the  decision  of
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Roopnarine-Davies  promulgated   10.12.14,
    dismissing  on  immigration  grounds,  but  allowing  on  human  rights
    grounds, the claimant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary of
    State, dated 25.9.13, to refuse him further leave to remain in  the  UK
    as a Tier 4 Student.  The Judge heard the appeal on 2.12.14.

 2. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Parkes  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    10.2.15.

 3. Thus the matter came before me on 1.4.15 as  an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.





Error of Law

 4. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that the determination of Judge Roopnarine-Davies  should  be  set
    aside.

 5. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision,  which  I  now
    give.

 6. Judge Roopnarine-Davies found,  for  cogent  reasons  provided  in  the
    decision,  that  the  claimant  could  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 319C of the Immigration Rules. The Secretary of State has not
    appealed that part of the decision and there is no cross-appeal by  the
    claimant against that decision. I note  that  although  there  is  what
    purports to be a Rule 24 response in the claimant's bundle prepare  for
    this error of law hearing, no such response was  served  in  compliance
    with directions.

 7.  It  follows  that  the  decision  that  the  appeal  be  dismissed  on
    immigration grounds must stand, which was accepted  before  me  by  the
    claimant's representative. The remaining issue is whether there is  any
    material error of law in the making of the decision to allow the appeal
    outside the Rules on the basis of article 8 ECHR.

 8. As drafted, the grounds rely on Gulshan  [2013]  UKUT  00640  (IAC)  to
    suggest that an article 8 assessment should  only  be  conducted  where
    there are compelling circumstances not recognised  by  the  Immigration
    Rules. It is submitted that the  judge  failed  to  identify  any  such
    compelling circumstances which would lead  to  an  unjustifiably  harsh
    outcome.

 9. However, it is arguable that the suggested approach is no longer valid.
    In R(MM (Lebanon)) v SSHD [2014] EWCA  Civ  985  the  Court  of  Appeal
    stated:

         "135.  Where the relevant group of IRs  [immigration  rules],  upon
         their proper construction provide a  "complete  code"  for  dealing
         with a person's Convention rights in the context of a particular IR
         or statutory provision, such as in the case of "foreign criminals",
         then the balancing exercise and the way the various factors are  to
         be taken into account  in  an  individual  case  must  be  done  in
         accordance with  that  code,  although  reference  to  "exceptional
         circumstances"   in   the   code   will   nonetheless   entail    a
         proportionality exercise.  But if the relevant group of IRs is  not
         such a "complete code" then the proportionality test will  be  more
         at large, albeit guided by the Huang tests and  UK  and  Strasbourg
         case law."


10. In Ganesabalan and other cases it has been held that the Rules are  not
    a 'complete code' for the consideration of article 8 issues. The latest
    in the line of authorities on this issue is  Singh v SSHD  [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 74, where the Court of Appeal made clear  that  the  'second-stage'
    can be satisfied by the decision-maker concluding that  any  family  or
    private life issues raised by the claim have already been addressed  in
    the first stage, the consideration under  the  Rules,  "in  which  case
    obviously there is no need to go through it all again." If the decision-
    maker's view is straightforwardly that all the article 8 issues  raised
    have been addressed in determining the claim under the Rules, all  that
    is necessary is to say so.


11. Although it was intended that the new Rules in force from 9.7.12  would
    properly reflect the article 8 private and family life requirements  in
    the generality of cases, so that it should only be  exceptionally  that
    an application would have a valid claim  under  article  8  which  fell
    outside the scope of the Rules, it is now settled that the right course
    in any case where an applicant relies on his or her private  or  family
    life is to proceed by considering first whether leave should be granted
    under the relevant provisions of the new Rules and only if  the  answer
    is no to go on to consider article 8 in its unvarnished form  (the  so-
    called 'two-stage approach'): Singh v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 74.

12. Mr Tufan's argument is that whilst the Rules are not a 'complete  code'
    for consideration of article 8 private and family life, and it  is  now
    clear that there is no intermediary or threshold test, the judge should
    have first considered any private and family life claim by reference to
    the  Immigration  Rules  and  then  considered   whether   there   were
    'exceptional' or compelling circumstances not adequately  addressed  in
    the Rules which required the judge to go  on  to  make  a  second-stage
    article 8 assessment, applying the Razgar stepped  approach.  Mr  Tufan
    complains that the judge identified no such compelling  or  exceptional
    circumstances. Only if there are insurmountable obstacles to continuing
    family life in Bangladesh, or that,  following  Nagre,  to  expect  the
    family to continue family life outside the UK  would  be  unjustifiably
    harsh, should the appeal have been allowed under article 8.

13. On the other side of that coin is the argument  of  the  claimant  that
    given that there was no consideration of article 8 private  and  family
    life within the Rules, and neither could there be as he  did  not  meet
    the requirements, and thus there was and could  be  no  proportionality
    assessment under the Rules, there had to be such an assessment  outside
    of the Rules, which the judge conducted, giving reasons for finding the
    decision to remove the claimant disproportionate. It was also suggested
    that if the only public interest in removing the claimant is so that he
    can make an application from outside the UK for leave  to  enter  as  a
    dependant  of  his  wife,  then  Chikwamba  suggests  that   would   be
    disproportionate. He lives with his wife and two children and  she  has
    leave to remain until 2017. I was  also  urged  to  consider  the  best
    interests  of  the  two  children  and  the  genuine   and   subsisting
    relationship the claimant has with his wife and children.

14. Although Judge Roopnarine-Davies went on to consider  article  8  ECHR,
    that was not done with regard to private and family life considerations
    under the Immigration Rules, the first stage. There is no reference  in
    the decision to Appendix FM in relation to family  life,  or  paragraph
    276ADE in relation to private life. As is clear from Singh, if all  the
    relevant factors have already been considered within an  assessment  of
    private and family life within  the  Rules,  there  is  no  purpose  in
    repeating the exercise by reference to article 8 ECHR and  it  suffices
    for the judge simply to say so.

15. Ms Magrath accepted that the claimant could  not  meet  either  set  of
    requirements, including to demonstrate  that  there  are  very  serious
    obstacles to his integration in Bangladesh.

16. However, the concern  is  that  it  would  be  difficult  to  make  any
    sustainable article 8 assessment outside the Rules without having first
    considered whether the claimant met the requirements of Appendix FM  or
    paragraph 276ADE, and in doing so the various factors relevant to  such
    an assessment arising from  the  claimant's  circumstances.  Only  then
    could the  judge  assess  whether  or  not  there  are  other  factors,
    compelling circumstances inadequately recognised in the Rules, so as to
    render  the  decision  to  remove  unjustifiably  harsh  or   otherwise
    disproportionate. That process was not followed and the judge  did  not
    identify any such compelling circumstances.

17. Whether the claimant could meet those requirements of the Rules must be
    highly relevant to any article 8  proportionality  balancing  exercise.
    Further, the fact that the claimant  vigorously  asserts  that  he  can
    fully meet a paragraph 319C application for  leave  to  remain  as  the
    dependant of a points-based system (PBS) migrant with leave  to  remain
    until 2017, must surely demonstrate that it cannot be  disproportionate
    to private and family life rights to refuse the application as made, as
    an alternative to removal is available. He is entitled to make  a  319C
    application from  within  the  UK,  taking  care  to  ensure  that  the
    evidential  requirements  under  Appendix  E  are  met,  and  in   such
    circumstances 319C clearly provides that leave will  be  granted.  From
    that perspective, this is not a Chikwamba or Hyat situation, as  it  is
    not necessarily the case that, despite the  removal  direction  already
    issued, that the claimant will be removed. On the facts  relied  on  in
    the claimant's case there is no real prospect of his being removed from
    the UK, provided he can make such an application within 28 days of  the
    resolution of this appeal and thus the termination of  his  section  3C
    leave to remain.

18. In the circumstances, I am satisfied that there was a material error of
    law in the approach of the First-tier Tribunal Judge to the  making  of
    the decision in relation to article  8  ECHR  outside  the  Rules.  The
    article 8 assessment was flawed for failure  to  consider  private  and
    family life within the Rules; failing to identify compelling  or  other
    circumstances  inadequately  recognised  in   the   Rules;   and   more
    significantly failing to take account of the fact that it remains  open
    to this claimant to make an application for leave to remain under  319C
    without having to leave the  UK  to  do  so,  so  that  the  article  8
    assessment that was made was unbalanced and ultimately unsustainable.

19. It follows that the decision must be set aside and remade.

20. I discussed with the representatives whether if I found an error of law
    it was  necessary  for  any  further  submissions  or  evidence  before
    remaking the decision. Neither party suggested that was  necessary,  as
    if I found no error of law the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    stands, and if I found a material error of law sufficient  to  set  the
    decision aside it would logically follow that I also found there was no
    basis for allowing the appeal on article 8 ECHR private or family life.

21. It being accepted that the claimant does not meet the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM in respect of family life, as neither partner nor  children
    have settled status, nor the requirements of paragraph  276ADE(vi)  not
    having lived in the UK for 20 years and it being accepted that he could
    not demonstrate very serious obstacles to integration in Bangladesh,  I
    find  no  compelling  circumstances  that  would  render  the  decision
    unjustifiably harsh. That is because, despite the removal decision,  it
    remains open to the claimant to make an  application  under  the  route
    provided under paragraph 319C for leave to remain in the UK with a  PBS
    migrant.  However,  in  the  event  that  he  does  not  make  such  an
    application I find nothing unjustifiably harsh or  disproportionate  in
    requiring the claimant to leave the UK. None of the family have settled
    status in the UK. They are citizens of  Bangladesh  where  the  parents
    have spent most of their lives. In the light of her PBS leave, it  will
    be up to his wife to decide whether to accompany him, but their  status
    in the UK  is  entirely  temporary  and  does  not  give  rise  to  any
    legitimate expectation of being  able  to  settle  in  the  UK,  simply
    because that is their choice or future intention. Article 8  is  not  a
    shortcut to compliance with the Immigration Rules and the fact that  he
    failed to demonstrate  that  he  could  meet  319C,  even  if  such  an
    application had validly been made, which is doubtful,  must  be  highly
    relevant to the proportionality balancing exercise. There  is  a  route
    open to him to remain without having to  leave  the  UK  and  in  those
    circumstances I find it difficult to understand how the decision of the
    Secretary of State to refuse  the  application  could  be  regarded  as
    disproportionate. The decision does not of itself separate the  family;
    it being his wife's choice and in respect of the children the  family's
    joint choice, to decide whether to  return  together  as  a  family  to
    Bangladesh where they have lived most of their lives,  and  where  they
    retain family, social and cultural ties.

22. In respect of private life, Patel and Nasim demonstrate that  temporary
    residence in the UK as student or PBS migrant does  not  give  rise  to
    private life to be protected by article 8 ECHR.  In  Nasim  and  others
    (article 8) [2014] UKUT 00025  (IAC),  the  Upper  Tribunal  considered
    whether the hypothetical removal of the 22 PBS claimants,  pursuant  to
    the  decision  to  refuse  to  vary  leave,  would  violate  the   UK's
    obligations under article 8 ECHR. Whilst each case must  be  determined
    on its merits, the Tribunal noted that the judgements  of  the  Supreme
    Court in Patel and Others v SSHD [2013] UKSC  72,  "serve  to  re-focus
    attention on the nature and purpose of article 8 of the  ECHR  and,  in
    particular, to recognise that article's limited utility in private life
    cases that are far removed from the protection of an individual's moral
    and physical integrity."

23. Insofar as section 55 and  the  best  interests  of  the  children  are
    concerned, given their young ages those are undoubtedly to remain  with
    their parents and if the parents are returning to Bangladesh then it is
    entirely reasonable to  expect  the  children  to  accompany  them.  No
    credible evidence has been  adduced  to  suggest  that  either  of  the
    children have any independent right to remain on the basis of article 8
    private life.

24. It follows that in remaking the decision in the  appeal,  the  claimant
    can neither succeed on immigration grounds nor on human rights grounds.

Conclusions:

25. For the reasons set out above, I find that the making of  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making  of  an  error  on  a
    point of law such that the decision should be set aside.





                                        I set aside the decision.

                                         I  re-make  the  decision  in   the
appeal by dismissing it.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup





Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the  Asylum  and
Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.


Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
(rule 23A (costs) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
2005 and section 12(4)(a) of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007).

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The appeal has been dismissed and thus there can be no fee award.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


