
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39182/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |                Decision & Reasons   |
|                                         |Promulgated                          |
|On 1 February 2016                       |                On 12 February 2016  |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            JOY NGOZI FREDERICKS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr F Abe, Legal Representative

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent's appeal against the Secretary of  State's  decision  to
    refuse to issue her with a residence card under Regulation 15A  of  the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  ("the  2006
    Regulations") was allowed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ruth  ("the
    judge") in a decision promulgated on 11 June 2015.

2.   The respondent applied for  a  residence  card  on  the  basis  of  her
    relationship with a British citizen child, claiming derivative  rights.
    The judge found that the requirements of the 2006 Regulations were  not
    met  and  there   has   been   no   challenge   to   that   conclusion.
    Notwithstanding  a   clear   statement   made   by   the   respondent's
    representative, Mr Abe, that he would  make  no  submissions  regarding
    Article 8, the judge went on to assess the merits of the appeal in this
    context.  He noted  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal made  mention  of  Article  8  and  that  there  had  been  no
    application to amend those grounds.  He considered  himself  bound,  on
    that basis, to decide  whether  the  decision  to  refuse  to  issue  a
    residence card was  "in  accordance  with  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    Article 8 of the ECHR" (paragraph 23 of the  decision).   He  concluded
    that the requirements of the Immigration Rules, contained  in  Appendix
    FM, were met.  He observed that although it was not necessary  for  him
    to consider whether  the  respondent  would  succeed  under  Article  8
    outside them, had such an assessment been required,  she  would  indeed
    have also succeeded on this basis.

3.   The Secretary of State  applied  for  permission  to  appeal.   It  was
    contended on her behalf, first, that the judge erred in considering the
    Article 8 ground of appeal, in the light of Sarkar [2014] EWCA Civ 195.
     In the light of guidance given in that case, the  ground  fell  to  be
    treated as abandoned.  Secondly,  in  any  event,  Article  8  was  not
    engaged in the appeal, in the light of Amirteymour  and  Others  [2015]
    UKUT 00466.  No notice had been served on the respondent under  Section
    120 of the 2002 Act and no decision to remove her had  been  made.   In
    these circumstances, the respondent was unable to bring a human  rights
    challenge.  Finally, as no Article 8 case was advanced at  the  hearing
    on the respondent's behalf, there was no opportunity for the  appellant
    to address the Tribunal on this aspect.  The judge erred in  proceeding
    to make an assessment, without the Secretary of State being able to put
    a case.

4.   Permission to appeal was  given  by  an  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  on  15
    October 2015.

5.   The respondent has made no Rule 24 response.

Submissions on Error of Law

6.   Mr Tarlow relied upon the grounds in support  of  the  application  for
    permission to appeal.  The judge noted at paragraph 23 of the  decision
    that the respondent did not intend to make any submissions  on  Article
    8.  In the light of Sarkar  and  Amirteymour,  the  decision  contained
    clear, material errors of law.

7.   In response, Mr  Abe  said  that  the  respondent  made  an  Article  8
    application in January 2013, which was unsuccessful.   Judicial  review
    proceedings were brought in the summer of 2013  and  the  Secretary  of
    State agreed to reconsider the case.   That  led  to  the  respondent's
    application  for  a  derivative  residence   card,   under   the   2006
    Regulations, and to the present appeal.  All the facts were put to  the
    judge.  Reference was made to the entire history of  the  case  and  to
    Article 8, on the respondent's behalf. The Secretary of State  withdrew
    her initial decision and then reconsidered the matter.

8.   Mr Abe said that he did not accept that the judge erred in law  as  the
    best interests of the respondent's child were required to be taken into
    account. The judge was right to consider Article  8  and  reliance  was
    placed upon the decisions in Amos [2011] EWCA Civ 552 and Sanade [2012]
    00048.

Conclusion on Error of Law

9.   The decision has been prepared by a very experienced judge  and  it  is
    readily  apparent  that  he  considered  the  respondent's  case   very
    carefully indeed.  However, having noted at paragraphs 12 and  23  that
    no Article 8 submissions were to be made by Mr Abe  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent, the guidance given by the Court of Appeal in Sarkar fell to
    be applied.  In those circumstances, notwithstanding mention of Article
    8 in the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, the  ground  was
    abandoned and the judge ought not to have considered it.  In proceeding
    to make an Article 8 assessment, the no  doubt  unintended  result  was
    that the Secretary of State was shut  out  from  putting  a  case.   At
    paragraph 12 of the decision, the judge clearly recorded that as Mr Abe
    had said that he would make no Article 8  submissions,  the  Presenting
    Officer made no submissions on the Secretary of State's behalf on  that
    issue.

10.  The decision under appeal is a refusal to issue a derivative  residence
    card and there has been no decision  to  remove  the  respondent  under
    Regulation 19 of the 2006 Regulations (or on any other  basis).   There
    is nothing to suggest that she was served with notice under Section 120
    of the 2002 Act and, unsurprisingly, there is no sign of  any  response
    to such a notice by her.  In  these  circumstances,  in  the  light  of
    Amirteymour,  Article  8  was  not  engaged  and  the  judge  erred  in
    proceeding to make an assessment and allowing the appeal on this basis.
     The Upper Tribunal concluded that JM (Liberia) [2006]  EWCA  Civ  1402
    was to be distinguished.  Neither the factual matrix of that  case  nor
    the reasoning had any  application  to  appeals  against  decisions  to
    refuse to issue residence cards or similar documents,  under  the  2006
    Regulations.   It  is  important  to  note  that  promulgation  of  the
    judgment in Amirteymour occurred on 11 July 2015, several  weeks  after
    the judge promulgated his decision and so he cannot be  criticised  for
    failing to take it into account.

11.  In these circumstances, notwithstanding the care with which  the  judge
    dealt with the appeal, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal must  be
    set aside, as containing material errors of law.

Remaking the Decision

12.  There has been no challenge to the judge's findings on  Regulation  15A
    of the 2006 Regulations.   This part of his analysis forms no  part  of
    the application for permission to appeal and there has been no Rule  24
    response and no  cross-appeal.   Mr  Abe  confirmed  that  the  judge's
    findings on Regulation 15A were not challenged in the remaking  of  the
    decision.

13.  In directions given by the Principal Resident Judge, the  parties  were
    advised to prepare on the basis that if the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal were set aside, any further evidence could  be  considered  by
    the Upper Tribunal at the hearing, in order to remake the decision.  Mr
    Abe said that his client's child was a salient feature of the case  and
    that the child's best  interests  should  be  properly  considered,  as
    should Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.  Mr Tarlow  said  that
    he had nothing to add to his submissions on error of  law.   Article  8
    was simply not engaged in the appeal and there was no challenge to  the
    Regulation 15A findings.

14.  In the light of  the  submissions  made  by  the  representatives,  the
    outcome of the remaking of the decision is clear.   Article  8  of  the
    Human Rights Convention is not engaged.  Mr Abe suggested that  it  was
    but, with respect to him, I am unable to accept that this is  so.   His
    client also suggested, at the end  of  the  hearing,  that  her  family
    circumstances were relevant.  Although they are,  of  course,  of  very
    great importance to her, her human  rights,  and  those  of  her  close
    family members, are not  engaged  in  this  appeal.   As  there  is  no
    challenge to the dismissal of the appeal under the 2006 Regulations, in
    the light of the judge's finding that the  requirements  of  Regulation
    15A were not met, the  overall  result  is  that  the  appeal  must  be
    dismissed.

15.  As Mr Abe may explain to his client, as no removal  decision  has  been
    made, she may continue to enjoy family life  with  her  child  and  the
    decision to refuse to issue her with a residence card will not  prevent
    her from doing that.  If a removal decision is made by the Secretary of
    State, an appeal may be brought and, in these circumstances, her  human
    rights (and perhaps those of others) may be relied upon.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is aside.  It is remade as  follows:
appeal dismissed.

Anonymity

There  has  been  no  application  for  anonymity  at  any  stage  in  these
proceedings and I make no direction on this occasion.


Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


FEE AWARD

As the appeal has been  dismissed, no fee award may be made.


Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell
