
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39725/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 12th March 2015                              |On 13th March 2015         |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before


                         upper tribunal Judge MARTIN


                                   Between


                              MR WAQAR SHAFIQUE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Burrett (instructed by Levenes Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Appellant with regard to a determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge M A Khan)  promulgated  on  15th  September  2014  by  which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to refuse him leave to remain in the UK on the basis  of  long
    residence and his private and family life.

 2. The Appellant says that he came to the UK from  Pakistan  on  27  April
    1998 since when he has lived continuously here. On 16  August  2012  he
    made an application for leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  on  the
    basis  of  long  residence  and  his  private  and  family  life  which
    application was refusal on 23 July 2013.

 3. In his determination the Judge set out in paragraph 12 the  background,
    namely that the Appellant claimed to have completed 14 years  residence
    in  the  UK  in  April  2012  and  instructed  solicitors  to  make  an
    application on his behalf. He said that they told him  his  application
    had been submitted in time but in fact it had not been;  the  relevance
    of delay being the removal, in July 2012 of the 14 year long  residence
    route to settlement. The Judge then goes on to refer to the Appellant's
    claim to have relatives in the UK including an elderly grandmother  for
    whom  he  provided  support  and  that  his  removal  would  amount  to
    interference with his private life under article 8.

 4. The Judge then summarises the Letter of  Refusal  which  considers  the
    Appellant's private life, which formed the  basis  of  the  claim,  and
    which  falls  for  consideration  under  paragraph  276  ADE   of   the
    Immigration Rules. The Respondent noted that the Appellant was  at  the
    date of the application 37 years of age and that he had spent the first
    23 years of his life in Pakistan. He had not lived in  the  UK  for  20
    years and it was not accepted that he had lost all  ties  to  Pakistan.
    The Secretary of State noted that in a  previous  application  made  in
    2008 it had been claimed by the Appellant that he had no family in  the
    UK whereas now he claimed to have a grandmother,  two  aunts  and  four
    uncles all of whom are British citizens.  They  also  referred  to  the
    Appellant saying that he had wanted to claim asylum but had not done so
    and that he has family in Pakistan with whom he had regular contact.

 5. The Judge then set out at paragraphs 18 and 19 the oral  evidence.  The
    Appellant formally adopted his written statement and then said that  he
    had four uncles, two aunts and a grand aunt in the UK and that none  of
    these were direct blood relations. His uncles and aunts were cousins of
    his parents and his grand aunt, who he referred to as his  grandmother,
    was his mother's aunt. He confirmed in his oral evidence that he had no
    direct family in the UK  and  that  his  mother  and  brother  live  in
    Pakistan. He said that his brother is married with  two  daughters  and
    that his mother lives with his brother and they all  live  together  in
    his brother's in law's family home. He also confirmed that  he  was  in
    regular contact with his mother and brother and the last  time  he  had
    contact with them was the day before the hearing.

 6. The Judge recorded that the Appellant said he was involved in voluntary
    work at two mosques in  the  UK  and  he  also  noted  the  Appellant's
    evidence that since 2011 he had not  lived  with  his  grand  aunt  but
    rather lived separately, sharing a room with a friend. His  grand  aunt
    lives with her son, his wife and  their  three  children  although  the
    Appellant said that he spends a lot of time with her and takes  her  to
    doctor and hospital appointments.

 7. The Judge then refers to the  cross-examination  of  the  Appellant  in
    which he claimed that he could not return to  Pakistan  because  he  is
    very close to his family in the UK and has no home in Pakistan  as  his
    mother lives with his brother's in-laws. When he came to the UK he said
    that he was in fear of his life. He claimed that people had beaten  him
    up in 1998 and he still fears them because they  are  still  there.  In
    1998 they had fired shots at his house. He said  that  his  mother  and
    brother told him that those people are still looking for him  and  that
    they had been threatened but nothing has happened.

 8. He said that his uncle, who was present at the hearing,  supported  him
    financially as does his sister in Canada. In addition he  worked  doing
    odd jobs such as on market stalls and clearing people's gardens.

 9. In his conclusions there is an obvious typing  error  at  paragraph  25
    where the Judge indicates the Appellant had  made  an  application  for
    entry clearance as a spouse. That  is  clearly  an  error  and  in  the
    remainder of the decision accurately reflects the application that  was
    made made. In the same paragraph the Judge notes that the Secretary  of
    State was not satisfied that the  Appellant  met  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276 ADE or appendix FM. He referred to the evidence  that  he
    had heard and  he  also  referred  to  the  contradiction  between  the
    Appellant's written statement and his oral evidence as to the nature of
    his relatives in the UK. He notes that despite the Appellant's claim to
    have been in fear he did not claim asylum and also that the  reason  he
    gave for not doing so was that  he  wished  to  rejoin  his  family  in
    Pakistan at some stage.

10. At paragraph 28 the Judge notes that  the  Appellant's  representatives
    had made an application for leave to remain which was  refusal  on  5th
    November 2008 and the Appellant appealed against  that  decision  which
    took place in 2009.  The Appellant chose not to attend.  The appeal was
    dismissed and the Judge quoted parts of that determination.

11. Thereafter the Judge referred to Article 8, appendix FM  and  paragraph
    276 ADE and dismissed the appeal.

12. The main basis of the challenge before me was what the  Judge  said  at
    paragraph 32; that on the basis of current case law there was  no  need
    for him to consider article 8 under  the ECHR outside  the  Immigration
    Rules unless there were cogent  reasons  or   compelling  circumstances
    which would  justify,  exceptionally,  allowing  an  application  under
    article 8. He referred to the line of  cases  which  began  with  Nagre
    [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) and includes MF (Nigeria)[2013] EWCA Civ  1192.
    He found at paragraph 33 that having considered  the  requirements  the
    Rules, only if there may be arguably good grounds for a grant of  leave
    to remain outside the rules, would it be necessary for him to  consider
    article  8  under  the  ECHR  and   whether   there   were   compelling
    circumstances not sufficiently recognised under  the  Rules.  He  found
    that in this case there  were  no  such  compelling  circumstances  and
    dismissed the appeal without consideration of article 8 under the ECHR.
    The grounds challenge that and permission was granted on that basis.

13. It is worthy of note at this stage that the law at  the  date  of  this
    hearing was in line with that quoted by the Judge.  However  the  cases
    have continued and we now have the benefit of  the  Court  of  Appeal's
    decision in Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 74 which clarifies  the  decision  in
    MM(Lebanon) [2014] EWCA Civ 985.  Singh confirms that there is no  need
    to conduct a full separate assessment under  the  ECHR  where  all  the
    issues have been addressed in the consideration  under  the  Rules  and
    paragraph 30 of Nagre remains good law.

14. Mr Burrett did not seek to challenge the current state of the  law  but
    said that the reality is whether the Appellant has an Article  8  claim
    or not and in this case he did and the Judge simply did not  deal  with
    it.

15. One of the major planks of Mr Burrett's argument was the failure by the
    Judge to consider what he sets out  briefly  at  paragraph  12  of  the
    decision, that if the Appellant's solicitors, instructed in  2012,  had
    made a prompt application when the Appellant had clocked  up  14  years
    long residence in the UK, he would have been granted  indefinite  leave
    to remain on the basis of the law as it  stood  then.  The  solicitors'
    delay in doing anything meant that by  the  time  the  application  was
    submitted in August 2012, the Rules had changed removing  the  14  year
    route.

16. There are several issues that arise from that submission.  Firstly,  it
    is trite law that when an Appellant seeks to blame representatives  for
    a failure it is incumbent upon him to produce evidence to that  effect.
    Given that the error was apparently in 2012  the  Appellant  had  ample
    time to make a complaint and to produce evidence of that to the  first-
    tier tribunal. He did not. Solicitors are required to confirm  client's
    instructions in  writing  and  there  would  have  been  correspondence
    passing between the Appellant and those representatives which he  could
    have produced. The simple fact is the Appellant  produced  no  evidence
    whatsoever with regard to his claim that his former solicitors were  at
    fault. If the Judge had made a finding that they had been at  fault  he
    would indeed have fallen into error because there was  no  evidence  to
    support such a finding.

17. So far as the Judge's failure to take into account the  fact  that  the
    Appellant could and should have been granted indefinite leave to remain
    on the basis of 14 years long residence is concerned,  Mr  Burrett  has
    failed to take into account that the Appellant could not possibly  have
    succeeded on that basis. As recited by the Judge the Appellant had made
    a previous application in 2008 which was the subject of the appeal that
    he did not trouble to attend. The decision of 19th August  2013,  which
    is the decision in the extant appeal, refers  to  the  Appellant  being
    served with form IS151A  on  9  December  2008  informing  him  of  his
    immigration status and liability to detention and removal.  Service  of
    that notice stopped the clock in terms of long residence. As at 2008 he
    had not accumulated 14 years long residence and  could  not  count  the
    period thereafter.

18. Accordingly, any suggestion that the Appellant was entitled to  succeed
    on that basis in 2012 is a "red herring;" he could not. Accordingly  it
    is not an error on the part of the Judge to fail to consider  a  matter
    which was completely irrelevant.

19. The remaining thrust of Mr Burrett's argument was that the Judge simply
    did not properly consider the private and family circumstances  of  the
    Appellant in the United Kingdom and had  he  done  so  he  should  have
    considered article 8  under  the  ECHR.  With  regard  to  the  Judge's
    comments that the Appellant had no  blood  relatives  in  the  UK,  the
    evidence was that his grand aunt was to all intents  and  purposes  his
    grandmother and he treated her as such.  The Judge was not entitled  to
    simply brush aside his relationship with her. The evidence was that she
    was highly dependent upon his assistance and as a result he should have
    considered the impact of his removal on the grand aunt. He referred  to
    the evidence being unchallenged but that the Judge then  made  findings
    against the Appellant on the basis of it which, he argued  he  was  not
    entitled to do. Additionally, the Judge ought to have  paid  particular
    attention to the length of the  Appellant's  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom, his lack of ties in Pakistan and close  ties  in  the  UK.  He
    argued that paragraph 276 ADE concentrated purely on the  ties  to  the
    home country and did not take into account close ties in the  UK.  They
    are only in article 8 and he argued that there were compelling  factors
    in the circumstances of this case to warrant consideration of article 8
    under the ECHR and for it to be allowed outside the  Rules.  The  Judge
    erred in failing to do so.

20. I find that argument to be without merit. The factors  relied  upon  by
    the Appellant in this case are very far from compelling.  He relies  on
    his relationship with family members in  the  UK.  However,  the  Judge
    accepted  the  presence  of  those  family  members   but   found   the
    relationship amounted to no more  than  emotional  ties.  He  noted  in
    particular that despite his grand aunt's apparent dependence upon  him,
    for the preceding three years he  had  not  even  lived  with  her  but
    separately and the grand aunt lived with her own son  and  daughter-in-
    law and their children. He  was  entitled,  contrary  to  Mr  Burrett's
    submissions, in those circumstances to conclude that there were  others
    who could render assistance to the grand aunt if he were not available.
     Indeed somebody must be assisting her on a daily basis  at  home.  The
    Judge was entitled to take into account that  the  Appellant  had  very
    close family ties in Pakistan in the form of  his  mother  and  brother
    with whom he was in regular contact to  such  an  extent  that  he  had
    spoken to them the day before the hearing. So far  as  family  life  is
    concerned that was the only evidence before the Judge. That is  a  long
    way short of coming within appendix FM and there is nothing exceptional
    or  compelling  about  those  circumstances  to  warrant  consideration
    outside the Rules. There are no circumstances not dealt with under  the
    Rules.

21. In terms of private  life  the  evidence  is  scant  indeed.  The  only
    evidence was the Appellant's length of time in the UK  and  doing  some
    voluntary work on an occasional basis  for  two  mosques.  Despite  his
    claim to be doing odd jobs and employment there was no evidence of that
    before the Judge. The Judge noted that the Appellant did not  meet  the
    requirements of either Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE  and  there  was
    nothing  about  the  circumstances  that   warranted   any   additional
    consideration. This was a case that could not  possibly  succeed  under
    Article 8. In that conclusion the  Judge  cannot  be  criticised.   The
    Appellant did not come close to meeting the requirements of  the  Rules
    and there was certainly nothing to warrant any additional consideration
    or to warrant the appeal being allowed  outside  the  Rules.  No  Judge
    could conceivably have reached any other conclusion.

22. For the above reasons I uphold the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  and
    dismiss the appeal to the Upper Tribunal.








Signed                              Date 12th March 2015





Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
