
[pic]
IAC-AH-sc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39545/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30th November 2015                |On 21st December 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                          Kehinde Temitayo ADENIRAN
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Fouladvand of Migrant Advisory and Advocacy
Service
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Owens of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 19th May 2015.

 2. The Appellant is a female Nigerian citizen born 3rd February  1973  who
    entered the United Kingdom in 2005 with entry clearance as  a  visitor.
    She thereafter remained in the UK without leave.

 3. On 2nd July 2012 the Appellant applied for leave to remain  in  the  UK
    outside the Immigration Rules, relying  upon  Article  8  of  the  1950
    European Convention on Human Rights (the  1950  Convention).   On  23rd
    October 2014 the Respondent issued a decision to remove  the  Appellant
    from the UK following refusal of a human rights claim.  The reasons for
    refusal are contained in a letter dated 3rd October 2014.

 4. The appeal was heard by the FTT on 14th  April  2015.   The  FTT  heard
    evidence from the Appellant and her mother  for  whom  she  acts  as  a
    carer.  The FTT found that the  appeal  could  not  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules in relation to Article 8,  having considered Appendix
    FM in relation to family life, and  paragraph  276ADE  in  relation  to
    private life.  The FTT considered Article  8  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules  and  concluded  that  the  Appellant's  removal  would  not   be
    disproportionate, and therefore the appeal was dismissed.

 5. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    In summary it was submitted that the Appellant had applied for leave to
    remain to continue to care for her disabled,  ailing,  elderly  mother.
    It  was  submitted  that  there  are   compelling   and   compassionate
    circumstances for leave outside the rules and the FTT had erred by  not
    allowing the appeal outside the Immigration Rules.

 6. It was submitted that the FTT had failed to  apply  the  principles  in
    Beoku-Betts [2008] UKHL 39 by failing to consider the human  rights  of
    the Appellant's mother as well as the Appellant.

 7. It was submitted that the FTT materially erred in  law  by  failing  to
    follow the principles in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.

 8. It was submitted that the decision made by the FTT is irrational.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge P J M Hollingworth of the FTT
    in the following terms;

         "An arguable error of law has arisen in  that  the  judge  has  not
         considered whether there would be a breach of the Article 8  rights
         of the Appellant's mother.  The judge found that Article  8(1)  was
         engaged in respect of family life.  At paragraph 58 the  judge  has
         only reached a conclusion in respect of the Appellant.  An arguable
         error of law has arisen in the context of the inferences  drawn  by
         the judge in respect of the  earlier  application  referred  to  in
         paragraph 54 given that the  judge  did  not  have  the  papers  in
         respect of that appeal before him.  The  judge  has  not  explained
         whether his finding that a deliberate omission had taken place  has
         affected his assessment of the Appellant's credibility.  The  judge
         referred to the position when her mother sought to  regularise  her
         stay because of her health condition in 2005 when  no  mention  was
         made of the Appellant."

10. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 contending in summary that the FTT directed  itself  appropriately
    and made findings which were open to made on the evidence.  The Grounds
    of Appeal  did  not  identify  an  error  of  law  but  amounted  to  a
    disagreement.

11. Directions were subsequently issued making provision for there to be  a
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether  the  FTT  decision
    should be set aside.

The Appellant's Submissions

12. At the  hearing  before  me  Mr  Fouladvand  relied  upon  the  grounds
    contained within the application for permission to appeal and the grant
    of permission to appeal.  Mr Fouladvand  submitted  that  the  FTT  had
    failed to consider the Article 8 rights of the Appellant's mother.  The
    FTT had not gone through the Razgar five-stage approach in relation the
    Appellant's mother.  The FTT had not placed weight upon the  fact  that
    the Appellant had been in the UK in excess of ten years  and  that  her
    mother requires care which the Appellant provides.

The Respondent's Submissions

13.  Mr  Duffy  submitted  that  the  FTT  had  considered   the   mother's
    circumstances at paragraphs 50  and  56  of  the  decision.   Mr  Duffy
    submitted that the grounds and submissions disclosed no error  of  law,
    and although a different decision may have been  made  by  a  different
    judge, that was not the test, and in the  absence  of  any  error,  the
    decision of the FTT should stand.

The Appellant's Response

14. Mr Fouladvand submitted that the key issue was that the human rights of
    the Appellant's mother had not been considered.  Medical  evidence  had
    been produced in relation to her condition, and the  Appellant  is  her
    mother's carer.  Family life could not  be  carried  on  if  they  were
    separated.

15. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

16. I find no material error of law in the FTT decision.  The  decision  is
    comprehensive, with findings of fact being made at paragraphs 18 -  29,
    the Immigration Rules considered at paragraphs 30 - 34, and  Article  8
    outside the rules being considered at paragraphs 35 - 58.

17. There is no challenge to the findings made by the FTT that  the  appeal
    cannot succeed with reference  to  either  Appendix  FM,  or  paragraph
    276ADE.

18. The challenge relates to the assessment of Article 8 outside the rules,
    by the FTT, in which it was  concluded  that  the  Appellant's  removal
    would not be a disproportionate breach.

19. The FTT did consider the Article 8 rights of  the  Appellant's  mother.
    The FTT did follow the five-stage approach advocated in  Razgar,  which
    is set out at paragraph 41.  At paragraph 43 the  FTT  found  that  the
    Appellant and her mother have family life that engages Article 8(1).

20. The FTT therefore accepted that Article 8 was engaged both in  relation
    to family life between the Appellant and her mother, and private  life.



21. The FTT correctly went on to consider the issue of proportionality.

22. The FTT considered the position of the Appellant's mother at  paragraph
    50, concluding that it was not reasonable to expect her to relocate  to
    Nigeria, and accepting that she is settled in the UK and that  she  has
    significant health problems.

23. The FTT also considered the Appellant's mother at paragraph 56, finding
    that alternative care is  available  to  her  in  the  absence  of  the
    Appellant.  It was noted that Social Services had  offered  some  care,
    and that the Appellant's mother has  three  sons  and  their  families'
    resident in the UK who could provide support.

24. There has been reference in the grant of permission to a  finding  made
    by the FTT in  paragraph  54  about  a  previous  application.   I  can
    ascertain no error on this issue.  The FTT noted that  the  Appellant's
    mother had sought to regularise her stay  in  the  UK  because  of  her
    health condition in 2005 and had not mentioned the Appellant.  The  FTT
    found that this was a deliberate omission, and this was a finding  open
    to be made on the evidence.  As recorded by the FTT, the Appellant  did
    not seek to claim that her presence in the UK had formed part  of  that
    earlier application.  This in my view is not, in any event, a  material
    issue.  The FTT did in my view err in paragraph 54 in finding  that  in
    accordance with  section  117B(4)  and  (5)  little  weight  should  be
    accorded to a private and family life between  the  Appellant  and  her
    mother.  The correct position is that little weight should be given  to
    a private life that has been formed when a person's immigration  status
    is precarious or unlawful and  little  weight  should  be  given  to  a
    relationship formed with a qualifying partner when a person is  in  the
    UK unlawfully.  It is not therefore correct to say that  little  weight
    should be give to the family life formed between the Appellant and  her
    mother, which the FTT found did  engage  Article  8.   This  is  not  a
    material error, because reading the decision as a whole,  it  is  clear
    that the FTT accepted that the Appellant and  her  mother  had  a  very
    close relationship, and a close emotional bond, which is  described  in
    paragraph 43.  It was also accepted that the  Appellant  acted  as  her
    mother's carer, although the FTT went on to find that alternative  care
    arrangements could be made.

25. The FTT erred in paragraph 53 in finding that the  Appellant's  ability
    to speak English and to be financially independent are factors  in  her
    favour.  The Upper Tribunal in AM (Malawi) [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC) found
    in the second paragraph to the headnote that;

         "An Appellant can obtain no positive right to a grant of  leave  to
         remain from either section 117B(2) or (3), whatever the  degree  of
         his  fluency  in  English,  or  the  strength  of   his   financial
         resources."

26. Therefore those factors do not go  in  favour  of  the  Appellant,  and
    although this is an error, it is not material, and does not assist  the
    Appellant's claim that the FTT decision should be set aside.

27. The FTT has considered all material factors in  this  appeal,  and  not
    placed weight upon any immaterial factor.  The FTT properly  considered
    the private and family life of both the Appellant and her mother.

28. The grounds contained within the application for permission  to  appeal
    evidence a strong disagreement with the conclusions reached by the FTT,
    but they do not disclose any material error of law.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aide the decision.  The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

No order for anonymity was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There has  been
no  request  for  anonymity  and  the  Upper  Tribunal  makes  no  anonymity
direction.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall    4th December 2015



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall    4th December 2015
