
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39586/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 May 2015                        |On 12 May 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE MCGOWAN
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                 Rehan Said
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. E. Oremuyiwa, Legal Representative from London
                    Investigation Immigration Education Ltd
For the Respondent:    Miss A. Broklesby-Weller, Senior Home Office
                    Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan; he was born on 26 May 1986.  He
    is married to Safia Parveeen. She was born on 4 May 1984; she is also a
    citizen of Pakistan. They have a daughter, born on 25 February 2014  in
    the UK. The Appellant's wife is a  Post  Study  Work  Migrant  and  the
    appellant claims as her dependent.

 2. The Appellant entered the  UK  as  a  General  Student  Migrant  on  24
    September 2009 with leave until 2011.  On 29 October  2012  he  applied
    for  further  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4  Student  to  study  at
    Bedfordshire College. His leave was extended until 5 May 2014.

 3. The licence held by the college was revoked. He  applied  to  vary  his
    leave from Tier 4 to Tier 1 (PSW) dependent. That was  granted  to  run
    from 20 February 2014 until 20 February 2016.

 4. He attempted to re-enter the UK on 9 October 2014  with  his  wife  and
    child. He, alone, was refused. He was interviewed on 9 October 2014 and
    11 October 2014. After the second interview he was served with a Notice
    of Refusal of Leave  to  Enter  which  included  the  observation  "the
    cancellation of your leave will be treated  for  the  purposes  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971 and the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002 as a refusal of leave  to  enter  at  a  time  when  you  were  in
    possession of a current entry clearance certificate". By so  doing  the
    Respondent intended to, and did, make an "immigration decision"  within
    section 82(2)(e) of the 2002 Act which, by reason of section  92(2)  of
    the same Act meant that the Appellant could appeal the  decision  while
    he was in the United Kingdom.

 5. The continuing leave was cancelled because the Respondent was satisfied
    that false  representations  had  been  made,  or  material  facts  not
    disclosed, in order to obtain leave. That  decision  was  made  on  the
    basis that a false or fraudulently obtained TOEIC certificate had  been
    provided to this sponsoring college in order to obtain a CAS.

 6. The Appellant's appeal against that decision was heard  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal on 8 January 2015. That appeal was dismissed, on both the
    Immigration Rules and the  Article  8  points.  The  Tribunal  had  the
    benefit of hearing evidence from the Appellant and  his  wife.  Witness
    statements and documentary evidence was relied upon by the  Respondent.
    The Tribunal gave a reasoned and detailed determination and reasons. We
    are grateful to the First tier Tribunal for the detailed history  which
    we do not need to repeat in detail here.

 7. The Appellant  appeals  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  essentially  on  two
    grounds; that there was a material error of law in the  application  of
    the burden and standard of proof and that if applied properly there was
    no, or no sufficient evidence, to support  the  findings  and  secondly
    that there was a  material  error  of  law  in  not  finding  that  the
    Appellant's Article 8 rights and the rights of his child  under  s.  55
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  meant  the  Respondent's
    decision was unreasonable because it was disproportionate.

APPEAL

 8. It was submitted before us on the Appellant's behalf that there was  no
    evidence that he had  been  involved  in  the  use  of  a  fraudulently
    obtained certificate. It was said that the only evidence  available  to
    the Respondent was of alleged general misconduct by Educational Testing
    Services, (ETS), the institution that carried out the tests and granted
    the certificates. We cannot accept that submission.  In  fact,  in  his
    evidence to the Tribunal the Appellant produced his  TOEIC  certificate
    showing that he took a test on 18 September 2012. The certificate gives
    his name, date of birth and a registration number 0044202016030055. The
    Respondent produced evidence of the checks carried out on the  validity
    of the process at  ETS,  that  evidence  showed  that  the  certificate
    granted to someone with the same  name,  date  of  birth,  registration
    number who carried out the tests on the same two  days  was  "invalid".
    That was the certificate which the Appellant accepted had been used  by
    him to obtain the CAS which was the basis upon which leave was  granted
    to him.

 9. Without any other evidence that  was  ample  material  upon  which  the
    Tribunal could have been satisfied to the required  standard  that  the
    Respondent had  proved  her  case.  The  Tribunal  looked  at  all  the
    evidence. It made findings  on  the  Appellant's  inability  to  recall
    important details about taking the test.

10. The finding was that the Appellant had sought to deceive by  using  the
    fraudulently obtained certificate to gain a place on the course at  the
    college. There was a further finding that he withheld material facts in
    not disclosing the original deception on applying for further leave  to
    remain under the PBS.

11. The tribunal made a reasonable  decision  based  on  the  evidence  and
    applying the proper burden and standard of proof. There is no  lack  or
    gap in the evidence upon which it reached that decision. The burden  of
    proof was correctly identified as remaining on  the  Respondent,  given
    the allegations. In a reasoned manner the differing pieces of  evidence
    were examined  and  counter  balanced,  paying  strict  regard  to  the
    standard required to discharge that burden. The Tribunal found,  as  it
    was perfectly entitled to do, that the Appellant  had  engaged  in  the
    process of obtaining a fraudulently acquired certificate.

12. In considering the Article 8 submissions the Tribunal conducted a  very
    careful exercise to balance the rights  claimed  by  the  Appellant  as
    against the public interest. The  Judge  found,  as  he  was  perfectly
    entitled to do, that the Appellant's right to the  continued  enjoyment
    of his family life was an important  consideration  but  there  was  no
    evidential basis upon which to conclude that that could not continue in
    Pakistan. Both the Appellant and his wife are from Pakistan  and  lived
    outside the UK until they reached adulthood. Their child was still less
    than one year old at the date of the hearing. She has no  life  outside
    her immediate family.

13. The Tribunal went on to  consider  s  55  and  the  child's  individual
    rights. Her best interests are to remain in the  care  of  her  mother,
    that can be achieved either in the UK with her mother, who has a  right
    to remain at the moment or to return to Pakistan with her  parents,  if
    that is the choice they make.

14. No valid criticism can be made of the reasoning  process  used  or  the
    decisions  reached.  No  error  of  law   has   been   identified   and
    substantiated in this appeal which must,  for  the  reasons  given,  be
    dismissed.


Signed        Date 7 May 2015

Mrs Justice McGowan
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
