

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/39879/2014
                                                               IA/39868/2014
                                                               IA/39871/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision and Reasons           |
|                                      |Promulgated                    |
|On 29 February 2016                   |On 10 March 2016               |
|                                      |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER

                                   Between

                        JASHBHAI MAHENDRAKUMAR PATEL
                               NAYANBEN PATEL
                         PALAKBEN MAHENDRABHAI PATEL
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Turner of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Jarvis a Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background


    1. The Respondent refused the  Appellants'  applications  for
       leave to remain on 16 October 2014. They are all  citizens
       of India who came to the United Kingdom  as  visitors  and
       failed to leave when their visas expired in  2001  in  the
       case of the first Appellant and 2008 in the  case  of  the
       other  Appellants.  The  third  Appellant  is  the   adult
       daughter of the other Appellants, she  being  born  on  11
       February 1989 (now aged 27) and her parents being born  on
       22 December 1959 and 18 February 1964 (now aged 56 and  52
       respectively). They sought leave to remain essentially due
       to the second  Appellant's  poor  health.  They  were  all
       required to leave the United Kingdom.


    2. Their appeals made pursuant to Articles 3  and  8  of  the
       European Convention on Human Rights 1950 were dismissed by
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Anthony ("the Judge")  following
       a hearing on 13 August 2015. There was no application  for
       permission to appeal  regarding  the  Article  3  decision
       which stands.

The grant of permission


    3. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Adio  granted  permission  to
       appeal (30  December  2015)  on  the  ground  that  it  is
       arguable that:


          "...the judge omitted to assess the  situation  of  the
          third Appellant  regarding  her  pregnancy  (sic  -  it
          should be to) for someone who had indefinite  leave  to
          remain...and whether or not it would have an impact  on
          family life with the second Appellant depending on  the
          outcome of that assessment. This  is  relevant  as  the
          judge accepted that the first and third Appellants  are
          joint full time carers to the second Appellant."


Respondent's position

    4. Mr Jarvis conceded that there was a material error of  law
       as the Judge noted the presence of  the  partner  who  had
       indefinite leave  to  remain  and  the  third  Appellant's
       pregnancy. No determination had been made on that  or  the
       impact the pregnancy of the third Appellant  may  have  on
       her ability to give primary care to the second Appellant.

Appellants' position

    5. It was a material error of law to exclude from the Article
       8  proportionality  balancing  exercise  that  the   third
       Appellant was then pregnant to a man  who  has  indefinite
       leave to remain as she is the predominant day to day carer
       of the second Appellant.


Judge's Determination


    6. It is found that [26/27] the  second  Appellant  has  Left
       Trigeminal Neuralgia for which she receives treatment  and
       that she had received treatment and medication  in  India.
       She spends most of the day in bed  due  to  her  pain  and
       compromised mobility. The third Appellant cares for her on
       a full time basis. She had failed to  establish  that  her
       treatment could not continue in  India  [35].  Her  social
       care and network of support would not be disrupted as  the
       other Appellants would be going with her. Other family and
       friends support is neither material nor significant  [36].
       There is nothing to suggest  that  the  financial  support
       from family and friends could not continue if they are  in
       India [37] and they could be accommodated there [38].

    7. The Judge found that consequences of  gravity  did  engage
       Article 8 regarding the  second  Appellant  [29]  but  not
       regarding the other Appellants [42]. Even if Article 8 had
       been   engaged,   [39/48]    removal    would    not    be
       disproportionate for any of them due to their  ability  to
       resettle and the need to maintain an effective immigration
       control. They are familiar with the language  and  customs
       in India, lived the majority of their lives  there,  would
       have support, and  have  been  here  unlawfully  for  many
       years.

Discussion


    8. It is settled  law  that  very  few  cases  succeed  under
       Article 8 that fail under Article 3  as  explained  in  GS
       (India) & others v SSHD [2015]  EWCA  Civ  40  and  Akhalu
       (health claim: ECHR Article 8)  [2013]  UKUT  00400  (IAC)
       where we are reminded in the headnote that;


          "...The correct approach is not to leave out of account what
          is,  by  any  view,  a  material  consideration  of  central
          importance to the individual concerned but to recognise that
          the countervailing public interest in removal will  outweigh
          the consequences for the health of the claimant because of a
          disparity of health care facilities in all but  a  very  few
          rare cases. The consequences of removal for the health of  a
          claimant who would not be able to access  equivalent  health
          care in their country of nationality  as  was  available  in
          this  country  are  plainly  relevant  to  the  question  of
          proportionality.  But,  when  weighed  against  the   public
          interest in ensuring that  the  limited  resources  of  this
          country's health service are used to the best effect for the
          benefit  of  those  for  whom  they  are   intended,   those
          consequences do not weigh heavily in the  claimant's  favour
          but speak cogently in support of  the  public  interests  in
          removal."


    9. I agree with the representatives that there was a material
       error of law as the  Judge  left  out  of  the  account  2
       material  factors  which  may   have   impacted   on   the
       proportionality balancing exercise required by Article  8,
       namely the third Appellant's  relationship  and  pregnancy
       and how they may have impacted on her ability  to  provide
       care for the second Appellant here and in India.


   10. I agreed with the representatives that it  would  be  most
       appropriate to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal
       for a de novo hearing on the Article 8 issue  in  relation
       to each Appellant to enable these matters to  be  explored
       and determined and their relevance  or  otherwise  weighed
       against the rest of the evidence.



   11. Upon remittal, given the fact that the third Appellant has
       now given birth, the new Judge  will  of  course  have  to
       consider the new child's care needs and what  impact  that
       has in relation to both the third Appellant's  rights  and
       what impact it will have on her ability to provide primary
       care for the second Appellant.


Decision:

    The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did
    involve the making of an error on a point of law in  relation
    to Article 8 only.

      I set aside the Article 8 decision.


    There was no Article 3 appeal before  me  and  that  decision
    stands.

    I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for a  de  novo
    hearing on the Article 8 issue only.





Signed:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
2 March 2016
