
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/39481/2014
     IA/39486/2014
     IA/39487/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |          Decision & Reasons      |
|                                         |Promulgated                       |
|On 8th June 2015                         |          On 17th June 2015       |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                             MISS MARJANA BEGUM
                             MISS SHIULINA BEGUM
                               MR MD JANU MIAH
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms O Momoh, Counsel instructed by M-R Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellants are citizens of Bangladesh born on 17th July  1989,  2nd
    May 1991 and 1st November 1993 respectively.  They  are  siblings,  two
    sisters and a brother.  They appeal against the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal  dated  20th  December  2014  dismissing  their  appeals,
    against the refusal of indefinite leave to remain and the  decision  to
    remove them from the UK, under paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the  Immigration
    Rules and on Article 8 grounds.

2.   The Appellants entered the UK on 10th May 2005  on  visit  visas  valid
    from 27th April 2005 to 27th October 2005.  From 2008 onwards they made
    successive applications under Article 8 all of which have been  refused
    with no rights of appeal.  Permission to appeal was granted  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge White for the following reasons.

    (a)  The judge found at paragraph 12 that the first Appellant  was  not
         at risk of an arranged marriage against her will.  In doing so  the
         judge refers to "Evidence which appears to have been considered  by
         previous Tribunals". The  judge,  however,  does  not  specifically
         identify any previous  Tribunal  determinations.   Furthermore,  it
         appears from the Respondent's reasons for refusal letter  that  the
         first Appellant's previous  applications  were  refused  without  a
         right of appeal.  It  is  arguable,  therefore,  that  the  judge's
         findings concerning the Appellants' familial ties  with  Bangladesh
         (paragraphs 12, 18 and 19) are flawed in that  there  has  been  no
         previous judicial finding on the issue.

    (b)  Given (a) above and the Appellants' long residence in the  UK,  it
         is arguable that the approach taken by the judge to  the  issue  of
         ties is flawed in that the exercise that has to be conducted  is  a
         "rounded assessment  of  all  the  relevant  circumstances",   (see
         Ogundimu (Article 8 - new Rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 60  (IAC)  and
         Bossadi (paragraph 276ADE; suitability; ties) [2015] UKUT 42).

3.   In submissions, Ms Momoh stated  that  the  judge  erred  in  law  with
    regard to familial ties by relying on previous decisions.  The  judge's
    findings at paragraph 12 were central to his assessment  of  276ADE(vi)
    and  whether  there  were  significant  obstacles  to  the  Appellants'
    reintegration into Bangladesh.

4.   The Appellants arrived in the UK as a family unit when  they  were  16,
    14 and 11 years old. They were still children when they came to the UK.
    The first Appellant was fleeing an arranged marriage and was  estranged
    from her other two siblings in Bangladesh. The judge did  not  consider
    the veracity of  this  evidence  and  his  reasoning  was  premised  on
    previous decisions which did not exist. There  was  a  danger  that  in
    referring to previous decisions the judge was attaching undue weight to
    the Secretary of State's rejection of  the  Appellants'  claims  rather
    than considering whether the decision of the  Secretary  of  State  had
    been properly made and assessing the Appellants' evidence afresh  under
    the Immigration Rules.

5.   At the end of paragraph 12 the judge found that  the  Appellants  could
    re-establish themselves in Bangladesh.  This  finding  lacked  adequate
    reasons.  The judge should have conducted a more fact-sensitive enquiry
    about whether the Appellants had family in Bangladesh and  should  have
    considered the strength and nature of those ties.  The judge had failed
    to properly consider the tensions which would exist on  return  because
    the first Appellant had fled an arranged marriage.  If he did  consider
    it then the nature of family ties in Bangladesh were weak.

6.   The judge's finding that the first Appellant had  social  and  cultural
    ties in Bangladesh is flawed because he did not assess the strength  of
    those ties and there was no adequate reason for why the first Appellant
    could re-establish her social and cultural ties on return.   The  judge
    failed to consider all the evidence in the round.

7.   The Appellants had spent their formative years in the UK, two  of  them
    were teenagers when they arrived.  The third  Appellant  was  close  to
    being here half of his life and the judge had failed to properly assess
    whether he could reintegrate in Bangladesh given that he had taken  his
    GCSE's in the UK and spent his formative years here.

8.   The judge erred in  applying  the  wrong  version  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  If the judge accepted that the  first  Appellant  had  fled  an
    arranged marriage then this  could  be  an  obstacle  to  return.   The
    judge's  reasons  were  inadequate  and  he  had  not  made  a  rounded
    assessment following Bossadi.  The judge could have come to a different
    conclusion if he had considered the number of years the Appellants  had
    been in the UK and their relative ages.

9.   On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Clark relied on Singh  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA  Civ  74,  paragraph  64,  in
    which it states that there is  no  need  to  conduct  a  full  separate
    examination of Article 8 outside the Rules where in  the  circumstances
    of a particular  case  all  the  issues  have  been  addressed  in  the
    consideration under the Rules.

10.  Mr Clark submitted that there was no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    judge's decision. The Rules were capable of being a complete  code  and
    the new Rule struck a balance between public interest and private  life
    taking into account ties and the  ages  of  the  Appellants.  Assessing
    integration was fact-specific. The  judge  considered  the  Appellants'
    ties to Bangladesh and  this  can  be  applied  to  his  assessment  of
    integration.  He carefully considered those ties and concluded that the
    Appellants had failed to show that they could  not  re-establish  their
    social and cultural ties.

11.  The position of the second Appellant was slightly  different.   It  was
    accepted at paragraph 18 that she was not fleeing an arranged  marriage
    and that she had an aunt and uncle in Bangladesh.  Mr Clark referred me
    to paragraph 16 of Bossadi and submitted that familial  ties  could  be
    pursued and strengthened.

12.  The third Appellant could not satisfy  paragraph  276ADE  (v)  and  the
    argument put forward by Ms Momoh amounted to  a  'near-miss  argument'.
    Mr Clark submitted that I had been invited to draw  an  inference  from
    how long the third Appellant had been in the country.   The  judge  had
    made a rounded assessment of all the facts.  It was not unusual that he
    went to school and established his private life here. This did not take
    the third Appellant's Article 8 claim outside the Immigration Rules.

13.  In response, Ms Momoh, with reference to paragraph 16,  noted  that  an
    assessment of ties should be both  objective  and  subjective  and  she
    submitted that this was not demonstrated in the decision.

Discussion and Conclusion

14.  At paragraph 12 of the  determination  the  judge  made  the  following
    findings in relation to the appeal of the first Appellant:

         "The Appellant is 25 years old, having arrived in the UK  when  she
         was 16 years of age.  She has therefore spent the majority  of  her
         life and her formative years in Bangladesh.   Her  family  live  in
         Bangladesh including two  siblings.   She  maintains  that  she  is
         estranged from her family because of her refusal to countenance  an
         arranged marriage.  Whether  this  is  still  the  case  and  these
         existing tensions still exist nine years later I have  nothing  but
         the Appellant's own evidence and that of her fellow  Appellants  on
         this point.  Evidence which appears  to  have  been  considered  by
         previous Tribunals, at least with regard to  the  central  element,
         whether she was fleeing an arranged  marriage.  That  evidence  has
         apparently been rejected on numerous occasions and by the  Tribunal
         in the past.  Even if that were the case and that she is  estranged
         from her entire family she nevertheless  has  social  and  cultural
         ties to Bangladesh.  Indeed  she  admitted  in  evidence  that  her
         English was poor (she is ESOL Stage 2) and that she is primarily  a
         Bangladeshi speaker.  She is 25 years of age and I  have  heard  no
         evidence to suggest that she could not  re-establish  her  cultural
         and social ties even if they have been lost.  I am  satisfied  that
         the  Appellant  does  not  meet  the  requirements   of   paragraph
         276ADE(vi)."


15.  The Judge went on to consider Article 8 and found that on the basis  of
    the evidence before him there were no insurmountable obstacles  to  the
    first Appellant continuing her family life with  her  siblings  outside
    the UK in Bangladesh.  The  fact  that  the  first  Appellant  and  her
    siblings would prefer to live in the UK rather than Bangladesh did  not
    amount to insurmountable obstacles to relocating. The judge found  that
    the interference with the first Appellant's private life was lawful and
    proportionate.

16.  In relation to the second  Appellant  the  judge  found  that  all  the
    considerations in relation to the first Appellant were  identical  save
    that the second Appellant did not suggest she had been a  victim  of  a
    possible arranged marriage or that she was estranged  from  her  sister
    and brother and she also  indicated  she  had  an  aunt  and  uncle  in
    Bangladesh.

17.  In relation to the third Appellant, at paragraph  19  the  judge  found
    that he could not satisfy paragraph 276ADE(v) because he had not  spent
    at least half his life continuously in the UK.  The judge then went  on
    to consider paragraph 276ADE(vi) and found:

         "Whilst I accept that in terms of the proportion of his life  lived
         in the UK, getting on for half his life, he like his siblings is  a
         native speaker  of  Bangladeshi  and  I  cannot  find  in  all  the
         circumstances he is in a significantly different position from  his
         fellow Appellants. I make the same points in respect of  Article  8
         as  has  been  made  previously  in  respect  of  the   first   two
         Appellants."


18.  The  Appellants'  previous  applications  for  leave  to  remain  under
    Article 3 and Article 8 had been refused with no right of  appeal.  The
    judge acknowledged this fact at paragraph 9 of the  determination.  His
    finding at paragraph 12 that the first Appellant's evidence in relation
    to fleeing an arranged marriage had been rejected by  the  Tribunal  on
    numerous occasions had no basis in fact. However, the judge went on  to
    consider, at paragraph 12, the first Appellant's evidence, taken at its
    highest, stating that even if the  Appellant  was  estranged  from  her
    entire family,  she  nevertheless  had  social  and  cultural  ties  to
    Bangladesh because she had lived there until she was 16 years old,  the
    majority of her life and her formative years.

19.  The judge therefore considered the first Appellant's  circumstances  on
    the basis that even if  it  was  accepted  she  had  fled  an  arranged
    marriage and had become estranged from her family, she still had social
    and cultural ties to Bangladesh which she could re-establish on return.
    Accordingly, the judge's error of fact did not amount to  an  error  of
    law because  in  effect  the  judge  went  on  to  consider  the  first
    Appellant's evidence taken at its highest.

20.  At the start of the  hearing  there  was  some  discussion  as  to  the
    relevant Immigration Rule.  The Secretary of State's decision  is  made
    on the basis that the Appellant has no ties including social,  cultural
    or family with the country to which he would have to go if required  to
    leave the UK.  This decision is made on 23rd  September  2014  and  the
    Immigration Rules were amended on 28th July  2014.   The  new  relevant
    Immigration Rule, paragraph 276ADE (vi) states:


             "The applicant is aged 18 years or above, has lived in the  UK
             continuously for less than twenty years  but  there  would  be
             very significant obstacles to the applicant's integration into
             the country to which he would have to go if required to  leave
             the UK'."


    The appeal was therefore put forward and argued on the basis of the old
    Immigration Rule instead of the new Immigration Rule.


21.  I find that an assessment of whether there  are  significant  obstacles
    to  the  Appellants'  integration  into   Bangladesh   encompasses   an
    assessment of whether the Appellants have any ties to  the  Bangladesh.
    I find that there is no error of law in the  judge's  decision  because
    his findings of fact in relation to 'ties' is relevant to an assessment
    of whether there  are  any  significant  obstacles  to  the  Appellants
    integration.

22.  Further, at paragraph 15, the judge found there were no  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life  continuing  outside  Bangladesh.   Therefore,
    reading the determination as a whole, I find that the judge did conduct
    a rounded assessment of all the evidence relevant to whether there were
    significant obstacles to integration.

23.  Accordingly, the  issue  to  determine  is  whether,  looking  at  that
    evidence, an application of the Immigration Rule in force at  the  date
    of decision could  have  led  to  a  different  conclusion.  I  am  not
    persuaded by Ms Momoh's submission that the judge has  failed  to  take
    into account the first Appellant's  claim  to  have  fled  an  arranged
    marriage, which could amount to a significant obstacle to  integration.
    I am satisfied that on reading paragraph 12 the  judge  has  in  effect
    accepted the first Appellant's evidence because he makes  no  reference
    to familial ties.  He accepts that because she  has  fled  an  arranged
    marriage she is estranged from her entire  family.   I  find  that  the
    judge has looked at the length of residence in  the  UK.   He  is  well
    aware that the first Appellant was 16 years of age when she came to the
    UK and she has spent a significant amount of time here.

24.  The judge is equally  aware  of  the  ages  of  the  second  and  third
    Appellants. He specifically considers the fact that the third Appellant
    has lived here for nearly half of his life.  I find  that  the  judge's
    conclusions that the Appellants could re-establish themselves on return
    to Bangladesh and there were no insurmountable obstacles to  continuing
    family life in Bangladesh was a finding which was open to  him  on  the
    evidence before him.

25.  I find that the judge's reasons at paragraphs 12 to  19  are  adequate.
    The judge accepts that the Appellants have  been  here  for  over  nine
    years, but finds that there was insufficient  evidence  before  him  to
    show  that  ties  could  not  be  re-established  or  that  there  were
    insurmountable  obstacles  to  integration  on  return  to  Bangladesh.
    Accordingly, I find that there was no  error  of  law  in  the  judge's
    determination and the Appellants' appeals are dismissed.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 15th June 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                                  Date 15th June 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
