
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Ia/39970/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 30 September 2015                 |On 15 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER


                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR SHAHBAZ IQBAL
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Julie Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    In Person


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is not subject to an  anonymity  order  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.  Neither  party
    has invited me to make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI  2008/2698)  and  I
    have not done so.

 2. The appellant (hereafter the Secretary of State)  appeals  against  the
    decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Kelly)  allowing   the
    respondent's appeal against a decision taken on 24  September  2014  to
    refuse to issue  a  residence  card  under  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2005 ("the Regulations").

Introduction

 3. The respondent is a citizen of Pakistan  born  on  1  March  1982.  The
    respondent claimed that he had been living with  Ms  Sabeena  Anwar,  a
    citizen of Italy born  on  22  June  1985  ("the  EEA  sponsor")  since
    February 2013.

 4.  The  Secretary  of  State  accepted  the  respondent's  identity   and
    nationality but concluded that the respondent  was  still  married  and
    therefore his relationship with the EEA sponsor was in doubt and  could
    not be considered durable and subsisting. There was  also  insufficient
    documentary evidence to demonstrate a durable relationship. There was a
    previous refusal on 12 April 2013.

The Appeal

 5. The respondent appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an oral
    hearing at Hatton Cross on 24 April 2015. He was not  represented.  The
    First-tier Tribunal found that the  EEA  sponsor  was  a  self-employed
    qualified person under the Regulations and that the relationship was  a
    durable one under regulation 8(5). The couple had a  baby.  The  appeal
    was allowed outright under the Regulations.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law  by
    allowing the appeal outright  when  the  Secretary  of  State  had  not
    considered regulation 17(4) discretion. The respondent was an  extended
    family member and the appeal should be remitted back to  the  Secretary
    of State to exercise discretion.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Simpson
    on 8 July 2015 on  the  basis  that  the  decision  was  silent  as  to
    regulation 17(4) and  the  judge  was  not  entitled  to  exercise  the
    discretion of the Secretary of State.

 8. Thus, the appeal came before me

Discussion

 9. Ms Isherwood submitted that there was no challenge to the  findings  in
    relation to durable relationship. However,  regulation  17(4)  requires
    the Secretary of State to make a decision first. The decision  must  be
    remitted back to the Secretary of State.

10. The respondent submitted that he was a family member by the date of the
    oral hearing because the wedding took place on 27 February 2015.All  of
    the documents that proved he was a family member were submitted  before
    the hearing. He also brought a birth certificate for the baby with  his
    name on it.

11. Ms Isherwood replied that the application was made before  the  parties
    were married. However, the evidence of the marriage was now before  the
    Secretary of State and it was unlikely that a  decision  would  now  be
    made under regulation  17(4).  Ms  Isherwood  had  seen  documents  and
    photographs in relation to the marriage.

12. I note that the judge found  that  the  relationship  was  genuine  and
    referred at paragraph 19 of the decision to the uncontested evidence of
    the marriage. However, there is no finding of fact in relation  to  the
    marriage and the appeal was allowed outright  on  the  basis  that  the
    respondent was an extended family member. That is a material  error  of
    law for the reasons given by the Secretary of State and because by  the
    date of the oral hearing the respondent was a family member rather than
    an extended family member.

13. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  allow  the  respondent's
    appeal under the Regulations involved the making of an error of law and
    its decision cannot stand. The EEA sponsor was exercising treaty rights
    in the UK as at the date of hearing and the respondent was  married  to
    the EEA sponsor as at the date of hearing. The respondent is the father
    of the EEA sponsor's baby. Those facts are not contested.  I  therefore
    remake the decision on the basis that the respondent is a family member
    of the EEA sponsor under regulation 7(1)(a)  and  regulation  17(4)  no
    longer applies to this appeal.

Decision

14. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    remake  the  decision  by  allowing  the  respondent's   appeal   under
    regulation 17(1) of the  Regulations.  I  remit  the  decision  to  the
    Secretary of State to make a lawful decision  on  the  basis  that  the
    respondent is a family member of the EEA sponsor and the EEA sponsor is
    a qualified person.


Signed   [pic]    Date 15 October 2015

Judge Archer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
