
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39488/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10th June 2014                               |On 23rd June 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                               Mr Tahir Iqbal
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H Kannangara
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by Tahir Iqbal against the determination of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Cohen promulgated on the 19th March 2014.  Mr Tahir
    Iqbal had applied under the points-based system but his application was
    refused on two bases.

 2. The first was that the CAS letter that he had provided was no longer
    valid because the college licence had been withdrawn and so far as the
    requirements for maintenance were concerned he had relied upon a
    statement from Bank Alfalah Limited.  The Secretary of State had
    concluded following a document verification report that that account
    was false and accordingly the entire application was rejected under
    paragraph 322 of the Immigration Rules.

 3. That point remained live at the appeal but unfortunately in the
    decision the burden and standard of proof was dealt with in this way at
    paragraph 10.  The burden of proving that the decision of the
    Respondent was not in accordance with the law and the relevant
    Immigration Rules rests upon the Appellant.  The standard of that proof
    is the balance of probabilities.  The relevant date for the purpose of
    this appeal is the date of the hearing.  I must look at those facts in
    existence on that date.

 4. In paragraph 11 the Judge then referred to the document verification
    report in the chain of emails relied upon and said:

         "The Appellant has failed to submit any evidence to counter this
         and I find that the document verification report and attach
         documentation can be relied upon and I attach significant weight
         thereto."

 5. There is no reference in the determination to the fact that where
    forgery is alleged the burden shifts to the Secretary of State.  The
    standard of proof is that of the balance of probabilities but cogent
    evidence is required to support an allegation of forgery.  There is no
    reference to that here and both paragraph 10 combined with the reliance
    on the failure of the Appellant to supply countering evidence gives a
    strong indication that the Judge has applied the wrong burden and
    standard of proof in this case.

 6. Accordingly the determination cannot stand.  I set the determination
    aside and I will formally order that the appeal be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal for reconsideration on all issues.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Parkes


