
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39440/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 December 2015                  |On 6 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between

                           MS ABIOLA HELEN PASEDA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mohammad Chaudhry Afzal, am agent instructed by
                    International Immigration Advisory Services
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. This is an appeal by the appellant against a decision of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against a decision  taken  on  16
       September 2014 to refuse her application for leave to remain  in  the
       UK under Article 8.




  Background Facts

    2. The claimant is a citizen of Nigeria who  was  born  on  14  February
       1982. She has a daughter, Stephanie Omotolani Damilola Paseda who was
       born in the UK on 2 September 2006.  The  appellant  entered  the  UK
       illegally in November 2002. On 8 November 2010 she applied for  leave
       to remain under the Immigration Rules HC395 (as amended) on the basis
       of private and family life.  That application  was  refused  with  no
       right of appeal. On 21 March 2011 she applied for  a  reconsideration
       and on 28 May 2014 in response to a one stop notice was made  by  the
       appellant's representative which resulted in a fresh decision  on  16
       September 2014 refusing the application, The reasons for refusal were
       that the respondent considered that it would be reasonable  for  both
       the appellant and her daughter to  leave  the  UK  and  re-locate  to
       Nigeria.

  The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

    3.  The  appellant  appealed  to  the   First-tier   Tribunal.    In   a
       determination promulgated on 2 June 2015, Judge  Paul  dismissed  the
       appellant's appeal.  The First-tier Tribunal found that the appellant
       was a vague  and  unsatisfactory  witness  and  that  her  claims  in
       relation to risk on return to Nigeria were not  credible.  The  judge
       found that it would  be  perfectly  reasonable  for  the  appellant's
       daughter to re-locate to Nigeria, there was no reason to believe that
       any interruption to her education  would  be  significant  or  unduly
       harsh, Nigerian culture places a high premium on  a  good  education.
       The judge found that the appellant had not demonstrated that she does
       not have close family, social or cultural ties with Nigeria.

  The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

    4. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   On
       15 October 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge  Hollingworth  granted  the
       appellant permission to appeal.  The  grant  of  permission  suggests
       that an arguable error of law has arisen in respect  of  the  judge's
       approach to s55. Thus, the appeal came before me.

  Summary of the Submissions

    5. The grounds of appeal and skeleton argument assert  that  the  First-
       tier Tribunal judge and the respondent did not  follow  the  case-law
       and Policy essentially arguing that 7 years is  the  relevant  period
       for considering that lengthy residence can lead to the development of
       ties that it would be inappropriate to disrupt. It is  asserted  that
       the judge erred by failing to mention s55 of the Borders, Citizenship
       and Immigration Act 2009 ('s55')  let  alone  fulfilling  the  duties
       imposed under it. It is also  asserted  that  the  case  of  Osawenze
       [2014] EWCA referred to  by  the  judge  is  not  applicable  as  the
       children were aged 4 and 1 in that case.

    6. Mr Afzal submitted that EX.1 clearly doesn't require a child to be  a
       British Citizen. When a child has lived in the UK for  over  7  years
       he/she  attracts  rights.  The  case  of  Azimi-Moayed   and   others
       (decisions affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 197  (IAC)
       ('Azimi-Moayed') sets out that in the  development  of  personal  and
       social contacts  there  is  a  magic  line  drawn  at  7  years  when
       considering the private life of children. He submitted  that  when  a
       child has lived in the UK for 7 years it must be considered to be  in
       the child's best interests under s55 to remain in  the  UK.  The  key
       test is the length of residence - the intention in the legislation is
       clear. Section 55 was brushed aside by both the  respondent  and  the
       First-tier Tribunal judge.  The  wrong  approach  was  taken  by  the
       Secretary of State. There was no consideration  of  the  2nd  of  the
       duties - to have regard to the  statutory  guidance  which  describes
       procedures and training. Paragraphs 1.14, 1.15,  2.6,  2.7,  and  2.8
       apply the most. In JO and Others (section  55  duty)  Nigeria  [2014]
       UKUT 00517 (IAC) it was held that it is necessary for  the  reviewing
       court to take cognizance of the guidance.

    7. In relation to Stephanie Mr Afzal submitted  that  she  is  attending
       school, is well integrated. There are no health issues.

    8. Mr Clarke submitted that there was no material error of  law  in  the
       First-tier Tribunal decision. Regarding Azimi-Moayed he  referred  me
       to the headnote at point iv) - the first 4 ears of a child's life are
       focussed on the parents. The period accrued by  Stephanie  is  not  7
       years it is the number of years from the age of 4. The material  time
       accrues is 5 years. In MK and JO the failure to make reference to the
       guidance is not an error as long as the duty is  complied  with.  The
       appellant has not referred to  anything  in  the  guidance  that  the
       Secretary of State has not complied with. He  submitted  that  it  is
       absolutely clear at paragraph 51 that the judge  considered  s55.  He
       followed EV (Philippines) and Others  v  SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874
       finding that it is perfectly reasonable  that  the  child  could  re-
       locate. At paragraph 18 he considered the evidence and  at  paragraph
       21 the judge looked at the educational position. At paragraph 19  the
       judge considered risk on relocation finding the  appellant's  account
       was not credible. The judge applied a reasonableness test and applied
       Azimi-Moayed. As set out in the case of Dube (ss.117A - 117D)  [2015]
       UKUT 90 (IAC) there is no need to  refer  to  s117  as  long  as  the
       factors are taken into account. At paragraph 24 the judge  considered
       AM Malawi finding that it does not tip the balance. It  is  difficult
       to see how the judge can  be  said  not  to  have  dealt  with  s117.
       Paragraph 15 is a reiteration of the respondent's submissions  it  is
       not the judge's own reasoning in relation to the case of Osawenze.

    9. In reply Mr Afzal submitted that the requirement is for a period of 7
       year's residence. That cannot be split between periods when the child
       is under and over 4 years of age.

Legislative Provisions

  Nationality and Immigration Act 2002 ('NIA Act')

   10. As from 28 July 2014 statutory provisions in a new  Part  5A  of  the
       2002 Act (inserted by s.19 of the Immigration Act 2014) requires,  in
       legislative form for the first time, the  Tribunal  to  take  certain
       factors into account when determining whether a decision  made  under
       the Immigration Acts breaches respect for private  and  family  life.
       The decision in the  instant  case  is  a  decision  made  under  the
       Immigration Acts. The relevant provisions provide:

   11. Section 117A sets out the scope of the new Part 5A headed "Article  8
       of the ECHR; Public Interest Considerations" as follows:

           '117A Application of this Part

           (1)    This Part applies where a court or tribunal  is  required
           to determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

                (a)    breaches a person's right to respect for private  and
                family life under Article 8, and

                (b)    as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of  the
                Human Rights Act 1998.

           (2)    In considering the public interest question, the court or
           tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

                (a)    in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
                117B, and

                (b)     in  cases  concerning  the  deportation  of  foreign
                criminals, to the considerations listed in section 117C.

           (3)    In subsection (2), "the public interest  question"  means
           the question of whether an interference with a person's right to
           respect for private and family life is justified  under  Article
           8(2).'

   12. The considerations listed in s.117B are applicable to all  cases  and
       are:

           '117B Article 8: public interest  considerations  applicable  in
           all cases

           (1)    The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in
           the public interest.

           (2)    It is in the public interest, and in  particular  in  the
           interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
           persons who seek to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  are
           able to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

                (a)    are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

           (3)    It is in the public interest, and in  particular  in  the
           interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
           persons who seek to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  are
           financially independent, because such persons-

                (a)    are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

           (4)    Little weight should be given to-

                (a)    a private life, or

                (b)    a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

                that is established by a person at a time when the person is
           in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

           (5)     Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a  private   life
           established by a person at a time when the person's  immigration
           status is precarious.

           (6)    In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
           the public interest does not require the person's removal where-

                (a)    the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                relationship with a qualifying child, and

                (b)    it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                leave the United Kingdom.'

   13. Section 117D provides the definition of a number  of  terms  used  in
       Part 5A. A "qualifying child" means a person under the age of 18  who
       is either a British citizen  or  who  has  lived  in  the  UK  for  a
       continuous period of seven years or more.

   14. The requirement in s.117A to "have regard" to the  considerations  in
       s.117B  means  a  court  or  Tribunal  must  have  regard  to   those
       considerations in substance even if no explicit reference is made  to
       the statutory provisions (see Dube (ss.117A - 117D)  [2015]  UKUT  90
       (IAC)).

   15. As a consequence, the court or Tribunal is required to give  the  new
       Rules (at [47]): "greater weight than as merely a starting point  for
       the consideration of the  proportionality  of  an  interference  with
       Article 8 rights" (see also SSHD v SS (Congo) and Others [2015]  EWCA
       Civ 387).

   16. Article 8 of the ECHR states:

           '(i)   Everyone has the right to respect  for  his  private  and
           family life, his home and his correspondence.

           (ii)   There shall be no interference by a public authority with
           the exercise of this right except such as is in accordance  with
           the law  and  is  necessary  in  a  democratic  society  in  the
           interests of national security, public safety  or  the  economic
           well-being of the country, for the  prevention  of  disorder  or
           crime, for the protection  of  health  or  morals,  or  for  the
           protection of the rights and freedoms of others.'

   17. Relevant Immigration Rules

           EX.1. This paragraph applies if

                (a)

                    (i)     the  applicant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
                    parental relationship with a child who-

                        (aa)   is under the age of 18 years;

                        (bb)   is in the UK;

                        (cc)   is a British Citizen or has lived in the  UK
                        continuously for at least the 7  years  immediately
                        preceding the date of application; and

                    (ii)   it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
                    leave the UK; or

                (b)     the  applicant  has   a   genuine   and   subsisting
                relationship with a partner who  is  in  the  UK  and  is  a
                British Citizen, settled in the UK or in the UK with refugee
                leave   or   humanitarian   protection,   and   there    are
                insurmountable obstacles to family life  with  that  partner
                continuing outside the UK."

           Paragraph 276ADE (in force from 9 July 2012 to 27 July 2014)

           The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave  to  remain
           on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the date of
           application, the applicant:

                (i)    does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in
                Section S-LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1.  in  Appendix
                FM; and

                (ii)   has made a valid application for leave to  remain  on
                the grounds of private life in the UK; and

                ...

                (iv)    is  under  the  age  of  18  years  and  has   lived
                continuously in the UK for at east 7 years (discounting  any
                period of imprisonment) and it would be not be reasonable to
                expect the applicant to leave the UK...

Discussion

   18. There is no challenge to the  findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       judge in respect of the appellant. The only challenge is  in  respect
       of the findings in relation to her daughter Stephanie.

   19. Whilst a judge does not need to refer to section 55 there  does  need
       to be a consideration of the child's  best  interests.  Although  the
       respondent's reasons for refusal letter engages with the Secretary of
       State's duty under s55 the judge appears to  have  referred  only  in
       passing to the consideration given to Stephanie's best  interests  by
       the Secretary of State.   For  example  at  paragraph  12  the  judge
       states:

           "The reasons for refusal letter also referred to the  fact  that
           it was claimed that the daughter had special needs. However that
           fell away in light of the evidence  given.  Essentially  it  was
           considered reasonable for Stephanie to leave  the  UK  with  her
           mother, to start a new life in Nigeria."

   20. At paragraph 21 the judge states:

           "... whilst I clearly accept that her child has spent her  whole
           life here, it seems to me - following the principles set out  in
           the case of EV Philippines - it would be  perfectly  reasonable,
           in an overall assessment,  to  conclude  that  the  child  could
           perfectly reasonably relocate to Nigeria. As  already  indicated
           above, I am satisfied that she has family connections there  and
           it is also plain that she has been  able  to  successfully  move
           from one school to another. As was  pointed  out  in  the  Upper
           Tribunal case of AM at paragraph 39,  there  was  no  reason  to
           believe that any interruption to  her  education  by  reason  of
           being returned to Nigeria would be significant or unduly  harsh.
           Nigerian culture places a high premium on a good education and I
           am quite satisfied that there are the means available to  ensure
           that that will continue there."

   21. Whilst it cannot be said  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  has
       failed to engage with Stephanie's  interests  the  focus  is  on  the
       effect of removal rather than a consideration of the relevant factors
       and an identification of her best interests. It is not clear that the
       judge would inevitably arrived at the same  conclusion  if  a  proper
       consideration of Stephanie's best interests had been carried out.

   22. I find that there was a material error of law in the judge's approach
       to the duty under s55 to consider as a primary consideration the best
       interests of Stephanie.

   23. I set aside that decision insofar as it relates  to  the  appellant's
       daughter pursuant to section 12(2)(a) of the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
       Enforcement Act 2007 ('TCEA'). The finding of the First-tier Tribunal
       judge in relation to the appellant are maintained.

Remaking the Decision

   24. A small bundle of further documents was served prior to the  hearing.
       They consist of a further witness statement  made  by  the  appellant
       dated 28 November 2014, various letters from friends  in  support  of
       the appellant and various reports from Stephanie's school  and  merit
       awards.  I  have  taken  these  into  consideration  when  making  my
       decision.

   25. As there is no appeal against the judge's decision in respect of  the
       private and family life of the appellant this appeal focuses  on  the
       Article 8 rights of her daughter Stephanie.

  Article 8 private life under the Immigration Rules

   26. The respondent considered Stephanie's  Article  8  rights  under  the
       Immigration Rules specifically Paragraph  276ADE.  The  Secretary  of
       State considered whether or not it  would  be  reasonable  to  expect
       Stephanie to leave the UK. Mr Afzal submitted that when a  child  has
       lived in the UK for 7 years it  must  be  considered  to  be  in  the
       child's best interests under s55 to remain in the UK. I do not accept
       that submission. Even where a child is a British citizen the  child's
       best interests must be considered based on all the evidence.

   27.  The  second  limb  of  Paragraph  276ADE  (iv)  is   essentially   a
       proportionality exercise. The question asked is whether it  would  be
       reasonable for Stephanie to leave  the  UK.  This  question  must  be
       answered in the context of what her best interests are ascertained to
       be. In ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4  the  Supreme  Court  noted
       that s 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009  was
       enacted to incorporate the UK's obligation under article 3(1)  United
       Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child that, 'In  all  actions
       concerning children, whether undertaken by public or  private  social
       welfare institutions, courts of law,  administrative  authorities  or
       legislative bodies, the best  interests  of  the  child  shall  be  a
       primary consideration.'

   28. The court held:

           "26.   ... This did not mean (as it would do in other  contexts)
           that identifying their best interests would lead inexorably to a
           decision in conformity with those interests. Provided  that  the
           Tribunal did not treat any  other  consideration  as  inherently
           more significant than the best interests  of  the  children,  it
           could conclude that the strength  of  the  other  considerations
           outweighed them. The important thing, therefore, is to  consider
           those best interests first. ...

           ...

           33.     We  now  have  a  much  greater  understanding  of   the
           importance of these issues in assessing the  overall  well-being
           of the child. In making  the  proportionality  assessment  under
           article 8, the best interests of the child  must  be  a  primary
           consideration. This means that they must  be  considered  first.
           They can, of course, be outweighed by the cumulative  effect  of
           other  considerations.  In   this   case,   the   countervailing
           considerations  were  the  need  to  maintain  firm   and   fair
           immigration  control,  coupled  with  the   mother's   appalling
           immigration history and the precariousness of her position  when
           family life was created. But, as the  Tribunal  rightly  pointed
           out, the children were not to be blamed for that. ..."

   29. In Azimi-Moayed and  others  (decisions  affecting  children;  onward
       appeals) [2013] UKUT 197(IAC) the Upper Tribunal in  considering  the
       case law in relation to decisions affecting children  identified  the
       following principles to assist in the determination of appeals  where
       children are affected by the appealed decisions:

           "i)    As a starting point  it  is  in  the  best  interests  of
           children to be with both their parents and if both  parents  are
           being removed from the United Kingdom then  the  starting  point
           suggests that so should dependent  children  who  form  part  of
           their household unless there are reasons to the contrary.

           ii)    It is generally in the interests of children to have both
           stability and continuity of social and educational provision and
           the benefit of growing up in the cultural norms of  the  society
           to which they belong.

           iii)   Lengthy residence in a country other than  the  state  of
           origin  can  lead  to  development  of   social   cultural   and
           educational ties that it would be inappropriate to  disrupt,  in
           the absence of compelling reason to the contrary.  What  amounts
           to lengthy residence is not  clear  cut  but  past  and  present
           policies have identified seven years as a relevant period.

           iv)    Apart from the terms of published policies and rules, the
           Tribunal notes that seven years from age four is  likely  to  be
           more significant to a child than the first seven years of  life.
           Very young children are focussed on their  parents  rather  than
           their peers and are adaptable.

           v) Short periods of residence, particularly ones  without  leave
           or the reasonable expectation of leave to enter or remain, while
           claims are promptly considered, are unlikely  to  give  rise  to
           private life deserving of respect in the absence of  exceptional
           factors.  In any event, protection of the economic well-being of
           society amply justifies removal in such cases."

   30. In EV (Philippines) and Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874 it was held
       that a decision as to what is in the best interests of children  will
       depend on a number of factors such as (a) their age; (b)  the  length
       of time that they have been here; (c) how  long  they  have  been  in
       education; (c) what stage their education has reached;  (d)  to  what
       extent they have become distanced from the country  to  which  it  is
       proposed that they return; (e) how renewable their connection with it
       may be; (f) to what extent they  will  have  linguistic,  medical  or
       other difficulties in adapting to life in that country; and  (g)  the
       extent to which the course proposed will interfere with their  family
       life or their rights (if they have any) as British citizens.

   31. I have considered the factors identified  in  ZH  (Tanzania),  Azimi-
       Moayed and  EV  Philippines  set  out  above.  I  accept  Mr  Afzal's
       submission that the requiemnt is to have lived in the UK for 7 years,
       not 7 years from the age of four. Stephanie satisfies the requirement
       in paragraph 276ADE of 7 years residence in the UK.  However,  it  is
       relevant that 7 years for  an  older  child  will  tend  to  be  more
       significant as the older the child is the more likely it will be that
       there is a development of social, cultural and educational ties. Life
       for older children will tend to encompass ties that are less  focused
       on life predominately within the family  unit.  Stephanie  is  now  9
       years old. She has lived in the UK all  her  life.  She  has  had  an
       opportunity  (albeit  limited  at  this  age)  to  develop  a  social
       awareness and has built up independent friendships as is demonstrated
       by the letters in support. Whilst it is generally in the interests of
       children  to  have  both  stability  and  continuity  of  social  and
       educational provision she is not at a critical stage in her education
       as she is still in primary school. She has no right to be educated in
       the UK as she is not a British Citizen. As set out by  the  Secretary
       of State education is freely available in Nigeria. She has gained the
       benefit of 4 years of education in the  UK  which  will  enhance  her
       educational opportunities in Nigeria. Whilst I recognise that a  move
       to Nigeria will require some adaptation to  a  new  home  and  a  new
       school she will be supported by Mother. She is still at a stage where
       her primary focus will be on her mother rather than her peers. She is
       young and adaptable. There are no medical or other difficulties  that
       have been identified. Her mother is Nigerian and still  has  ties  to
       Nigeria. She has a grandmother and Aunt living in Nigeria. Her mother
       will be  able  to  assist  her  integration  into  life  in  Nigeria.
       Stephanie has no  connection  with  the  United  Kingdom  by  way  of
       nationality.

   32. It is also relevant that the appellant entered the UK unlawfully  and
       has remained unlawfully throughout.

   33. This factor cannot be held against the child in  assessing  her  best
       interests as she had no knowledge of her mother's immigration status.
       However, this does not mean that this factor  is  irrelevant.  In  MH
       (Pakistan) [2011] CSOH 143, at Paragraph 56, the court held:

           "The propriety of taking account  of  immigration  history,  the
           precariousness of the position when a relationship  was  entered
           into, and the need to maintain immigration control is  confirmed
           by Lady Hale at paragraph 33 in ZH (Tanzania)."

   34. At Paragraph 10 of MH Pakistan the court held:

           "None of this was a matter of controversy  between  the  parties
           and I noted that in one of the cases to which I was referred, ZH
           (Tanzania) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] 2
           WLR 148, Baroness Hale of Richmond considered how these  factors
           would apply in an ordinary immigration case where a  person  was
           to be removed because he has no right to be  or  remain  in  the
           country.  At  paragraph  18  she  noted  that   the   Convention
           jurisprudence recognised that the starting point was  the  right
           of all states to control the entry and residence of aliens ..."

   35. I find that the best interests of Stephanie is to be cared for by her
       mother. However, to safeguard those interests does not  require  that
       she lives in the UK. The level of integration of Stephanie in the  UK
       is not such that it would be disproportionate for her to be  removed.
       It is reasonable, on the facts of this case, to expect  Stephanie  to
       leave the UK. Further, there are countervailing factors in this  case
       in respect of the appellant's unlawful entry  and  stay  in  the  UK.
       However, even without that factor, taking into consideration the best
       interests of Stephanie I am satisfied, on the evidence, that it would
       be reasonable to expect her to leave the United Kingdom.

   36. Mr Afzal made a number of submissions in respect of the Secretary  of
       State's consideration of the 2nd of the duties under s55, namely,  to
       have regard to the statutory guidance. As submitted by Mr  Clarke  Mr
       Afzal did not identify any specific aspect of the guidance  that  the
       Secretary of State was said to have failed to comply with. He  merely
       referred to paragraphs of the guidance which he submitted  were  most
       relevant. In the absence of any particulars  I  have  not  considered
       this any further.

Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules

   37. In Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 640
       (IAC) the Upper Tribunal set out  the  correct  approach  to  appeals
       involving both Article 8 and the new Immigration Rules.  The headnote
       reads as follows:

           "On the current state of the authorities:

           ...

           (b)     after applying the requirements of the  Rules,  only  if
           there may be arguably good grounds for granting leave to  remain
           outside them is it necessary for Article 8 purposes to go on  to
           consider  whether  there  are   compelling   circumstances   not
           sufficiently recognised under them: R (on  the  application  of)
           Nagre v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2013]  EWHC
           720 (Admin);

   38. There is no 'exceptionality test' or 'threshold' test but there is  a
       requirement to carry out a balancing  exercise  where  an  individual
       cannot meet the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules.  The  public
       interest will generally only be outweighed if an applicant  can  show
       that 'compelling circumstances' exist  -  see  [40]  to  [42]  of  SS
       (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387.

   39. To ensure fairness I have considered the Article 8 claim  outside  of
       the Immigration Rules.

   40. The correct approach to determining a claim under Article 8  is  that
       set out in R v SSHD ex parte Razgar [2004] UKHL 27. A Tribunal should
       consider 5 questions, namely:

           "(i) Will the proposed removal be an interference  by  a  public
           authority with the exercise of the applicant's right to  respect
           for his private or (as the case may be) family life?

           (ii) If so, will such interference  have  consequences  of  such
           gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

           (iii) If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

           (iv) If so, is  such  interference  necessary  in  a  democratic
           society in the interests of national security, public safety  or
           the economic wellbeing of the country,  for  the  prevention  of
           disorder or crime, for the protection of health  or  morals,  or
           for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others?

           (v) If so, is such interference proportionate to the  legitimate
           public end sought to be achieved?"

   41. In this case I do not consider it necessary to consider the  first  4
       questions posed as it is not disputed that there is  a  private  life
       (the appellant and her daughter would be removed together as a family
       and there is no claim of any other family life in the UK) and that  a
       decision that would result in Stephanie and her mother being  removed
       from the UK is an interference with  their  private  life,  that  the
       consequences in the circumstances of this case are of such gravity to
       engage Article 8, that the interference is in accordance with the law
       and is necessary. The core  issue  is  whether  the  interference  in
       Stephanie's Article 8 rights is proportionate to a legitimate aim.

   42. I am mandated by Parliament to give effect to section 117 of the 2002
       Act. Section 117A is engaged because I am required to decide  whether
       the impugned decision to refuse leave  to  remain  would  breach  the
       right to respect for private and family life under Article 8  enjoyed
       by the claimant, her husband and their children.

   43. Sufficient weight must be accorded to  the  public  interest  in  the
       maintenance of effective immigration  controls  (s117B(1)).  In  this
       case the appellant does not meet the requirements for leave to remain
       in the UK.  Additionally  she  has  at  all  times  been  in  the  UK
       unlawfully. Further,  sufficient  weight  must  be  accorded  to  the
       interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,  in  that
       persons who seek to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  must  be
       financially  independent  (s117B(3)).  The  appellant  has  not   had
       recourse to public funds thus far but there is no evidence  that  she
       is financially independent. The evidence suggests that she is reliant
       on financial support from friends. It is  not  known  if  that  would
       continue to be available to her. Little weight is to be accorded to a
       private  life  formed  when  the  person's  Immigration   status   is
       precarious (s117B (5)). Although as I set out  above  the  precarious
       status of Stephanie's stay in the UK cannot be held against her it is
       not an irrelevant factor when considering the proportionality of  the
       decision to remove the appellant.

   44. Section 117B(6) is of a different nature and is directly relevant. In
       Treebhawon and others (section 117B(6)) [2015] UKUT 00674  (IAC)  the
       Upper Tribunal held, at paragraph 20  that :

           '...

           Within this discrete regime, the statute proclaims unequivocally
           that where these  three  conditions  are  satisfied  the  public
           interest does not require the removal of  the  parent  from  the
           United Kingdom. Ambiguity there is none.'

   45. In the headnote in that case the position was set out as

           (i)    ... In any case where the conditions enshrined in section
           117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  are
           satisfied, the section 117B(6) public interest prevails over the
           public interests identified in section 117B (1)-(3).

   46. In considering section 117B(6) therefore the only  real  question  in
       this case is whether or not it would not be reasonable for  Stephanie
       to leave the UK. The public interest in immigration  control  is  not
       relevant. The test is essentially the same as in Paragraph 276ADE.

   47. The Court of Appeal stated in VW (Uganda):

           "19.   ... While it is of course possible that the facts of  any
           one case may disclose an insurmountable obstacle to removal, the
           inquiry into  proportionality  is  not  a  search  for  such  an
           obstacle and does  not  end  with  its  elimination.   It  is  a
           balanced judgment of what can  reasonably  be  expected  in  the
           light of all the material facts.

           ...

           24.    EB (Kosovo) now confirms that the  material  question  in
           gauging the proportionality of a removal  or  deportation  which
           will or may break up a family unless the family  itself  decamps
           is  not  whether  there  is  an  insuperable  obstacle  to  this
           happening but whether it is reasonable to expect the  family  to
           leave with the appellant. ..."

   48. For the reasons I have already set out above I  have  found  that  it
       would be reasonable for Stephanie to leave the UK even in the absence
       of any of the countervailing factors that I identified.

   49. Having weighed all the factors set out above and having found that it
       is reasonable to expect Stephanie to leave the UK  I  find  that  the
       interference with their Article 8  rights  is  proportionate  to  the
       legitimate public end sought  to  be  achieved  namely,  the  aim  of
       preserving the economic well-being of the  country.  The  refusal  to
       grant the appellant leave to remain in the UK  is  proportionate  and
       therefore the appeal is allowed and the Secretary of State's decision
       stands.

   50. I have considered whether any parties require the  protection  of  an
       anonymity direction. No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously.
       Having considered  all  the  circumstances  and  evidence  I  do  not
       consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

Decision

   51. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the  making  of  an
       error of law.  I set aside that decision.

   52. I remake the decision dismissing the appellant's appeal. The decision
       of the Secretary of State stands.


Signed   P M Ramshaw   Date 2 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw
