
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39880/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 1st October 2014                           |On 17th December 2014        |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                              JANNET MUDAVANHU
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Chapwanya of Genesis Law
For the Respondent: Mr Smart - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    1. On 30th May 2014 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M Hall found an error of
       law in the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge K Henderson and
       set that decision aside. On the  11th  August  2014  the  substantive
       hearing was adjourned as an issue as to  the  true  identity  of  the
       person before the Upper Tribunal arose although at  the  commencement
       of this hearing Mr Smart confirmed there were no further concerns.



  Background



    2. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe, born on 26 October 1967,  who
       appeals the refusal by the Secretary of State to grant her indefinite
       leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of 10 years lawful
       residence.  The application was refused under paragraph 276B  of  the
       Immigration Rules as the appellant is said to have spent  periods  of
       time in the United Kingdom without lawful leave, totalling 284  days.
       The appellant had therefore remained in the United Kingdom in  breach
       of immigration laws in excess of 28 days and therefore  her  ten-year
       period was not a continuous period of lawful residence.


    3. The application was also considered under  paragraph  276ADE  but  it
       found the appellant did not have 20 years  residence  in  the  United
       Kingdom and had not severed all ties, including social, culture,  and
       family ties to Zimbabwe.  The  Secretary  of  State  noted  that  the
       appellant still had a brother living in Zimbabwe  and  that  she  had
       returned to her home state in 2003/2004 and 2012.


    4. Consideration was given to whether it was appropriate to grant  leave
       outside the Immigration Rules but it was not found that  family  life
       existed. The respondent noted ties to  her  local  church  and  as  a
       volunteer visitor with the City Hospital in Birmingham and  her  work
       as a Tenant Support Worker, but found such did  not  entitle  her  to
       remain on a permanent basis, that her skills were  transferable,  and
       that there were insufficient grounds to  warrant  a  grant  of  leave
       outside the Rules.


    5. Before the First-tier Tribunal the appellant claimed in  her  grounds
       of appeal that  she  suffered  difficulties  with  her  health  of  a
       gynaecological nature and that there had been a need  for  corrective
       surgery. There is also a reference to the sickness of her mother  who
       has since passed away, confiding with  a  Methodist  preacher  and  a
       Methodist minister regarding health difficulties, and her belief  she
       will experience difficulties as a result of her  published  views  in
       support of gay/lesbian rights.  The  appellant  claimed  that  as  an
       advocate she fears for her life and also refers to  suffering  sexual
       trauma, and the reasons that she remained single.  There  is  also  a
       reference to sexual abuse occurring to her  in  her  village  between
       1982 and 1990.


    6. In a witness statement provided for the purposes of the appeal before
       the Upper Tribunal the appellant relies upon similar grounds claiming
       that she fears for her life on return to Zimbabwe based upon gay  and
       lesbian advocacy in Zimbabwe, which she claims the  authorities  will
       crush with impunity. The appellant states she has conducted  research
       in the field in Zimbabwe as part of her Ph.D. research project during
       which time she and her research assistants  experienced  difficulties
       with the authorities.  The appellant claims the  views  expressed  in
       her Ph.D. thesis are opposed to the official views of  the  president
       of Zimbabwe.


    7. In relation to the brother  who  lived  in  Zimbabwe,  the  appellant
       states that he has since left the  country  and  relocated  to  South
       Africa and that she will therefore be returned alone without support,
       resources, or employment prospects.



  Discussion



    8.   The   appellant's   nationality,   date   of   birth,   educational
       qualifications as a person holding both a  Masters  degree  and  PhD,
       together with the presence of family members in the  United  Kingdom,
       are not contested.


    9. The appellant has provided  evidence  of  medical  issues  that  have
       impacted upon her life in the United Kingdom but this  material  does
       not indicate that the appellant requires ongoing  medical  treatment,
       although it is submitted on her behalf, that her  experiences  during
       the course of medical investigations and procedures  and  ability  to
       cope with the  same  have  far  reaching  psychological  consequences
       particularly if she must return to Zimbabwe. The medical aspects  are
       specifically referred to in support of the claim for leave to  remain
       on Article 3 grounds within the appellant's skeleton argument.


   10. The latest information the appellant seeks to rely upon  in  relation
       to her medical issues is to be found on pages 25 to 35 of her  appeal
       bundle although many of the documents are dated 2002, 2006, and  2008
       and refer to previous gynaecological issues. On page 25 is  a  letter
       from her GP dated the 18  July  2014  addressed  to  the  appellant's
       solicitors responding to specific questions  although  a  copy  those
       questions has not been provided. The GP states:


           . The appellant has been diagnosed with abdominal pain.
           . The appellant is currently on no medication.
           . The appellant has been registered with the surgery since  July
             2008.
           . The appellant was seen by Dr  Lateef  on  the  8th  July  with
             abdominal discomfort and was referred for an  ultrasound  scan
             and maybe an endoscopy later on if symptoms persist.
           . The appellant was prescribed Lansoprazole on 23 May  2014  but
             we are unsure if she responded to treatment  as  she  did  not
             request any more.


   11. In N v UK Application ECHR 26565/05 and the Grand Chamber upheld  the
       decision of the House of Lords and said that in medical cases Article
       3 only applied in very exceptional circumstances particularly as  the
       suffering was not the result of an intentional act or omission  of  a
       State or non State body.   The  threshold  was  not  reached  in  the
       present case which could be distinguished from D v UK (1997) 24 ECHR.
        The legal test was set out at paragraph 42 as follows "A decision to
       remove an alien who is suffering from a serious  physical  or  mental
       illness to a country where  the  facilities  for  treatment  of  that
       illness are inferior to those available in the Contracting State  may
       raise an issue under Article 3 but only in a  very  exceptional  case
       where the humanitarian grounds against the removal are compelling. In
       the D case the very exceptional  circumstances  were  that  that  the
       applicant was critically ill and appeared to be close to death, could
       not be guaranteed any nursing or  medical  care  in  his  country  of
       origin and had no family there willing or able to  care  for  him  or
       provide him with even  a  basic  level  of  food  shelter  or  social
       support".  The EctHR said that Article 3 could not be  relied  on  to
       address the disparity in medical care between Contracting States  and
       the  applicant's  state  of  origin.   The  fact  that  the  person's
       circumstances,  including  his  or  her  life  expectancy,  would  be
       significantly reduced was not sufficient in itself to give rise to  a
       breach of Article 3. Those same principles had to apply  in  relation
       to the expulsion of any person afflicted with any serious,  naturally
       occurring physical or mental illness which might cause suffering pain
       or reduced life expectancy and required specialist medical  treatment
       that might not be readily available or which might only be  available
       at considerable cost.  No separate issues arose  under  article  8(2)
       and it  was  not  therefore  necessary  to  consider  the  Claimant's
       submission that removal would engage her right to respect for private
       life.


   12. In relation to physical ailments; I find it has not been  established
       that the appellant  suffers  any  ongoing  issues  requiring  medical
       treatment/intervention at this time. It has not been established that
       if there was to be a diagnosis that medical treatment  would  not  be
       available for the same or accessible within Zimbabwe. It has not been
       established that the appellant is able to satisfy the  required  test
       to  engage  Article  3  on  the  grounds  of  her  physical   medical
       condition/presentation.


   13. The skeleton argument also refers to  psychological  aspects  of  her
       previous treatment.  I accept that having  to  undergo  a  number  of
       procedures, including what appears to be a repair procedure, can have
       a  psychological  effect  on  any  individual.  In  relation  to  the
       psychological aspects of an Article 3 claim  the  threshold  is  very
       high - see N v UK (Application 26565/05) above.


   14. In J v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 629
       the Court of Appeal said  that  in  a  foreign  case  the  Article  3
       threshold would be  particularly  high  and  even  higher  where  the
       alleged  inhuman  treatment  was   not   the   direct   or   indirect
       responsibility of the public authorities in the receiving  state  and
       resulted from some naturally occurring illness  whether  physical  or
       mental.


   15. There is no evidence of a persuasive nature from  a  psychiatrist  or
       psychologist indicating that any recognised condition exists  of  the
       nature suggested in the  skeleton  argument  or,  if  it  does,  that
       treatment would not be available for the same in Zimbabwe within  the
       mental health services. The appellant has  failed  to  discharge  the
       burden of proof upon her to the required standard to show that she is
       able to succeed on this basis.


   16. In relation to the physical and mental health issues, so far as  they
       form part of the Article 8 assessment, it has  not  been  established
       that there is any engagement with her private life beyond the use  of
       GP services and the NHS within the United Kingdom. As stated, it  has
       not been shown that facilities will not  be  available  in  her  home
       state or that there is a bond of dependency  upon  the  providers  of
       health services within the United Kingdom that would lead to  Article
       8 being engaged on this basis or, if it  was,  that  would  make  the
       decision disproportionate.


   17. In relation to the appellant's claim to be entitled to be  recognised
       as a refugee on the basis of her perceived membership of a particular
       social group;  this  group  was  defined  by  her  representative  in
       submissions as being a member/sympathiser of GALZ or  her  perception
       as such. It was accepted in submissions that the appellant was unable
       to bring forward any evidence to prove that she would be perceived in
       such an adverse way although it was submitted it was  plausible  that
       those in Zanu PF may take such  an  adverse  view  in  light  of  the
       expressed opposition to members of this group by the President.


   18. It is accepted the appellant has been out of Zimbabwe for  some  time
       but it was submitted that she would be seen as an  advocate  of  this
       group as she is seen by the world at large as such as a result of her
       Ph.D. thesis.  One of the reasons for the  delay  in  producing  this
       determination, from the date of the hearing, has been to allow me  to
       read the thesis which was kindly provided by the appellant and  which
       is stated to be available on the University of  Birmingham  internet.
       The title of the thesis is "The Attitude of the Methodist  Church  in
       Zimbabwe to Homosexuality: Towards  a  Socio-sexological  Theological
       Investigation".  The date of the document is 2010 and it highlights a
       number of aspects of Zimbabwe society including the traditional views
       of members of the Shona community and  the  Methodist  Church  within
       Zimbabwe  to  aspects  of  sexuality,  containing  comment  upon  the
       political  aspects  but  also  biblical  and  other   teachings   and
       publications in relation to these issues.


   19. Although I accept the thesis has been produced and it  deals  with  a
       subject  which,  at  times,  has  been  shown  to  be  one  that   is
       particularly  sensitive  within  Zimbabwe  the  assertion  that   the
       appellant has acquired a profile as a result of  the  publication  of
       this document such that she would be viewed as a  worldwide  advocate
       for members of the gay and lesbian community is not substantiated.


   20. The appellant was granted permission to undertake  this  work  within
       Zimbabwe and refers in her finished text  to  potential  difficulties
       and problems that she and her research assistants were fully aware of
       in undertaking the research. However, it appears that the Church  and
       others approved her undertaking the research, completed and  returned
       questionnaires, permitted the appellant to arrange and attend  public
       meetings where discussions occurred, which  is  recorded  within  the
       text of the thesis. The conclusion of the  thesis  at  paragraph  7.4
       contains the following observations:


           It is uncertain how the social life of homosexual men and  women
           is  likely  to  develop  in  Zimbabwe.  Until  now   they   have
           experienced only a few years public history but  are  thoroughly
           frustrated in all their attempts and the approach of the  Church
           can at best be described as nostalgic,  evocative  and  wistful.
           Homosexuality as we know it today is challenging the  church  in
           Zimbabwe to rethink its theological approaches to sexuality.  As
           Paul puts it, our knowledge at best is imperfect (1Cor13:9),  it
           is hypocrisy then for a Church to claim a monopoly of the truth,
           there  must  always  be  openness  to  insights   within   every
           generation. It provides a good reason for the Church to


                Be willing to step outside the bounds  of  our  comfort  and
                into the realm of God's creation.  We  must  be  willing  to
                follow Christ into the places that  make  us  uncomfortable,
                places that we never imagined going.


           The challenge for the Church is to participate in  actions  that
           will break especially the cycle of gay  and  lesbian  abuse,  to
           walk with the victims and  to  confront  what  we  would  rather
           avoid. This carries with it the pastoral duty to  be  active  in
           protecting those who are victimised, since it is sadly true that
           members of the gay and  lesbian  community  are  often  verbally
           abused and made  the  targets  of  humiliation.  The  Church  is
           challenged   to   critically   analyse   its   socio-theological
           approaches to sexuality. The Church needs to engage some serious
           thought into the effects her approach has to on  all  concerned,
           more so,  where  human  beings  are  concerned.  The  debate  on
           homosexuality is about God and human rights, it is about God and
           the marginalised. Jesus' ministry was  concerned  with  breaking
           barriers humans put up against each other. There is a  need  for
           the Church to facilitate a discourse on sexuality in which  gays
           and lesbians should  be  part.  The  idea  of  participation  by
           quantification honestly needs to be revised before a  meaningful
           discourse can take place. Any disclosure on sexuality  in  which
           the voice of gays and lesbians is not  heard  is  an  unequalled
           discourse  because  it  portrays  an  assumed   superiority   of
           knowledge by the Church. Nevertheless, it is important  to  note
           that it is other people's lives being  tossed  left,  right  and
           centre. Why not let the  individuals  concerned  that  lead  the
           debates that concern them and determine their own destiny? For a
           well balanced approach to the issue of homosexuality the  Church
           needs the contribution of gays and lesbians in Zimbabwe, because
           in reality at this stage everyone else  has  been  speaking  for
           them.  There is need for an  open  contribution  from  gays  and
           lesbians in Zimbabwe  for  which  the  Church  can  provide  the
           appropriate  context  to   facilitate   such   discourse.   This
           contribution may operate as a corrective of  the  misconceptions
           surrounding  homosexuality  in   this   context,   and   develop
           awareness as well as open up new avenues for  exploring  African
           sexuality at large. To continue propagating a theology of sexual
           silence where homosexuality is concerned does not seem  to  hold
           much water now that there is a known organised group of gays and
           lesbians in the country.  Today  the  Church  is  faced  with  a
           modest task: to recognise and acknowledge the emergence of a new
           situation that should lead to a  broad  ecclesial  awareness  of
           sexuality.


           It is certain that attitudes towards change in any society  fall
           within a broad spectrum. While one extreme of the  spectrum  may
           oppose all transformation under any circumstances and  cherishes
           a return to the past, insisting that  the  achievements  of  the
           past are better than any possible future  proposals,  the  other
           opposite extreme may support and advocate  immediate  change  at
           any cost. These extremes are imminent once the debate kicks off.
           Whatever direction the debate may fall, the bottom line is that,
           it is a human right to be accorded  the  opportunity  to  openly
           debate all share an opinion on  issues  that  are  pertinent  to
           one's life.


           What the Church also needs is more comprehensive  academic  work
           to broaden knowledge on human sexuality. In doing so the  Church
           needs to work with a broad prospective  that  subjects  what  is
           regarded as the norm to a critical evaluation as an  attempt  to
           present a more  progressive  alternative  in  the  face  of  new
           evidence from other related scientific studies as well as social
           changes.  It is a reality now  that  one  need  to  think  twice
           before making  claims  such  as  "this  is  not  part  of  Shona
           culture", because the interaction of cultures is  increasing  by
           the day, and as a result claiming or  denying  the  monopoly  of
           anything has too many limitations,  and  seems  to  be  an  over
           simplistic approach. It is a reality that  traditional  villages
           are  fast  disappearing,  and  with  city  life  becoming   more
           fashionable there are some elements  of  traditional  lifestyles
           that are no longer practical.  Of late  the  country  have  seen
           lots of  people  emigrating  to  different  countries;  such  an
           upheaval and cultural overhaul is bound to  give  people  a  new
           face. However, it is also a reality that there are some elements
           of the culture's sexual concepts that to this day have  survived
           the storms, of which the concept of  Shona marriage coupled with
           its primary purpose of procreation is a typical  example,  hence
           the phallocentric model elaborated above.


           In conclusion I would like to quote  Wogaman's  remarks  in  his
           book A Christian Method to  Moral  Judgement,  "We  live  at  an
           awkward but exciting juncture  of  human  history.  None  of  us
           should claim too much for our  own  wisdom.  All  of  us  should
           confront our sensibilities humbly and diligently, hoping that by
           our faithfulness the next generation will have more to work with
           and  a  better  society  to  live  in."  The  understanding   of
           homosexuality among the Shona is going to be a  long  drawn  out
           process which requires the corporation of not  only  the  Church
           but the whole community of which the Church is a member. Because
           the reality is that gays and lesbians may not wish  to  be  what
           they are, but they have to be because that is what they are, and
           therefore they are.  In this respect then, the Church  must  get
           real and get used  to  it  because  this  is  real  contemporary
           challenge  that  can  no  longer   remain   behind   social   or
           ecclesiastical doors.  The challenge for the Church is to boldly
           face up to the related socio-theological challenges if  it  does
           not want to live  in  an  imaginary  world.  The  phenomenon  of
           homosexuality, complex as it is, and with its many  consequences
           for social, cultural and ecclesial life  requires  the  Church's
           attentive study, active concern and  honest,  theological  well-
           informed discourse. Advocating for a secrecy model does not seem
           to hold water any more.  There  is  every  indication  that  the
           coming years will provide us with very  different  exciting  and
           challenging ways of viewing sexuality as well as the Church,  in
           ways that are quite different from    those that  we  have  been
           accustomed to in the past or today.  The same  should  apply  to
           our theological approaches if they are to  remain  relevant  for
           every generation; in doing so the Church of God marches on.


   21. The appellant is an ordained  Minister  herself  and  refers  in  the
       thesis to the fact that a substantial part of the work she did by way
       of research was in an area in which she had held a ministry  and  was
       therefore known to her congregation and trusted.


   22. I accept that the reaction to the  appellant's  suggestions  and  the
       discussion generally may depend upon the standpoint of the individual
       reader. There is clearly a challenge to the  view  of  the  Methodist
       church within Zimbabwe which may produce  an  adverse  reaction  from
       officials within that Church who do not share what they may  perceive
       as a radical  view  of  this  particular  area  of  socio-theological
       thinking. There is no suggestion however that the appellant will face
       a real risk of serious harm from those within the Church although she
       claims that her position as a Minister has been  lost  to  her  as  a
       result of her recommendations; this suggestion is  not  supported  by
       sufficient material originating from the Church itself  to  create  a
       real risk for the appellant  on  return,  sufficient  to  engage  the
       United Kingdom's international protection obligations, or to show she
       will be unable to continue her work within the Church.


   23. The appellant refers in the  thesis  to  the  existence  of  gay  and
       lesbian members of  the  community  together  with  organised  groups
       providing representation for  them,  albeit  not  as  openly  as  the
       appellant   may   prefer   to   avoid    the    risk    of    adverse
       reactions/persecution. Such groups, including GALZ, are  the  subject
       of adverse  rhetoric  from  the  President  although  this  group  in
       Zimbabwe recently succeeded in actions brought against the police for
       what they considered  to  be  unjustified  harassment.  The  relevant
       country guidance case is that of LZ (homosexuals) Zimbabwe CG  [2011]
       UKUT 00487 (IAC) in which the Tribunal held that (i) There  has  been
       much public expression of extreme homophobia at the highest levels in
       recent  years  in  Zimbabwe  (ii)  Male   homosexual   behaviour   is
       criminalised, but prosecutions  are  very  rare.  Lesbianism  is  not
       criminalised.   (iii)   Some   homosexuals   suffer   discrimination,
       harassment and blackmail from the  general  public  and  the  police.
       Attempted extortion, false complaints and unjustified detentions  are
       not so prevalent as to pose a general risk.  There are no records  of
       any murders with a homophobic element.  "Corrective  rape"  is  rare,
       and does not represent a general risk. (iv) There is a  "gay  scene,"
       within limitations. (v) Lesbians, living on their  own  or  together,
       may face greater difficulties than  gay  men.  (vi)  GALZ  (Gays  and
       Lesbians of Zimbabwe) takes a realistic view: Zimbabwe  is  "not  the
       worst place in the world  to  be  gay  or  lesbian  even  though  the
       President, government officials and church leaders have whipped up  a
       climate of hysterical homophobia." (vii) Applying HJ & HT [2010] UKSC
       31, [2010] Imm AR 729, there is no general risk to gays or  lesbians.
       Personal  circumstances  place  some  gays  and  lesbians  at   risk.
       Although not decisive on its own, being openly gay may increase risk.
        A positive HIV/AIDS diagnosis may be  a  risk  factor.   Connections
       with the elite do not increase risk.  (viii)  The  police  and  other
       state agents do not provide protection. (ix) A homosexual at risk  in
       his or her community can move elsewhere, either in the same  city  or
       to another part of the country.  He or she might choose  to  relocate
       to where there is greater tolerance, such as Bulawayo, but the choice
       of a new area is not restricted.  The  option  is  excluded  only  if
       personal circumstances present risk throughout the country


   24. The appellant has not establish she has an adverse profile that  will
       place her at risk on return as demonstrated by her own admission that
       she returned to Zimbabwe for the purposes of  research  in  2003/2004
       and thereafter returned for the purposes of a holiday in 2012.  There
       is no evidence the appellant came to the  adverse  interests  of  the
       authorities at  the  airport  on  return  or  suffered  ill-treatment
       sufficient to indicate that she is likely to be targeted on return in
       any part of Zimbabwe in 2014. The 2012 visit  substantially  postdate
       publication of the thesis in 2010. In HS (returning  asylum  seekers)
       Zimbabwe CG [2007] UKAIT 00094 the Tribunal found that the process of
       screening returning passengers is an intelligence led process and the
       CIO will generally have identified from  the  passenger  manifest  in
       advance, based upon such intelligence, those passengers in whom there
       is any possible interest. The fact of having  made  an  asylum  claim
       abroad is not something that in itself  will  give  rise  to  adverse
       interest on return. In paragraphs 264 and 266 the tribunal said: "The
       CIO has taken over responsibility for the  operation  of  immigration
       control at Harare airport and immigration officers are being replaced
       by CIO officers. We accept also that one of the purposes of  the  CIO
       in monitoring arrivals at the airport is to identify  those  who  are
       thought to be, for whatever reason, enemies of the regime. The aim is
       to detect those  of  interest  because  of  an  adverse  military  or
       criminal profile. The main focus of the operation to  identify  those
       who may be of adverse interest remains those who are perceived to  be
       politically active in support of the opposition. But anyone perceived
       to be a threat to or a critic of the  regime  will  attract  interest
       also ... We have set out the evidence that indicates in whom the  CIO
       has an interest. This will be those in respect of whom there  is  any
       reason to suspect an adverse political, criminal or military  profile
       of the type identified in AA(2). In addition, those perceived  to  be
       associated with what have come to  be  identified  as  civil  society
       organisations may attract adverse interest as critics of the  regime"
       (and see paragraph 282). At paragraph 102 the tribunal had said: "The
       evidence concerning the CIO establishes clearly that anyone who comes
       to the attention of the CIO and is perceived to be an  enemy  of  the
       regime faces a very real risk of being  subjected  to  physical  ill-
       treatment".


   25. In CM (EM country  guidance;  disclosure)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2013]  UKUT
       00059(IAC) the Tribunal held that the fresh  evidence  regarding  the
       position at the point of return does not  indicate  any  increase  in
       risk since the Country Guidance was given  in  HS  (returning  asylum
       seekers) Zimbabwe  CG  [2007]  UKAIT  00094.  On  the  contrary,  the
       available evidence as  to  the  treatment  of  those  who  have  been
       returned to Harare Airport since 2007 and the absence of any reliable
       evidence of risk there means  that  there  is  no  justification  for
       extending the scope of who might be regarded by the  CIO  as  an  MDC
       activist.


   26. It is not suggested that on return the appellant is likely to  engage
       in activities that will bring her to the  adverse  attention  of  the
       authorities.  Her previous employment in Zimbabwe was as  a  Minister
       of the Methodist Church not as a vocal activist supporting members of
       the gay and lesbian community.  It is not claimed she  is  a  lesbian
       and the basis of the claim is  that  the  real  risk  rises  from  an
       adverse perception following the publication of the thesis not  as  a
       result  of  her  desire  to   undertake   activities   reflecting   a
       fundamentally held belief that forms part of her  personal  identity,
       which it would not be permissible to expect her to act discreetly  to
       hide in order to avoid persecution.


   27. I have taken into account the letter of purportedly from  the  office
       of the Secretary of the MDC for Chitungwiza Province  dated  24  July
       2014 confirming the appellant was  granted  permission  to  undertake
       research on homosexuality in 2003 and the fact it was emphasised that
       she needed to be extremely cautious due to potential risk. The letter
       states that her work was noticed by government officials  and  people
       were severely beaten and a  few  jailed,  threats  made,  and  people
       tortured by the government authorities and a  lot  of  families  have
       suffered the consequences. It is also stated that  since  publication
       of the thesis in 2010 the author of the letter has noticed people who
       assisted  her  suffering  "atrocious  punishments   from   government
       officials" and that the authorities will not hesitate to  punish  the
       appellant herself as the author.  The letter  was  criticised  by  Mr
       Smart in his submissions on the basis it is in general  terms,  there
       was no indication of the identity of the person who signed the letter
       or who created it, no specific information relating to the number who
       suffered, and that the content did not established that the appellant
       herself faced a real risk on return.


   28. The signatory of the letter is stated to  be  the  Secretary  of  the
       province for the MDC, although is not  named.  There  is  a  lack  of
       detail in the letter although there is no mandatory  requirement  for
       all evidence to be in a  particularly  detailed  form.  If  the  work
       undertaken by the  appellant  has  created  a  real  risk  such  that
       physical harm has resulted specific detail may not be  required.  The
       difficulty with the letter however is it that it does not specify who
       was ill treated other than in generalised terms and appears to be the
       only source of information relating to this allegation. The claim the
       appellant faces a real risk from government officials as a result  of
       the publication of the thesis in 2010 is also undermined by the  fact
       she was able to enter Zimbabwe for purposes of a holiday in 2012 when
       there was no adverse interest shown in her at the airport  or  within
       Zimbabwe generally sufficient to engage the  need  for  international
       protection.


   29. In relation to this  issue;  I  find  the  appellant  has  failed  to
       substantiate her claim to face of  real  risk  of  ill  treatment  on
       return sufficient to engage the United Kingdom's obligation under the
       Refugee Convention, in relation to the  Qualification  Directive,  or
       under the Human Rights Convention.


   30. The appellant also seeks to rely upon Article 8 family life which she
       states is with her sister, brother-in-law and their children, and her
       brother in the United Kingdom. It was accepted  in  submissions  that
       the appellant is unable to succeed in relation to Article 8 under the
       Immigration Rules and so it is  necessary  to  consider  this  matter
       outside the Rules under Article 8 ECHR.


   31. The Article 8 claim is based upon a relationship with family  members
       in the United Kingdom but these are adults, bar  her  nephews  and/or
       nieces.  Any relationship with the junior members of the  family  has
       not been shown to be anything other than the normal  relationship  of
       an aunt. Even if the  appellant  does  maintain  close  contact  with
       family members in the  United  Kingdom  the  best  interests  of  the
       children have not been shown to be other than to  remain  with  their
       own parents who are their primary carers.  It has not been shown that
       the appellant's removal and  change  of  contact  with  her  sister's
       children to indirect contact will result in consequences that will be
       unjustifiably  unduly  harsh   such   as   to   make   the   decision
       disproportionate.


   32. Any relationship with her brother, sister,  and  other  adult  family
       members in the United Kingdom may be strengthened by the  appellant's
       own circumstances although it was noted that she has not only studied
       to a very high level of  academic  achievement  but  also  undertakes
       voluntary work and paid employment in the United Kingdom;  indicating
       a willingness and ability to undertake activities  outside  the  home
       environment  and  a  degree  of  independence.  The  appellant's  own
       evidence undermines the submission made by her representative that if
       returned to Zimbabwe all she will know is  her  previous  life  as  a
       Minister which may be lost to  her  as  result  of  the  thesis.  The
       appellant has worked in the United Kingdom in a role not  related  to
       her profession as a Minister indicating that she is an  adaptable  as
       well as a very competent individual. It has not been shown  that  the
       consequences of removal from the United Kingdom in  relation  to  her
       relationships with any adult member of the family, or in relation  to
       her private life in the United Kingdom, will result in  unjustifiably
       harsh consequences such as to make the decision disproportionate. The
       appellant may wish to stay with family  in  the  United  Kingdom  but
       Article 8 does not given an individual the choice of where they  wish
       to reside and, as the appellant has never  had  a  grant  of  settled
       status in the United Kingdom, the family and private life  she  seeks
       to rely upon has all been created at  a  time  when  her  immigration
       status was precarious. As a result little weight should  be  accorded
       to it by virtue of the provisions of section 117B of the 2002 Act and
       the Strasbourg jurisprudence.


   33. The appellant also raised in her written and oral evidence  the  fact
       that she had been the subject of sexual abuse. The appellant  claimed
       a single act of abuse in 1982 in  her  oral  evidence  to  the  Upper
       Tribunal but in other parts of her evidence refers to a longer period
       between 1982 and 1990.  The appellant, however, did not flee Zimbabwe
       and there is no evidence of ongoing acts of abuse or of  any  adverse
       experiences of this nature between 1982 and September 2001  when  she
       came to the United Kingdom as a student. Although it was indicated in
       submissions made on her behalf  that  the  appellant  would  have  to
       return to her home village, which may have  been  the  venue  of  the
       abuse, she states in the earlier part of the thesis that she not only
       lived in her home village but would also travelled  with  her  father
       and live in a local town/city with him  while  she  was  growing  up,
       indicating experience of living in other parts of  Zimbabwe.  It  has
       also not been established on the facts that it would be  unreasonable
       for her to relocate to another area in Zimbabwe if she did  not  wish
       to return to her home village in any event. Employment prospects  are
       probably greater within the conurbations too.  Insufficient  evidence
       has been established to show that she would be required to return  to
       the site of any previous  abuse  or  that  she  could  not  establish
       herself elsewhere.


   34. I accept that the psychological impact of abuse can be extremely deep
       but there is no indication that the appellant has  sought  assistance
       from the professional authorities in the United Kingdom  trained  and
       equipped to deal with any residual emotional or psychological issues.
       If such issues exist they would  fall  within  consideration  of  the
       mental health aspects of the claim which, for  the  reasons  set  out
       above, it has not been established that treatment,  if  required,  or
       assistance would not be available in Zimbabwe to which the  applicant
       will be able to seek access.  In summary in relation to  this  issue;
       the appellant claimed she was abused in the village at the age of  15
       but no police action was taken. The abuser was  not  a  relative.  In
       2010, however, she returned to her home village as her mother was ill
       with no evidence of any adverse reaction. The  appellant  has  chosen
       not to seek assistance for the consequences  of  abuse  and  to  keep
       events in her mind and deals with the same internally, as a result of
       which no expert evidence is available. If returned to Zimbabwe  there
       is no evidence of an impact sufficient to engage Articles 3 or 8, the
       latter on a physical and moral integrity  basis,  treatment  has  not
       been shown not to be available or assistance from women's  groups  in
       Zimbabwe, although the appellant has to-date chosen not to  make  use
       of  the  same  in  the  United  Kingdom.   If  there  is  an  ongoing
       consequence as a result of the appellant's choice not to obtain  help
       available to her that is not a matter arising  as  a  result  of  the
       consequence of any action of the state but rather as a result of  the
       appellant's own choices.


   35. Comment  was  also  made  in  submissions  regarding  the  fact  that
       following medical intervention and  the  hysterectomy  the  appellant
       cannot  have  children.  This  issue  was  however  combined  with  a
       submission that she  would  have  to  return  to  her  village  where
       cultural thinking is that women marry and have children and  that  it
       was inhumane to expect the appellant to return due to  the  resulting
       emotional consequences. The medical evidence supports  the  fact  the
       appellant is unlikely to be able to  conceive  a  child  following  a
       hysterectomy and her own thesis discusses at length  the  traditional
       view of the role of women within Shona  society.   As  stated  above,
       however, it has not been  established  that  the  appellant  will  be
       required to return to her home village or that it is unreasonable for
       her to relocate to or within the  conurbations  where  the  appellant
       recognises herself, in her thesis, that society  within  Zimbabwe  is
       changing.  It has also not been established that the fact she may  be
       a single woman who, even if married,  is  a  person  unable  to  have
       children  will  result  in  any  form  of  persecution  or  treatment
       sufficient to engage the United Kingdom's obligations in the field of
       international   protection.     Misunderstanding    can    lead    to
       harassment/abuse/marginalisation in some cases but it  has  not  been
       established that there is a real risk to the appellant  or  that  the
       appropriate threshold will be crossed in all Zimbabwe.


   36. It  is  accepted  that  the  appellant  on  return  to  Zimbabwe  may
       experience a period of disruption to  her  lifestyle,  hardship,  and
       uncertainty, while she readjusts and  re-establishes  her  life.  She
       returns however as a highly educated  individual  albeit  in  a  more
       specialist field, with contacts within Zimbabwe  and  family  in  the
       United Kingdom who have provided her with support  to  date  with  no
       suggestion that they will abandon her even if she is returning  home.
       It is claimed her brother has left Zimbabwe and moved to South Africa
       but that is a neighbouring state  indicating  that  a  family  member
       remains in the region.


   37. The burden is on the Secretary of State to prove  that  any  decision
       under Article 8 is proportionate.  For the reasons  set  out  in  the
       reasons for refusal letter,  Mr  Smart's  submissions,  and  set  out
       above, I find the Secretary of State has discharged  this  burden  in
       relation to family life, private life, and medical issues. The burden
       is upon the appellant to prove she is entitled to be recognised as  a
       refugee, and, if not, a person entitled to a  grant  of  humanitarian
       protection and a person entitled to leave to remain as a result of  a
       real risk of a breach of rights under Article 3 in relation  to  both
       protection  and  medical  issues.  I  find  the  appellant  has   not
       substantiate her claim in relation to any of the above heads and  has
       failed to discharge the burden upon her to show that she is  entitled
       to any form of international protection or leave to remain.


   38. The appellant is no more than a failed asylum seeker and as  such  at
       no risk on risk  on  return  to  Zimbabwe  per  se.   Her  appeal  is
       therefore dismissed.


  Decision


   39. The First-tier Tribunal Judge has been found to have materially erred
       in law and her decision set aside. I remake the decision as  follows.
       This appeal is dismissed.


  Anonymity.


   40. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.  I make no such order pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
       Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.






Signed.......................................................

Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 16th December 2014

