
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39124/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1st September 2016                         |On 27th September 2016        |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                Mr Ismail [P]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Ahmed (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mrs Abone (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, the Secretary of State, appeals with permission  against
    the decision of reasons statement of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cox,
    promulgated on 21st August 2015.  Judge Cox allowed the  appeal  of  Mr
    [P] against the decision of the Secretary of State dated 19th September
    2014 to refuse him leave to remain in the UK on the basis of his family
    and private life, on account of  his  marriage  with  [HP],  a  British
    citizen in July 2011.

 2. Mr [P] was represented by Mr Ahmed of Counsel and  the  Respondent  was
    represented by Mrs Abone, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

 3. Mrs Abone, representing the Secretary of State, relied upon the Grounds
    of Appeal.  These state that, although EX.1.(b) and EX.2 of Appendix FM
    have nothing to say about returning to the home country with a view  to
    making an entry clearance application, and that the  sole  question  is
    whether there are insurmountable obstacles to  family  life  continuing
    "outside the UK", the Tribunal decision in Chen [2015] UKUT  00189,  is
    of some considerable significance.

 4. This states that, given that the issue may well  be  whether  temporary
    separation to enable an individual to make  an  application  for  entry
    clearance will turn out to be disproportionate, in all cases  "it  will
    be for the individual to place before the Secretary of  State  evidence
    that such temporary separation will interfere  disproportionately  with
    protected rights" and that it is not enough to rely upon  the  case  of
    Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40.

 5. Second, even  if  the  case  of  Chen  was  not  before  the  Tribunal,
    nevertheless, given  that  the  judge  had  described  the  Appellant's
    immigration history as one that was  "disgraceful"  such  that  he  had
    deviously set out to manipulate the Immigration Rules, with a  view  to
    securing settlement, it was not disproportionate, and in the  interests
    of immigration control, to require the  Appellant  to  return  back  to
    India to make a fresh application to enter on a spouse's visa.

 6. For his part, Mr Ahmed submitted that there was no  material  error  of
    law at all.  This is because paragraph 11 did  not  stand  alone.   The
    judge, after paragraph 11, had gone on  to  make  further  findings  at
    paragraph 12 and paragraph 13, and there were no direct  challenges  to
    what was said in paragraph 12 and paragraph 13.  It is  true  that  the
    judge has referred to the Appellant's "disgraceful immigration  history
    during which he has evidently pursued his own interests  with  complete
    distain for the UK system of immigration control" (paragraph 11).

 7. Nevertheless the judge also found  that  "insurmountable  obstacles  do
    exist in this case for the cumulative reasons" that were set out in the
    skeleton argument, and these included the  fact  that  the  Appellant's
    partner was a British citizen settled in the UK;  had  a  diagnosis  of
    schizoaffective disorder with a history of mental health, such that she
    had been admitted to hospital under Section 2 of the Mental Health Act,
    that she did not hold dual nationality and Indian immigration  laws  do
    not permit dual  nationality;  and  that  given  that  the  Appellant's
    partner was a British citizen it would be unreasonable  to  expect  the
    British citizen to give up her rights to relocate  to  India,  and  any
    such requirement may well offend against the principle in Zambrano (see
    paragraph 12).

 8. Furthermore the Appellant's wife was expecting a child  (see  paragraph
    12(j).  In these circumstances the judge took  into  account  the  fact
    that "given the particular vulnerabilities  of  [HP]  and  her  ongoing
    treatment for her mental disorder, the continuity of which coupled with
    the support she receives  from  the  Appellant  appeals  vital  to  her
    stability" (paragraph 13).

 9. In reply, Mrs  Abone  submitted  that  there  were  no  "insurmountable
    obstacles"  to  the  Appellant  returning  to  India  and  remaking  an
    application on a spouse's visa given that the  statistics  showed  that
    34% of visa settlement applications are determined within fifteen days,
    98% are determined within 30 days and 100%  are  determined  within  60
    days.  Accordingly, this was a case where  the  "temporary  separation"
    would not interfere disproportionately with protected rights.

No Error of Law

10. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the  judge  does  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should  set  aside  the  decision.   I  note  Mr
    Ahmed's skilful argument before  this  Tribunal  that  the  Immigration
    Rules in EX.1. and EX.2. import no question of  "proportionality"  when
    discussing the issue of whether there are "insurmountable obstacles  to
    family life being enjoyed outside the UK", and  that  this  is  only  a
    calculation that is embarked  upon if consideration is given to  family
    life rights outside the Rules.

11.  However  the  Tribunal  in  Chen  has  made  it  clear  that  in   the
    consideration of EX.1 and  EX.2,  when  regard  is  had  to  "temporary
    separation" to enable an individual to make an  application  for  entry
    clearance" it is important to consider  whether  this  "will  interfere
    disproportionately with protected rights". The plain fact here is  that
    the judge has given all due consideration to the proportionality of the
    measures taken.  It was for the judge  to  do  so  and  the  judge  has
    demonstrated that such  a  judicial  fact-finding  exercise  cannot  be
    termed to be "perverse" or "irrational".  This  is  because  the  judge
    states at paragraph 11 that the  Appellant's  immigration  history  has
    indeed been a "disgraceful"  one,  whereby  he  has  "pursued  his  own
    interests with complete distain for  the  UK's  system  of  immigration
    control".

12. Importantly, he has also noted  within  the  same  paragraph  that  the
    Appellant's Islamic marriage was regarded by the Secretary of State  as
    being one which was genuine and subsisting, given that they  had  lived
    together as  partners  for  two  years  and  that,  it  is  also  amply
    corroborated that she is now pregnant with  the  party's  first  child"
    (paragraph 11).

13. As against this, the judge then went on to  consider  at  paragraph  12
    those factors that weighed in the balance in favour  of  the  Appellant
    and gave these detailed consideration.  At paragraph 13, the judge then
    returned to the question of "insurmountable obstacles" and observed the
    "vulnerabilities of [HP]" given her ongoing treatment before concluding
    that [HP] would not go to India as she made  clear  and  that  in  that
    event "there would be no prospect of continuing  family  life  together
    outside the UK" (paragraph 30).

14. I have to say finally, that I found [HP]'s conduct in the court  to  be
    highly objectionable in the manner that she spoke out but I  accept  Mr
    Ahmed's submissions that this was on account of her  mental  condition.
    It does not, in any event, impact upon the  legality  of  the  decision
    below which I hold to be sustainable.

No Error of Law

15. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

16. No anonymity order is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 21st September 2016


