

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/39976/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 11 August 2015                        |On 19 August 2015         |
|                                         |                          |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          SHAIKH MUTTAHEDUR RAHMAN
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Nath (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr Biggs (Counsel)


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


   1. The respondent is a citizen of Bangladesh born on  29  November  1990.
      The SSHD appeals with permission, against a decision of the First-tier
      Tribunal promulgated on 16 April 2015 to allow the respondent's appeal
      on the basis that it is not in accordance with the law.


Background

   2. It is helpful in this case to summarise the relevant background  facts
      and procedural history together.


   3. The respondent entered the UK with entry clearance as a student on  26
      November 2009, when he  was  18.   He  originally  studied  commercial
      management at London East Bank College but changed his place of  study
      to London  Premier  College  where  he  studied  travel,  tourism  and
      hospitality.

   4. On 25 April 2013, and therefore before the expiry of his  leave  as  a
      student on 30 April 2015, the respondent applied to vary his leave  in
      order to extend it.  The SSHD extended his leave to  31  August  2013.
      The respondent did not know about this decision until  his  solicitors
      were informed of this by his MP, many months after his leave  expired.
      It is claimed by the respondent that the SSHD lost  his  passport  and
      disadvantaged him by preventing him from pursuing his studies,  during
      this process and failed to clearly address what had happened  or  what
      was to be done about it.

   5. In an application dated 12 November 2013   the  respondent  sought  to
      persuade the SSHD that because  of  the  failure  to  communicate  her
      decision, he had been disadvantaged and a further decision  should  be
      taken granting him leave to remain.  In a decision dated  19  December
      2013 the SSHD refused the application for leave to remain outside  the
      Rules.

   6. On 14 February 2014 the respondent lodged a claim for judicial review.
       The grounds submitted that whilst the SSHD addressed  Article  8  she
      failed to address his claim that the negligent handling  of  his  case
      was such that this should be remedied  by  a  grant  of  discretionary
      leave outside the Rules.  The grounds relied upon the observations  in
      R (Nagre) v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720at [49] to the effect  that  the  SSHD
      should genuinely bear in mind those cases  that  may  be  'exceptional
      cases within the SSHD's guidance and should:

                 "seek to stand back  after  working  through  the  analysis
                 required under the new rules  so  as  to  make  an  overall
                 assessment of the facts to see whether  there  might  be  a
                 good arguable case of disproportionality if leave to remain
                 is not granted, and, if there is, to examine that case with
                 care to  see  whether  removal  would  be  justified.   The
                 reasoning in decision letters should  seek  to  demonstrate
                 that this reasoning process has indeed been gone through."

   7. In a consent order sealed on 22 July 2014  the  respondent  agreed  to
      withdraw his judicial review claim upon the SSHD (1) reconsidering his
      application as if it were made whilst he  had  leave  to  remain,  (2)
      issuing a new decision within  three  months  and  (3)  providing  the
      respondent with a right of appeal.

   8. In accordance with the consent order the SSHD treated the respondent's
      12 November 2013 application as if it had been made when he had  leave
      to remain but in a decision dated 19 September 2014  refused  to  vary
      his leave to remain and decided to remove the respondent under section
      47 of the  Immigration,  Asylum  and  Nationality  Act  2006.  As  the
      decision was treated as if made when the appellant had leave, again in
      accordance with the consent order, the respondent was given a right of
      appeal.  The SSHD's notice of immigration decision was accompanied  by
      a reasons for refusal letter of the same date.  This first  considered
      whether the respondent could meet the requirements of  para  276ADE(1)
      and clearly explained why he did not.  The SSHD went  on  to  consider
      whether leave outside the Rules should be given because of exceptional
      circumstances  but  did   concluded   there   were   not   exceptional
      circumstances which would make removal disproportionate.

   9. The respondent exercised his right of appeal and detailed  grounds  of
      appeal dated  7  October  2014  were  prepared  and  lodged  with  the
      assistance of his current solicitors.  These grounds submit  that  the
      decision "is erroneous; not in accordance with the  immigration  rules
      nor is it in accordance with  the  [SSHD's]  published  policy".   The
      grounds do not set out with any degree of precision how the respondent
      meets the Rules or how the decision breaches policy.  The focus of the
      grounds is really to set out why the removal of the  respondent  would
      constitute a disproportionate breach of Article 8.

  10. Mr Biggs represented the respondent at the hearing before  the  First-
      tier Tribunal.  The respondent was unrepresented.  Judge Khan accepted
      Mr  Biggs'  submissions  and  found  that  the  respondent  has   been
      disadvantaged by the SSHD's actions and in failing  to  consider  this
      when exercising her discretion or making the decision to  remove,  the
      SSHD's decision is not in accordance with the law.

  11. The SSHD appealed against this decision on the basis  that  the  Judge
      failed to identify what the SSHD has not considered  or  to  make  any
      findings on the points made in the  refusal  letter.   The  SSHD  also
      pointed out that the Judge mistakenly referred  to  India  instead  of
      Bangladesh.   Judge  McDade  considered  these  grounds  arguable  and
      granted permission to appeal on 11 June 2015.

  12. The matter now comes  before  me  to  determine  whether  or  not  the
      decision contains a material error of law.

Hearing

      13. At the hearing Mr Nath relied upon  the  grounds  of  appeal.   Mr
          Biggs asked me to uphold the decision.  I  reserved  my  decision,
          which I now give with reasons.

Legal framework

      14. The SSHD made two 'immigration decisions' for the purposes of  the
          Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  in  this  case:  (1)
          she refused to vary the respondent's leave to  remain  under  para
          276ADE and (2) she decided to remove the respondent under  section
          47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  Mr  Biggs
          clarified that the respondent  accepted  he  could  not  meet  the
          requirements of the Rules and the  focus  of  the  appeal  to  the
          First-tier Tribunal was  based  on  a  challenge  to  the  removal
          decision on the basis that it is otherwise not in accordance  with
          the law (s 84(1)(e) of the 2002  Act).   It  is  unfortunate  that
          this argument was not made clear within the grounds of  appeal  to
          the First-tier Tribunal.  Mr Biggs nonetheless indicated  that  it
          was made clear to Judge Khan who agreed to and did consider it.


      15. In Kabaghe (appeal from outside UK - fairness) Malawi [2011]  UKUT
          00473(IAC) Blake J re-stated the ambit of s 84(1)(e):


                 "36. Third, we remind immigration judges and the respondent
                 that the statutory  jurisdiction  to  consider  whether  an
                 immigration decision is in accordance with the law includes
                 consideration of whether the decision has been made  fairly
                 because there is a public law  duty  on  the  Secretary  of
                 State to act fairly: see  discussion  in  Macdonald  Eighth
                 Edition at 19.09 citing Singh v Immigration Appeal Tribunal
                 [1986] Imm AR 352; D.S. Abdi v SSHD [1996] Imm AR  148;  BO
                 (Nigeria) [2004] UKIAT  00026;  AG  (Kosovo)  [2007]  UKAIT
                 00082; AA (Pakistan)  [2008]  UKAIT  00003  and  HH  (Iraq)
                 [2008] UKAIT 00051. These principles have been  applied  in
                 the Upper Tribunal: see Thakur (PBS decision -  common  law
                 fairness)  Bangladesh  [2011]  UKUT  151  (IAC)  and  Patel
                 (revocation of sponsor licence  -  fairness)  India  [2011]
                 UKUT 211 (IAC)."


                 37.   Where the appellant challenges a removal decision on
                 the basis that it is unlawful  and  unfair,  and  gives  an
                 apparently credible account of the  treatment constituting
                 the  unfairness,  the  immigration  judge  is  entitled  to
                 expect some form of evidential response from the respondent
                 identifying what happened when and what  factors  informed
                 the decision making. There was no information  provided  on
                 the file as to how and  why  the  decision  to  remove  was
                 reached apart from the reasons for  the  detention  summary
                 that  has  turned  out  to  be  wholly  inaccurate  and  an
                 immigration summary that is both incomplete and  silent  on
                 the material issue.


                 38.  We note that that the respondent was  not  represented
                 before Judge Place and so he would not have  been  able  to
                 ask for the inquiries  to  be  made  that  Mr  Bramble  has
                 helpfully conducted for our benefit. This is  a  completely
                 unsatisfactory state of affairs. While  we  recognise  that
                 resources are scarce and invidious choices need to be  made
                 about where to deploy representatives, the  judge  must  be
                 able to determine the appeal on accurate  information  from
                 the respondent supplied in one form or another, and in  any
                 event  internal  review  of  such  decisions  should   have
                 identified the procedural failings in this case long before
                 the Judge was called on to make a judicial decision.


                 39.  We repeat what was said by the AIT in EO  (Turkey)  at
                 [44] quoted above at [24] namely the decision maker  should
                 demonstrate that the  relevant  considerations  were  taken
                 into account: either by a contemporaneous file note made by
                 the officer, or a reasoned decision made  by  someone  with
                 access to the relevant information.  We note that the  UKBA
                 Enforcement  Instructions  and  Guidance  "Instructions  on
                 Applying Paragraphs 364 to 368 and 395C of the  Immigration
                 Rules"  chapter  53.1.1   (accessed   28   November   2011)
                 contemplate  that  a  record  is  made  of   the   relevant
                 circumstances:


                       "Before a decision to remove is taken on a case,  the
                       case-owner/operational staff must consider all  known
                       relevant factors (both positive and negative). It  is
                       important to cover the compassionate factors  in  the
                       transcription of the interview and to record them and
                       the fact that you have discussed them with  the  UKBA
                       officer authorising removal, on the local file minute
                       or IS126E and UKBA internal database  records  (CID).
                       Removal should not be considered in  any  case  which
                       qualifies for  leave  under  the  Immigration  Rules,
                       existing policies or where it would be  inappropriate
                       to do so under this policy."


                 40.  In the absence of such information the judge will have
                 to decide whether to allow the appeal on the basis that the
                 lack of the information is probative of the fact  that  the
                 relevant considerations were not  taken  into  account,  or
                 adjourn for further inquiries to be made, causing  expense,
                 inconvenience and delay, all of which are contrary  to  the
                 overriding objective of Tribunal justice."


  16. It is important that these comments are read in the  context  of  what
      Blake J said in Fiaz (cancellation  of  leave  to  remain  -  fairness
      [2012] UKUT 57 (IAC) at [34]:


                 "We would add that the jurisdiction  of  this  Tribunal  to
                 determine that a decision is not in accordance with the law
                 because of a lack of fairness, is not to be degraded  to  a
                 general judicial power to depart from the Rules  where  the
                 judge thinks  such  a  course  appropriate  or  to  turn  a
                 mandatory factor into a discretionary one. Fairness in this
                 context is essentially procedural: a course of action  that
                 prevents the claimant from drawing a relevant  document  or
                 other information to the attention of the  decision  maker,
                 or preventing the claimant from switching colleges  to  one
                 that is currently approved by the Secretary of State rather
                 than substantive: an untrammelled exercise of discretion to
                 permit people to remain who have failed to use the previous
                 permission for the purpose for which it was granted and who
                 have no other claim to remain under the rules."

Discussion

  17. The SSHD's grounds  of  appeal  are  narrowly  drafted.   The  Judge's
      reference to India and not Bangladesh is not a mistake  of  fact  that
      has caused any unfairness and Mr Nath was correct to  accept  this  at
      the hearing.


  18. The alleged errors of law are  said  to  be  the  Judge's  failure  to
      identify what the SSHD has not considered and his failure to make  any
      findings on the points made in the refusal letter.  The  latter  point
      can be addressed shortly.  The Judge did not address the  points  made
      in the refusal letter for obvious reasons.  Although  the  grounds  of
      appeal  prepared  by  the  appellant's  solicitors  did  not   clearly
      recognise this by the time of the hearing it was  clarified  that  the
      respondent accepted he could not  meet  the  requirements  of  276ADE.
      This is the subject matter that took up the majority  of  the  reasons
      for refusal letter.

  19. I accept that the Judge's decision is not clearly structured and it is
      at times difficult to follow the reasoning employed.  However when the
      decision is read as a  whole  together  with  the  relevant  documents
      available to the Judge the reasons provided are sufficient.  The Judge
      accepted the credibility of the  respondent's  evidence  that  he  was
      disadvantaged by  the  SSHD  [24  and  25].   The  Judge  was  clearly
      concerned about what happened to the respondent in 2013 and the SSHD's
      failure  to  explain  her  actions.   The  Judge  accepted  Mr  Biggs'
      submission that the decision to remove did not take into account  what
      had happened and ought  to  have  been  considered  when  'exceptional
      circumstances' were considered.  The section  in  the  refusal  letter
      under 'exceptional circumstances' is entirely silent  on  this  issue.
      The reasons for refusal letter may consider exceptional  circumstances
      but it does not in any way consider what happened in  this  particular
      case in the manner that Nagre and Kabaghe sets out is  necessary  (see
      paras 6 and 15 above).  The Judge therefore accepted that the decision
      to remove unfairly failed to take relevant matters  into  account  and
      needed to be remade by the SSHD, who should  expressly  consider  what
      happened to the respondent and this  should  inform  any  decision  on
      whether to remove him.

  20. I note that this is a case in which there is little evidence from  the
      SSHD  to  explain  what  happened.    Indeed   there   was   no   SSHD
      representative before the First-tier Tribunal.  However this is also a
      case in which the respondent was seeking  a  period  of  discretionary
      leave to address the past unfairness on the part of the SSHD.  For  my
      part it is difficult to see why any past unfairness in 2013  continues
      to impact upon the respondent  in  a  meaningful  manner  at  present.
      There is very little to set out what he is studying or  doing  in  the
      UK.  Having said that, I am satisfied  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      provided adequate reasons for the SSHD to know why  the  decision  was
      not in accordance with  the  law.   The  SSHD  has  simply  failed  to
      consider the submission advanced on behalf of the respondent that  the
      SSHD's unfairness toward him in 2013 has caused him prejudice  and  is
      sufficient to  constitute  exceptional  circumstances  such  that  she
      should exercise her discretion not to remove the respondent.  That  is
      a matter for the SSHD to address when she reconsiders  the  claim  and
      not for me to make any further comment on.


Decision

  21. I find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal does  not  contain
      an error of law and I do not set aside the decision of the  First-tier
      Tribunal.



Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
13 August 2015

