
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39029/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |      Decision and Reasons        |
|                                          |Promulgated                       |
|On 6 April 2015                           |      On 14 August 2015           |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between

                                    MS AA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Bazini of counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Pal a Home Office Presenting Officer


        DETERMINATION AND REASONS FOR FINDING A MATERIAL ERROR OF LAW

Introduction


   1.   This appeal is subject to an anonymity order made by the  First-tier
      Tribunal. Neither party invited me to rescind the order.  Pursuant  to
      Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  (SI
      2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper  Tribunal  or  a
      Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of
      publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original
      Appellant. This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any
      failure to comply with this direction could give rise to  contempt  of
      court proceedings.


   2.    This is an appeal by the appellant who is a citizen of Nigeria born
      on 27 February 1979.

   Immigration History
   3.    The appellant was granted leave to enter the United Kingdom on a  6
      month visit visa valid until 4 February 2005. She was granted  further
      leave to enter on a 2 year visit visa valid to 14 December 2008. Leave
      to enter for a further 2 years until 24 November 2010 was granted  but
      the appellant was refused entry on landing in the  UK  on  2  December
      2008.  She  was  granted  temporary  admission  subject  to  reporting
      conditions which were later suspended. The  appellant  applied  for  a
      Family Member residence stamp on 17 July 2009. This was refused on  19
      October 2009. She applied for a non-EEA  residence  card  on  27  July
      2011. This application was refused on  28  October  2011  because  the
      marriage was considered to be one of convenience. The  appellant  made
      an application for leave to remain  on  Human  Rights  grounds  on  21
      December 2011 which was refused on 13 November 2012 with no  right  of
      appeal. Further representations were  received  by  the  Secretary  of
      State on 8 April 2013 giving rise to the decision appealed against the
      respondent refused the application on 3 September 2013.
   4.    The appellant appealed  against  the  respondent's  decision  of  3
      September 2013 to the First-tier Tribunal.

The First-tier Tribunal Judge's Decision


   5.    The appellant's appeal was dismissed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      O'Keeffe ('the judge') in a decision promulgated on 9 March  2015.  An
      application was made at the start of the hearing  for  an  adjournment
      because the appellant had applied for a  child  arrangement  order  in
      respect of her niece, M, who was in long term foster care.  The  judge
      refused to adjourn the hearing after  a  short  adjournment  for  more
      information. The hearing proceeded and the judge dismissed the  appeal
      on Article 8 grounds.

Permission to appeal


   6.   The appellant applied for permission to appeal. Permission to appeal
      was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Heynes who indicated that 'an
      arguable error of law is disclosed by the application in  refusing  an
      application  for  an  adjournment  pending  a  first  hearing  of  the
      application of a Child Arrangement Order'.

   7.   At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr Bazini on behalf of the
      Appellant and Ms Pal on behalf of the respondent.

Discussion


   8.  The grounds of appeal, which are lengthy, assert that the judge erred
      in law by i) failing to grant an adjournment, and ii) failed to  grant
      a period of discretionary leave.


   9.    The grounds assert that the findings of the judge  in  relation  to
      the delay in initiating proceedings, the reason for that delay  (legal
      aid funding), the history and extent of  the  appellant's  involvement
      with the Local Authority dealing with M's care and placements and  her
      attempts to gain access to M are flawed. The grounds also assert  that
      various reports written by the Local Authority should  not  have  been
      relied on by the judge and that the judge  had  failed  to  take  into
      account a special guardianship report. In summary  the  grounds  argue
      that the bundle of documents before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge,
      amounting to 580 pages, illustrates that the appellant had a realistic
      prospect of the family court  making  a  decision  that  will  have  a
      material impact on the relationship between the appellant and M.

  10. At the hearing Mr Bazini handed up a  number  of  documents  from  the
      family court in Stoke on Trent. Mr Bazini was not  suggesting  that  I
      take these into consideration as they were not before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal judge. However, if I were to find a  material  error  of  law
      they might assist in determining the appropriate course of action.  Mr
      Bazini also asked me to note that the court had asked the appellant to
      file full details of her immigration status by 20 August 2015.




  11. Mr  Bazini  referred  me  to  the  case  of  Mohammed  (Family  Court)
      Proceedings - outcome) [2014] UKUT 419  (IAC).  His  submissions  were
      that the judge had penalised the appellant for a  delay  in  obtaining
      legal aid to und the family court proceedings which  were  beyond  her
      control. This was plainly a material error. The judge had not  applied
      the correct test when making the decision not to adjourn. As  set  out
      in the headnote in Mohammed the test is 'whether there is a  realistic
      prospect of the Family Court  making  a  decision  that  will  have  a
      material impact on the relationship between a  child  and  the  parent
      facing immigration measures...'. The question the  judge  should  have
      addressed was whether there was a realistic prospect that the decision
      will have a material impact not who was to blame  for  the  delay.  He
      submitted that the witness Ms O on the day of  the  hearing  indicated
      that the prospects were good. The judge failed to  take  into  account
      the special guardianship  report  confirming  that  the  plan  was  to
      introduce contact between M and the appellant.  The  judge  failed  to
      take into account the numerous emails after  the  order  was  made  in
      2011, failed to take into account the 30/40 trips to  social  workers,
      the assessments made and the constant contact  between  the  appellant
      and the Local Authority. Mr Bazini argued that the factors set out  by
      the judge in respect of the position from paragraph 32 in the decision
      relate to a consideration of article 8 these factors had nothing to do
      with the judge's  consideration  of  whether  there  was  a  realistic
      prospect in relation to the family court proceedings as the judge  had
      already refused the adjournment before considering  those  issues.  In
      any event Mr Bazini submitted that the analysis of the judge is flawed
      as even in 2012 it is evident that the  Local  Authority  were  saying
      that something might happen in the future and certainly  some  contact
      was being considered. Mr Bazini referred to p196 of the  bundle  where
      it is stated that there had been no decision  to  deny  the  appellant
      access to her niece but contact has to be carefully planned and at 197
      the report states that it is advisable that contact  be  gradual.  The
      summary concluded that the  appellant  is  currently  being  assessed.
      Further at p242 of the bundle the plan was  to  slowly  introduce  the
      appellant by providing photographs. In summary Mr Bazini's  submission
      was that the judge had not taken into account the assessments and  the
      plan for gradual contact to take place. The judge did not address  her
      mind to the correct legal test.


  12. Ms Pal submitted that at paragraph 43 the judge  referred  to  several
      decisions. The judge set out what the court should  consider  and  had
      proper regard to the family  court  and  had  regard  to  the  special
      guardianship report making reference to the findings in  that  report.
      The judge specifically notes that she was not referred to any specific
      positive findings in that report. The judge  considered  a  number  of
      letters from the Local Authority where their findings were that it was
      not in M's best interests to have contact. The appellant had not  seen
      the child since 2010. All these factors led the judge to form the view
      that the family court proceedings would not a have a  material  impact
      on the outcome of the appeal. Ms Pal submitted  that  as  things  have
      moved on since the appeal hearing it was always open to the  appellant
      to make a further fresh application  in  light  of  the  Family  Court
      Orders.




  13. I take Mr Bazini's point  that  the  judge  made  a  decision  on  the
      adjournment at the beginning of the hearing but I do  not  agree  that
      the only reason for refusing the adjournment was based on the delay in
      obtaining legal funding. The judge clearly indicated when refusing the
      adjournment that she had taken into account the  fact  that  the  care
      proceedings had concluded in April 2011, that that the  appellant  had
      not provided a valid reason as to why an application had not been made
      from April 2011 to  January  2015.  These  factors  are  pertinent  to
      whether there is a realistic prospect of the family court  proceedings
      having a material  effect  on  the  relationship  between  M  and  the
      appellant. It has to be remembered that the judge will have  read  all
      the papers prior to the hearing so will have been aware of the factors
      identified later in the decision when making the  decision  to  refuse
      the adjournment. In the instant case the relationship is also relevant
      - this is not a parent and child relationship. It is between  an  aunt
      and niece, a niece that had been in the care of  the  Local  Authority
      for nearly 4 years. In drawing attention to this  I  do  not  wish  to
      diminish the strength of feelings  that  the  appellant  has  for  her
      niece. However, it is a factor that weighs in the  assessment  of  how
      realistic the prospect of a material impact was to be evaluated.


  14. The judge referred at (paragraph 43) to the number of cases  including
      Mohammed and identified the correct test. The judge has  identified  a
      number of factors and made findings adverse to the likelihood  of  the
      family proceedings having a material impact on the appeal. I have  not
      set out all the relevant factors  but  have  identified  some  of  the
      salient ones namely:
         . The appellant accepted in evidence that she had not seen M since
           2010 (para 33)
         . The appellant told  the  judge  that  she  had  been  positively
           assessed in respect of M but the judge found  that  the  reports
           provided did not support that assertion (para 33)
         . On 4  February  2011  a  letter  sent  from  the  social  worker
           indicated  that  the  appellant  seemed  reluctant  to   provide
           information so an assessment could be completed to  see  whether
           the appellant could be a carer for M.(para 334)
         . An adoption report noted that extensive efforts have  been  made
           to gain information from the appellant...she has been  unwilling
           to provide even basic information.(para 36)
         . On the evidence before the judge she found  that  the  appellant
           was aware of the care proceedings in respect of M  and  provided
           insufficient  information  to  enable  the  Local  Authority  to
           evaluate her as a potential carer.(para 37)
         . In a report from Silvina Gioseffi in May  2012   it  was  stated
           that it was clarified to the appellant that there had  not  been
           any decision to deny  access  to  M  but  it  was  paramount  to
           consider M's needs whilst introducing a family member with  whom
           she had had no contact for a long period of her life (para39)
         . A special guardianship assessment  concluded  that  due  to  M's
           significant and complex emotional  needs  there  were  too  many
           known risks  for  a  placement  with  the  appellant  to  be  an
           option.(para 40)
         . The judge considered the large number  of  emails  submitted  in
           evidence which appeared to her to mainly to  be  concerned  with
           the practicalities of the assessment. She said that she was  not
           referred to any specific positive endorsement of  the  appellant
           within those emails (para 40)
         . A letter dated 12 March 2013  from  the  appellant's  solicitors
           setting out - the local authority have stated that consideration
           was given to contact taking place but they did not think contact
           was in M's best interests as you did not  appear  a  significant
           figure and by your own  admission  you  had  only  had  sporadic
           contact with M throughout her life. When M was shown a photo  of
           you she did not recognise you or your name (para 42)
         . The judge stated that she could find anything  on  the  evidence
           provided to support the appellant's assertion that she had  been
           assessed positively  and  that  her  immigration  status  was  a
           stumbling  block  to  her  application.  Although  the  evidence
           demonstrates  that  the  appellant  instructed   solicitors   in
           connection with a proposed application for contact the judge was
           not provided with a  satisfactory  explanation  as  to  why  the
           appellant did not make a formal application until January  2015.
           (para 44)


  15.  I have taken into consideration the submissions made by Mr Bazini and
      have considered the bundle of evidence that was before the  First-tier
      Tribunal judge. I accept that the appellant has been making efforts to
      make contact arrangements with M and  that  the  special  guardianship
      assessment relied on does indicate that contact was at that  stage  in
      contemplation. However this was in 2012 and there has not, at the time
      of the hearing (and still has  not  to  date),  been  any  contact.  I
      consider that the number of visits (30/40) purported to have been made
      to social workers is not  supported  by  the  evidence  and  has  been
      significantly overstated.  I consider that the judge clearly did  take
      all the evidence onto account and did address her mind to the  correct
      legal test.  It  is  clear  from  RS  (immigration  and  family  court
      proceedings) India [2012] UKUT 00218 (IAC) that the factors  that  the
      judge considered were relevant  to  an  assessment  of  the  realistic
      prospect of a material impact test. The headnote at 2 sets out:
         2. In assessing the above questions, the judge will normally want
         to consider: the degree of the claimant's previous interest in and
         contact with the child, the timing of contact proceedings and the
         commitment with which they have been progressed, when a decision is
         likely to be reached, what materials (if any) are already available
         or can be made available to identify pointers to where the child's
         welfare lies?


  16. These were factors that the judge noted  from  the  evidence.  It  was
      recorded that the appellant had had no contact with M since 2010, that
      the proceedings were initiated shortly before the  appeal,  there  had
      been considerable delay in initiating the proceedings,  the  appellant
      only had sporadic contact with M throughout her  life  and  the  Local
      Authority had placed M in long term foster care.


  17. Even if it is arguable that at the beginning of the hearing the  judge
      did not take  into  account  the  test  on  the  relevance  of  family
      proceedings before refusing the adjournment the error would  not  have
      been material. The judge did refer to the correct test and had in mind
      the prospects of the family court proceedings  in  making  a  material
      difference to the outcome of the appeal. The grounds with  regards  to
      the evidence are essentially a disagreement with the findings  of  the
      judge on the material issues.




  18. The refusal to adjourn the proceedings was not  a  material  error  of
      law.


Conclusion

  19. There was no error of law such that the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal should be set aside.



   Notice of Decision


   The appeal is dismissed. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 12 August 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw


















