
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39044/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23 May 2014                                |On 6 June 2014               |
|Extempore judgment                            |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                              MRs Sun Hee Kang

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Reid, Counsel, instructed by Kothala & Co
(Harrow Road)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is the appeal of Mrs Sun Hee Kang  against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal who dismissed her appeal against the refusal of the
    Secretary of State to grant her further leave to remain in the UK.

2.   The application that was  made  by  Mrs  Kang  is  slightly  confusing.
    According to form FLR(O) she wished to remain in the  UK  as  a  family
    member of her son but she does not meet the  required  Rules  for  that
    category because he is here as a Tier 4  Student.   She  had  initially
    been granted leave to enter by way of entry clearance as the parent  of
    a child at school  under  the  guardian  visa,  paragraph  56A  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  Unfortunately the covering  letter  that  was  sent
    with the application is not complete, only the first page is available.
     The Home Office do not appear to have a second  page  and  Mrs  Kang's
    present  solicitors  who  have  taken  over  from  the  solicitors  who
    submitted the application have been unable  to  obtain  the  file  from
    those solicitors.

3.   The Secretary of State took a decision  to  refuse  to  vary  leave  to
    remain on the grounds  that  she  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM under the parent route nor did she meet paragraph 276ADE of
    the Rules.  Consideration was not given to paragraph 56A of the  Rules.
    One of the arguments that was put to me was that that should have  been
    considered by the Secretary of State and that therefore the decision by
    the Secretary of State was unlawful  for  not  having  dealt  with  the
    application before her.  I cannot accept that.  The front page  of  the
    covering letter refers to Mrs Kang initially [my  emphasis]  coming  to
    the UK, which implies that she was attempting to change her status. But
    her grounds of appeal against that decision do make it very clear  that
    she was intending to remain in the UK as the parent of a child in full-
    time education.  She refers to not making her permanent  home  here  in
    the UK; she refers to her son having a Tier 4 Student permit  and  that
    she submitted the various documents that are required in order to  meet
    the requirements of paragraph 56A.  So far as the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal is concerned the judge only considered  the  requirements
    of Appendix FM for a decision under  the  parent  route  and  paragraph
    276ADE of the Rules.

4.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not consider the grounds  of  appeal.
    In fact, in paragraph 7 of her determination she says:

         "The appellant does not present any grounds which suggest that  she
         meets the requirements of the Immigration Rules because she  wishes
         to remain in the UK whilst her son studies here but  he  is  not  a
         British citizen.  In effect the appellant has chosen for her son to
         attend a junior school in the UK and wants leave to care for him."

5.   The judge then goes on to look at Article 8.  She fails  completely  to
    engage with the grounds of appeal.  On that basis I am  satisfied  that
    there is an error of law in the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that the determination is to be set aside to be remade.

6.   I heard submissions from both parties as to whether I should  hear  the
    appeal or whether it should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for
    determination.  Although some documents were before me the Secretary of
    State had in her Rule 24 response said that she  did  not  accept  that
    adequate documentation had been submitted.  Ms Everett said that it was
    not clear whether, when that Section 24 response  was  drafted  whether
    the documentation was present.  Ms Reid is not clear what documentation
    is before the Tribunal.

7.   I am also concerned that the significant substantive grounds of  appeal
    have not been considered in any way by the First-tier Tribunal and  for
    that reason I am satisfied that no relevant findings of fact have  been
    made  and  therefore  in  accordance  with  the  President's   Practice
    Direction this matter should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for
    a full hearing on the facts with no findings retained, to be  heard  by
    any First-tier Judge other than Ms Mensah.

          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision and  remit  the  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for hearing afresh, no findings to be preserved.





Signed                                  Date 5th June 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker

