
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39075/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 24th June 2015                    |On 15th July 2015                    |


                                   Before

                    deputy upper tribunal JUDGE d. KELLY


                                   Between

                            MR SIMON OMOKE OGUDU
                           (anonymity not ordered)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Dr E Mynott, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr M Dwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who was born on the 25th December
    1984. He  has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal,  upon  a  renewed
    application, against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Saffer
    to  dismiss  his  appeal  against  the  Respondent's  refusal  of   his
    application for further leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  as  the
    spouse of a British citizen.

 2. In order to understand the arguments that were put to me by Dr Mynott -
    arguments that have little if anything  to  do  with  those  that  were
    raised before Judge Saffer or those for which permission to  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal has been granted - it will be necessary to trace the
    history of these proceedings back to a decision of  the  Tribunal  that
    pre-dates that which is the subject of this appeal.

 3. The subject of the present proceedings is an application that was  made
    by the appellant as long ago as the 6th December 2011. That application
    was for leave to remain as the spouse of a person who is settled in the
    United Kingdom. It was originally refused, on the 12th  June  2012,  on
    grounds that the appellant have failed (i) to show  that  the  marriage
    was  subsisting,  and  (ii)  to  provide  an  English   language   test
    certificate in the form prescribed by the Immigration Rules. The appeal
    against that decision came  before  Judge  Wright,  sitting  at  Hatton
    Cross, on the 5th October 2012. In a decision promulgated on  the  24th
    October 2014, Judge Wright allowed the appeal against the  respondent's
    decision because, contrary to the law as it stood  at  that  time,  the
    Notice of Immigration Decision combined a decision  to  refuse  further
    leave to remain with a decision to remove the appellant from the United
    Kingdom. The Tribunal observed that in  those  circumstances  a  lawful
    decision remained "outstanding" and that this  would  now  need  to  be
    taken "in the light of this  determination  and  the  information  then
    available to her (including with reference  to  Mr  Gabbitas'  previous
    advice of 17/2/2012) and in light of any new information then to  hand,
    such as any original English language test certificate in speaking  and
    listening from an approved English language test  provider  and/or  any
    further 'marriage subsisting' evidence submitted by  the  appellant  in
    the meantime, and the effect of the appellant's marriage to  a  British
    citizen" [paragraph 20].

 4. The reference to the advice of a 'Mr Gabbitas' was  to  that  contained
    within a Home Office internal memorandum that had somehow entered  into
    the public  domain.  It  recommended  that  the  appellant  be  granted
    discretionary  leave  to  remain  (outside   the   Immigration   Rules)
    notwithstanding the fact that  he  had  failed  to  submit  an  English
    language test certificate.

 5. The respondent reconsidered and again refused the  application  on  the
    17th September 2014. It is this decision that is  the  subject  of  the
    instant  appeal.  By  this  stage,  and  by  virtue   of   transitional
    provisions, the application now fell to be considered under both  under
    Part 8 the 'old Rules' and Appendix FM of 'new  Rules'  that  had  been
    introduced on the 9th July 2012. It was refused on the same grounds  as
    before (see paragraph 3, above). On this occasion, the Respondent  also
    considered whether the appellant qualified for  a  grant  of  leave  to
    remain under the private and family life provisions of the Rules as set
    out in paragraph  276ADE  and  Section  Ex.1  of  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules. So far as the former was concerned,  the  respondent
    concluded that the  length  of  appellant's  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom and his continued ties to Nigeria disqualified him from a grant
    of leave to remain on private life grounds. So far as the  family  life
    was concerned, the respondent concluded that the appellant did not meet
    the eligibility criteria for consideration on  this  ground  under  the
    Rules. Having concluded that there were no  'compelling  circumstances'
    to merit consideration for a grant of  discretionary  leave  to  remain
    outside the Rules, the respondent decided to refuse the application.

 6. In the course of making his findings, Judge Saffer stated that  he  was
    satisfied that the appellant's marriage was genuine and  subsisting,  a
    finding  which  the  respondent  has  not  sought  to   challenge.   He
    nevertheless  concluded   that   there   were   not   any   "compelling
    circumstances" such as to warrant a grant  of  discretionary  leave  to
    remain (outside the Rules)  by  reason  of  the  appellant's  continued
    failure  to  submit  an  English   language   test   certificate.   The
    circumstances upon which the appellant had relied  in  support  of  his
    claim to be exempted from this requirement was his inability to sit  an
    English language test without the return of his passport, which he  had
    of course lodged with the respondent at the time when he had  submitted
    his application.

 7. The original grounds of application for permission  to  appeal  against
    Judge Saffer's decision are accurately summarised by the Judge  (Monica
    J. Pirotta) who refused it:

         "The grounds of the Application asserted that the  Judge  committed
         errors of law because he  had  misunderstood  or  not  applied  the
         policy of exceptional circumstances, and failed  to  consider  that
         the Appellant could not submit his passport because  the  Secretary
         of  State  had  it  in  the  application  and  could  not  make  an
         application to the Nigerian High  Commission  for  a  new  passport
         because they required the expired passport to be returned  to  them
         first.

         He argued that the IJ had not taken into account the impact on  the
         Appellant of the decision, failed to pay regard to the attempts  by
         the Appellant to obtain the  English  language  qualification,  and
         unjustly ignored the obstacles forced in the  Appellant's  way.  He
         further argued that the requirement for  the  language  certificate
         was not in accordance with the law, that the IJ had misapplied  the
         Appendix FM and Ex.1 as the appellant had a relationship  with  his
         partner."

 8. In refusing permission to appeal  on the above grounds,  Judge  Pirotta
    said this:

         "The Determination shows that the IJ took an accurate and  adequate
         note of the factual basis of the application showing the  Appellant
         had to provide, with his application, evidence of a  language  test
         which met the criteria and had failed to  do  that.  The  Appellant
         could have withdrawn the application or  obtained  the  certificate
         before making the  application,  but  chose  instead  to  go  ahead
         without one of the mandatory documents required for this  class  of
         application. The responsibility for that course of action  is  that
         of the Appellant and nobody else. The Appellant did  not  meet  the
         criteria under Appendix FM, there were no grounds  to  engage  EX1.
         There were no insurmountable obstacles to returning to  Nigeria  to
         take the relevant test and making an application to return from out
         of country.  The  interference  with  his  private  life  would  be
         temporary, limited and necessary to respect the Immigration  Rules,
         proportionate to his  circumstances,  and  a  legitimate  aim.  The
         remedy lay in the Appellant's hands."

 9. The appellant renewed his application to  the  Upper  Tribunal.  Deputy
    Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman granted permission in the following terms:

         "It is arguable that the Judge  erred  materially  in  law  (i)  in
         failing to consider whether the appeal could succeed via the EX1(a)
         route, given his findings of fact and given that the Appellant made
         an in time application to vary his leave and was  not  required  by
         this route to  fulfil  the  English  language  requirement.  It  is
         further arguable that the Judge erred in  his  application  of  the
         principle set out in Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40  i.e.  whether
         there was "good reason" per Lord Brown at 42, for the Appellant  to
         return to Nigeria to apply for  entry  clearance,  but  rather  put
         forward reasons as to why it would  not  be  unreasonable  for  the
         Appellant to return to Nigeria to obtain entry clearance."

10. Dr Mynott nevertheless presented  the  appeal  in  a  manner  that  was
    unencumbered by the terms  in  which  permission  to  appeal  had  been
    granted by Deputy Judge Chapman. He did not therefore address the legal
    issues that they raise, and it is thus necessary for me to do so before
    I turn to consider his submissions.

11. The flaw in the first argument that was raised by Deputy Judge  Chapman
    lies in its assumption that Section Ex. 1 provides a separate and free-
    standing route to settlement under the Immigration Rules. It does  not.
    Whilst it is true that many of the eligibility requirements  for  leave
    to remain as a 'partner' are made subject to the application of Section
    Ex.1, this is not the case  with  regard  to  the  requirement  for  an
    English language test certificate under Section E-LTRP.4.  In the  case
    of the requirement to submit  an  English  language  test  certificate,
    there is a general exemption where "there are exceptional circumstances
    which prevent the applicant from being able to meet  the  requirement".
    The appellant did not however meet  this  test  in  the  instant  case,
    however, for reasons that are touched upon in  the  decision  of  Judge
    Saffer and which are more fully explained  in  the  reasons  that  were
    given by Judge Pirotta in refusing permission to appeal.  However,  had
    the  appellant  met  the  "exceptional  circumstances"  test  for  non-
    production of an English  language  test  certificate,  it  would  have
    followed from Judge Saffer's unchallenged finding that the  appellant's
    marriage was subsisting that  the  appeal  fell  to  be  allowed  under
    Section E-LTRP itself, without any need to  consider  Section  EX.1  of
    Appendix FM at all.

12. So far as the  second  argument  raised  by  Deputy  Judge  Chapman  is
    concerned, this is based upon a common misconception of  the  rationale
    in Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40.  That  rationale  applies  only  to
    cases where the sole reason for refusal of  an  in-country  application
    for leave to remain is because  the  Rules  require  the  applicant  to
    submit his application from abroad. In such cases it will be  necessary
    for the respondent to show that there is 'good reason'  to  expect  the
    appellant  to  fulfil  this  requirement  if  it  is  not  to  be  held
    disproportionate for Article 8 purposes. In this case, however, it  was
    not a requirement of the Rules that the appellant should in  the  first
    instance seek entry clearance from abroad  if  he  wished  to  continue
    family life in the United Kingdom. On the contrary, the possibility  of
    the  appellant  having  to  make  such  an  application  was  a  direct
    consequence of his failure to meet all the substantive requirements for
    leave to remain and, thus, his  putative  removal.   The  rationale  in
    Chikwamba did not therefore have any application to the facts  of  this
    case.

13. For the above reasons, I am satisfied that Judge Pirotta  was  entirely
    right to refuse permission to appeal and that Deputy Judge Chapman  was
    equally wrong to grant it.

14. I therefore turn, finally, to the arguments of Dr  Mynott.  As  I  have
    previously observed, whatever  merit  these  arguments  may  have,  the
    appellant has not been granted permission to advance them. I  therefore
    consider them only for the sake of completeness.

15. The first argument is that the Secretary of State acted  unlawfully  in
    failing to have regard  to  the  advice  that  she  received  from  her
    caseworker concerning the grant of  discretionary  leave  (outside  the
    Rules) [see paragraphs 3 and 4  above].  This  argument  did  not  even
    feature in the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  and  there
    does not appear to have been there any application before Judge  Saffer
    to amend the grounds so as to include it. It is therefore difficult  to
    see how Judge Saffer can be said to have erred in failing  to  consider
    it. So far as the detail  of  the  argument  is  concerned,  Dr  Mynott
    submitted that the Secretary of State had completely ignored the  basis
    upon which the appellant's first  appeal  had  been  allowed  by  Judge
    Wright. That submission is  however  based  upon  a  less-than-accurate
    representation of the reason that Judge Wright gave  for  allowing  the
    appeal which, it will be recalled,  had  been  based  upon  the  rather
    technical legal position at that  time  concerning  the  lawfulness  of
    combining a decision not to grant leave to remain with  a  decision  to
    remove the applicant from the United Kingdom.  It  follows  that  Judge
    Wright's observations concerning the circumstances that  the  Secretary
    of State might wish to consider when making  her  "outstanding"  lawful
    decision were essentially obiter dicta, and thus  not  legally  binding
    upon her.

16. The second argument is that in considering "exceptional  circumstances"
    Judge Saffer erred by failing to apply the Secretary of State's  policy
    guidance concerning leave to  remain  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.
    However, the Tribunal  did  not  have  the  necessary  jurisdiction  to
    substitute its own exercise of a  discretion  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules for that of the Secretary of State  (see  Section  85(6)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  as  it  then  stood).
    Moreover, the appropriate test for exemption from  the  requirement  to
    submit an appropriate English Language test certificate is to be  found
    within the Rules themselves [see paragraph 11,  above].  The  appellant
    did not meet that test for the reasons that were explained in detail by
    Judge Pirotta (above) but which may be summarised by  saying  that  the
    only reason that the appellant found himself having to  rely  upon  the
    exemption was his own failure to obtain an appropriate English language
    test certificate before (rather than after) he submitted  his  passport
    with his application for further leave to remain. The Common  Law  duty
    to act fairly towards an applicant is  engaged  only  in  circumstances
    which arise after he has submitted his application and which are beyond
    his control. Neither of these things could be said to have  appertained
    in the appellant's case. Indeed, it would be strange  if  an  applicant
    were able to rely upon the way in which he has chosen  to  arrange  his
    affairs as  a  reason  for  avoiding  the  legitimate  requirements  of
    immigration control. The appellant's claim to have belatedly passed the
    relevant English language test is thus irrelevant to the issue  of  the
    legal soundness of Judge Saffer's  decision,  and  his  application  to
    admit his recently-acquired certificate is therefore refused.

17. I am therefore satisfied that Dr Mnynott's  arguments  could  not  have
    availed the appellant even if he had been granted permission to advance
    them.

Notice of decision

18. The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity is not ordered



Signed   Date

Judge D Kelly
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

