
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39884/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd May 2015                             |On 9th June 2015              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI

                                   Between

                       Immigration Officer - heathrow
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                Arati Kothari
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Otchie, Counsel instructed by Shri
Venkateshwara Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Respondent, Ms Kothari, is a citizen of India whose date  of  birth
    is recorded as 10th March 1956.  On 17th October 2014 she arrived  with
    a visa permitting entry to the United Kingdom at Terminal  3,  Heathrow
    Airport but in the view of the Immigration Officer  there  had  been  a
    change of circumstances. The visa was cancelled.

 2. Ms Kothari appealed and on 2nd January 2015 her  appeal  was  heard  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Woolf sitting at  Hatton  Cross.   The
    relevant  paragraph  of  the  Immigration  Rules  relied  upon  by  the
    Immigration Officer was 321A.  The relevant part provides as follows:

         "Grounds on which leave to enter or remain which is in force is  to
         be cancelled at port or while the  holder  is  outside  the  United
         Kingdom

         321A.    The following grounds for the cancellation of  a  person's
                leave to enter or remain which is in force on [her]  arrival
                in, or whilst [she] is outside, the United Kingdom apply;

                (1)    there has been such a change in the circumstances  of
                    that person's case since the leave was  given,  that  it
                    should be cancelled."

 3. Quite properly the judge recognised that the burden of proof  was  upon
    the  Secretary  of  State.   The  judge  came  to  the  view  that  the
    Immigration Officer had failed to discharge  that  burden.   The  judge
    noted that the evidence was limited; that there was no interview record
    to examine; no Visa Application Form; and no evidence of what enquiries
    were made of the Entry Clearance Officer by the Immigration Officer.

 4. Not content with that decision, by Notice dated 5th February  2015  the
    Immigration Officer made application for permission to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  The  grounds  set  out  the  history  relating  to  Ms
    Kothari.  There had been a number of visits starting  from  July  2011.
    She had on occasions stayed longer than she had said that she would but
    on no occasion had she overstayed the six month period permitted by the
    visa.  It is right to observe, however, that there were times when  she
    went back to her home country only to  return  to  the  United  Kingdom
    after a short period, indeed measured in weeks.  In  the  circumstances
    the Immigration Officer complains in the grounds that Ms Kothari was in
    breach of the Immigration Rules and makes  reference  to  Rule  41(ii).
    That is a provision which requires an applicant to evince an "intention
    to leave the United Kingdom at the end of the period of  the  visit  as
    stated by him [or her] and does not intend to live for extended periods
    in the United Kingdom through frequent or successive visits".

 5. We observe permission having been granted by Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Hollingworth on 18th March 2015,  that  the  Immigration  Rule
    referred to in the grounds does not appear to  have  been  specifically
    referred to in the First-tier Tribunal but rather 321A.  Be that as  it
    may, Mr Tufan was somewhat  embarrassed  when  he  appeared  before  us
    because he had a bundle of documents which might have been  capable  of
    establishing for the Immigration Officer that which was contended  for.
    However it is perfectly clear from the notes of  the  judge  that  that
    bundle of documents was not before the judge, and we so find.

 6. Insofar as the Immigration Officer now complains, it is of note that so
    far as Mr  Tufan  could  discern,  that  bundle  was  in  fact  in  the
    Presenting Officer's bundle at the time of the hearing so that if there
    were any cause for complaint  from  the  Immigration  Officer  then  it
    should be directed towards the Presenting Officer and  not  the  judge.
    The judge cannot  be  criticised  for  failing  to  take  into  account
    evidence that was not placed before her; all the more so when it  would
    seem that the matter of the evidence was raised at the hearing with  an
    entry appearing in the judge's notes, yet  still  the  bundle  was  not
    placed before the judge.  In the circumstances in relation  to  grounds
    referring to rule 321A we find no error.

 7. We should record the fact that Mr Tufan  did  make  application  to  us
    pursuant to rule 15(2A) of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008, to admit the bundle but given the late application, with no
    sufficient explanation why the bundle was not placed before the  Judge,
    we refused.

 8. However we should say that given the guidance in the case of Sawmynaden
    (Family visitors - considerations) [2012] UKUT 00161  had  we  admitted
    the bundle we may very well have come to the  view  that  the  eventual
    decision made by the judge was one that was open to her.  As it was  we
    need not trouble ourselves with that particular point.

 9. We invited the representatives at the conclusion of  our  statement  of
    reasons to add any observations which they had.  Neither representative
    wished to add to what we have  concluded.   In  the  circumstances  the
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed and the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal is affirmed.

Notice of Decision
The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker


