
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39606/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Sheldon Court, Birmingham            |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14 July 2014                               |On 4 August 2014             |


                                   Before

                DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ROBERTSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And
                               SHAROON FATIMA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:         Mr D Mills, Counsel, instructed by the
                    Respondent.
For the Respondent:        Mr T Mahmood, Counsel, instructed by Syeds,
Solicitors.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Immigration History

 1. The Appellant in this appeal  was  the  Respondent  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing. However, for ease  of  reference  the  Appellant  and
    Respondent are hereafter referred to as they were before the First-tier
    Tribunal.  Mrs Fatima will therefore be referred to  as  the  Appellant
    and the Secretary of State will be referred to as the Respondent.


 2. The Appellant is a female citizen of Pakistan, whose date of birth is 1
    January 1948. As to the background to the case, the  Appellant  entered
    the UK as a visitor on 31 March 2007 with a multivisit visa valid until
    14 March 2009. She  applied  for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  18
    September 2008, which was refused on 3 March  2009,  with  a  right  of
    appeal. She appealed and her appeal was dismissed on 30 April 2009. She
    applied for a High Court Review, which was refused on 8  May  2009  and
    she was notified of her liability to removal.


 3. She applied for leave to remain on 26 June 2013 on  the  basis  of  her
    family and private life in the UK; it was submitted that  her  age  and
    'significant health issues' would make it unreasonable to expect her to
    leave the UK. Her appeal against the  decision  of  the  Respondent  to
    refuse her application for further leave to remain (FLR)  and,  at  the
    same  time,  issue  a  decision  to  remove  her  under  s  47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 was allowed by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hubble under paragraph 276ADE, the reasons for which are
    contained within his determination  promulgated  on  1  May  2013.   In
    summary, the Judge believed the evidence of the  Appellant  as  to  her
    circumstances in Pakistan and allowed her appeal under paragraph 276ADE
    on the basis that she had "...no ties (including  social,  cultural  or
    family) with Pakistan..."


 4. The Respondent appealed against this decision on  the  basis  that  the
    Judge erred:


        a. By failing to resolve issues and a conflict  of  evidence  which
           cast real doubt  on  the  Appellant's  credibility  because  the
           Appellant stated that she had four children who were in  the  UK
           but it could be seen from the previous  determination  that  she
           had six children. She told the Tribunal that one child had  died
           and she did not know where the other child was but there was  an
           affidavit from her brother  saying  that  her  daughter  was  in
           Pakistan;


        b. By failing to follow  Home  Office  guidance  in  assessing  the
           Appellant's ties to Pakistan. In particular, he failed  to  take
           into account  the  fact  that  the  Appellant   spent  the  vast
           majority of her life in Pakistan, that she had  had  significant
           exposure to the cultural norms of  Pakistan  during  that  time,
           that she had a daughter and a brother there and that  she  spoke
           the language; and


        c. By failing to  consider  the  Appellant's  alleged  illness  and
           dependency under the dependent relative requirements of Appendix
           FM; and this is a material error because she would not have  met
           the 'threshold criteria' at E-ECDR.2.4 and E-ECDR.2.5.

 5. In granting permission, Judge Lewis stated that  the  Judge  had  taken
    into account the Appellant's circumstances in Pakistan and  found  that
    although she retained cultural ties, she had no family or  social  ties
    but that the difficulty with this was that there was a conflict in  the
    evidence as to lack of family there. Judge Lewis states that  a  number
    of references are made in the determination as to  a  daughter  of  the
    Appellant with  the  Appellant  stating  that  she  did  not  know  her
    whereabouts but her brother, who resides in Pakistan,  stating  in  his
    affidavit that that she is in Pakistan. Judge Lewis further states that
    the although the Judge stated that he finds the  Appellant's  evidence,
    on balance honest and truthful [71], and that  there  was  no  evidence
    before him that the Appellant's daughter, who lived with  her  in-laws,
    could offer her accommodation [80], there was  a clear conflict between
    the Appellant's evidence and that of her brother as to the  whereabouts
    of her daughter and, in accepting the core of the Appellant's  evidence
    at  [71]  the  Judge  does  not  address  this  conflict.  Judge  Lewis
    concludes, 'This, I find, is an arguable error of law. It relates to  a
    significant evidential  issue,  which  feeds  into  the  finding  under
    paragraph 276ADE.'


 6. In relation to the application under Appendix FM, Judge Lewis concludes
    that if the Judge's findings are sound under paragraph  276ADE,  it  is
    not an error for him not to have gone on to consider the  appeal  under
    Appendix FM. However, if they are not sound, it is an error on his part
    not to consider the appeal under Appendix FM.

 7. A Rule 24 response was not submitted but Mr  Mahmood  stated  that  the
    appeal was opposed.



Submissions on behalf of the Respondent


 8. Mr Mills submitted that he relied on the  grounds  of  application  and
    made the following additional points:


        a. The Appellant had spent nearly 60 years of her life in Pakistan,
           she had family there and the conclusion that she had no ties  to
           Pakistan was perverse; the Judge had not taken into account  the
           material before him. Despite referring expressly  to  Devaseelan
           in the determination on a number of occasions,  he  had  had  no
           regard to the conclusions set out in the previous determination.
           The Appellant had practised deception to enter the  UK  and  the
           Judge  on  the  previous  occasion  had  stated  that  she   had
           deliberately made false representations in the past on her entry
           clearance applications. In this  context,  the  Judge  does  not
           state why he found the Appellant to be  truthful.  A  number  of
           witnesses are referred to within the determination but none gave
           oral evidence or were cross-examined.  The  Judge  had  evidence
           before him that this family had subjected a daughter to a forced
           marriage and she had been taken into care and a higher court had
           decided that a crime had been committed against  her.  Mr  Mills
           asked the question, 'How is it that  this  aspect  of  the  case
           played  no  part  in  the  credibility  assessment?'  Mr   Mills
           submitted that the Judge had stated he believed what he had been
           told, that he accepted that her circumstances had changed but it
           was not enough to say that he accepted  that  her  circumstances
           had changed without saying why he thought that she was no longer
           being deceitful.


        b. The Judge stated that there was no evidence before him that  the
           daughter in Pakistan could offer the Appellant accommodation but
           this appears to reverse the burden of proof. It is not enough to
           make an assumption from the absence of evidence;  the  Appellant
           has  to  establish  that   her   daughter   cannot   offer   her
           accommodation.


        c. The Judge had quoted from  Ogundimu  (Article  8  -  new  rules)
           Nigeria [2013] UKUT 00060 (IAC) at [88] but he had only referred
           to that part of the determination which appeared to support  his
           conclusion. It was further provided in Ogundimu:


                   "124. We recognise that the text under the rules  is  an
                   exacting one. Consideration of whether a person has  'no
                   ties' to such country must involve a rounded  assessment
                   of all the relevant  circumstances  and  is  not  to  be
                   limited to 'social, cultural and family'  circumstances.
                   Nevertheless, we are satisfied that the appellant has no
                   ties with Nigeria. He is a stranger to the country,  the
                   people, and the way of life.  His father may  have  ties
                   but they are not ties of the appellant or any ties  that
                   could result in support to the appellant in the event of
                   his return there. Unsurprisingly, given  the  length  of
                   the appellant's residence here, all of his ties are with
                   the United Kingdom. Consequently the  appellant  has  so
                   little connection with Nigeria so as to  mean  that  the
                   consequences for him in establishing private life  there
                   at the age of 28, after 22 years residence in the United
                   Kingdom, would be 'unjustifiably harsh'.

                  "125.  Whilst  each  case  turns   on   its   own   facts,
                  circumstances relevant to  the  assessment  of  whether  a
                  person has ties to the country to which they would have to
                  go if they were required to leave the United Kingdom  must
                  include, but are not limited to:  the  length  of  time  a
                  person has spent in the country to which he would have  to
                  go if he were required to leave the  United  Kingdom,  the
                  age that the person left that country, the  exposure  that
                  person has had to the  cultural  norms  of  that  country,
                  whether that person speaks the language  of  the  country,
                  the extent of the  family and friends that person  has  in
                  the country to which he is being deported or  removed  and
                  the quality of the  relationships  that  person  has  with
                  those friends and family members. "


        d. He submitted that the threshold under the Immigration Rules  was
           high; as stated in Ogundimu, the "text under  the  Rules  is  an
           exacting one". There has to be a rounded  assessment  and  there
           was no rounded assessment  by  the  Judge.  He  found  that  the
           Appellant did not have relatives  in  Pakistan  but  she  had  a
           daughter there.  Added to this, she had cultural ties there; she
           had lived there for nearly 60 years and Ogundimu provided for an
           assessment based on length of residence there, age when she left
           the country, which was nearly 60, the language  she  spoke  (she
           had  no  language  difficulties)  and   the   quality   of   her
           relationships with family and friends there.


        e. Mr  Mills  submitted  that  the  Judge  had  accepted  that  the
           Appellant was credible without considering the findings on  this
           point under Devaseelan and he did not consider  her  ties  in  a
           rounded assessment and had thereby  erred  in  law.  He  further
           submitted that if I found that there was  a  material  error  of
           law, it should be remitted to the FtT for a re-hearing.




    Submissions on behalf of the Appellant


 9. Mr Mahmood submitted that there was no material error  of  law  in  the
    determination of the Judge; he had  considered  all  the  evidence  and
    reached his conclusions. He  accepted  that  the  Appellant  still  had
    cultural ties and made his assessment as to social and family  ties  on
    the evidence before him. When asked what the Appellant's  response  was
    to the evidence contained in the affidavit of her  brother  as  to  her
    daughter in Pakistan, Mr Mahmood stated that it was not recorded in the
    determination; in the previous determination the Appellant stated  that
    she did not know where her daughter was.


10. He submitted that the Judge had found the Appellant to be  'honest  and
    truthful' and had properly considered the evidence before him.  He  was
    not able to say, however, how or where in the determination  the  Judge
    had given reasons for his finding that the  Appellant  was  honest  and
    truthful in the context of the adverse  credibility  findings  made  by
    Judge James in 2009.


11. However, Mr Mahmood submitted that the Judge  had  been  aware  of  the
    determination of Judge James, and had  referred  to  it  and  given  it
    consideration and had not materially erred in law. As  he  had  allowed
    the appeal under paragraph  276ADE,  there  was  no  need  for  him  to
    consider the appeal under Article 8 and Appendix FM.


12. Following submissions, I confirmed  that  in  my  view  the  Judge  had
    materially erred in law in failing to engage with the  evidence  before
    him and in failing to provide adequate reasons  for  his  findings  and
    that a copy of my written determination with full reasons would be sent
    out. I asked the parties for their views on the resumed hearing.


13. Mr Mills submitted, and Mr Mahmood accepted, that given  the  scale  of
    the findings of fact that would need to be made, the matter  should  be
    remitted for rehearing to the First-Tier Tribunal. Mr Mahmood submitted
    that the four witnesses who had attended  the  hearing,  had  not  been
    called on to give evidence due to 'the way in which the  hearing  went'
    but that they would want to give evidence and  a  time  estimate  of  3
    hours was necessary.



Decision and reasons


14. As provided in Slimani (Content of Adjudicator's Determination) Algeria
    * [2001] UKAIT 00009, in the determination the Judge need only tell the
    losing party why he has lost and enable him to identify  whether  there
    has been any appealable error; he need not deal with every issue  (para
    7). There is a focus, in Slimani, on the adequacy of the reasons  given
    by the decision-maker, as to which it is stated:


         "In  Save  Britain's  Heritage  v  Secretary  of  State  for   the
         Environment [1991] 1 WLR 153, Lord Bridge said this:-

             "The three criteria suggested in the dictum of Megaw J  [in  Re
             Poyser & Mills Arbitration] are that  the  reasons  should  be
             proper, intelligible and adequate.  If the reasons  given  are
             improper they will reveal some  flaw  in  the  decision-making
             process which will be open to challenge on some  ground  other
             than the failure to give reasons.  If the  reasons  given  are
             unintelligible, this will be equivalent to giving  no  reasons
             at all.  The difficulty  arises  in  determining  whether  the
             reasons  given  are  adequate,  whether  they  deal  with  the
             substantial points that have been raised or enable the  reader
             to know what conclusion the decision-maker has reached on  the
             principal controversial issues.  What degree of  particularity
             is required?  I do not  think  one  can  safely  say  more  in
             general terms than that the degree of  particularity  required
             will depend entirely on the nature of the issues  falling  for
             decision."

15. In reaching my decision, I also bear in mind the guidance in R(Iran)  v
    SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982, at paragraphs 13 to 15, which  confirms  that
    "...unjustified complaints  by  practitioners  that  are  based  on  an
    alleged failure to give reasons, or adequate reasons are seen  far  too
    often..." The Court of Appeal in R (Iran) then set out the  factors  to
    be considered in deciding if a Judge has given sufficient  reasons  for
    his decision. In summary, if  the  reasons  for  the  decision  can  be
    understood from the determination, the Judge will have  given  adequate
    reasons, the questions being  whether  the  Judge  has  identified  the
    issues, resolution of which are vital to the case; and whether  he  has
    set out how he has resolved them.


16. Although the threshold for a finding of perversity is high, and  in  my
    view in this  case  is  not  crossed,  I  find  that  the  Judge  erred
    materially in the following ways:


        a. He had before him  the  determination  of  Judge  James  as  the
           starting point for his  deliberations,  which  he  acknowledged.
           However, in the determination of Judge James contradictions  and
           inconsistencies in the evidence given by the Appellant  and  the
           witnesses were noted (at paragraphs 28, 36, 41, 46 - 47, 53, 69)
           and he made firm credibility findings at paragraphs 73  and  76.
           He also found  that  the  Appellant  had  her  own  property  in
           Pakistan (at paragraphs 52 and 54). In the context of the  clear
           adverse credibility findings being the  starting  point  of  the
           Judge's determination, he has not given any reasons for his  own
           finding that the Appellant was 'honest  and  credible'.  In  the
           face of the previous  adverse  credibility  findings,  when  the
           previous Judge had found that the Appellant  and  her  witnesses
           had 'shaped' the evidence to support the appeal and had 'omitted
           information which does not support  the  appeal'  (at  paragraph
           73), it is necessary for the Judge to give reasons as to why  he
           believes that she is now telling the truth, that the Appellant's
           daughter in Pakistan was unable to offer her accommodation  when
           no evidence had been provided on this issue  and,  indeed,  what
           had happened to the Appellant's own home which she was  said  to
           have owned in the 2009 determination. It is for the Appellant to
           prove as the burden of proof is on her. I find  that  the  Judge
           failed to engage with the evidence before him in the context  of
           the findings made in the previous  determination.  I  find  that
           these are material errors of law which impacted directly on  his
           findings of fact and therefore undermined  the  conclusions  for
           the purposes of paragraph 276ADE. This  is  a  fundamental  flaw
           such that his determination must be set aside.


        b. As the findings under paragraph 275ADE  are  unsustainable,  the
           Judge erred in failing to consider the  Appellant's  application
           under Appendix FM.




17. The determination of Judge Hubble contains material errors  of  law  as
    set out above and his determination is set aside. No findings  of  fact
    are preserved. In assessing whether the matter should  be  remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal pursuant to Practice Statement 4.2 (a)  of  the
    Practice Statements for the Immigration  and  Asylum  Chambers  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal  and  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued  by  the  Senior
    President of Tribunal on 10 February 2010,  taking  into  account  that
    witnesses attended the hearing and did not have the opportunity to give
    evidence, and given the nature and extent of the findings of fact  that
    are required, the matter is remitted to the First-tier tribunal  for  a
    de novo hearing. The following directions apply:


        a. The Appellant's and Respondent's bundles before  the  First-tier
           Tribunal hearing shall stand as the evidence  of  the  Appellant
           and Respondent respectively;
        b. The  Appellant  and  the  Respondent  shall  file  and  serve  a
           paginated bundle of all additional evidence to be relied  on  at
           the rehearing within 7 working  days  before  the  date  of  the
           hearing;
        c. The matter is to be listed with a time estimate of 3 hours; and
        d. A Mirpuri interpreter will be required. If this is not  correct,
           and the language spoken by the Appellant  is  not  Mirpuri,  the
           Appellant must contact the First-tier Tribunal and  confirm  the
           language and dialect required of interpreters  for  herself  and
           any witnesses.

18. It appears that at  no  stage  in  the  proceedings  has  an  anonymity
    direction been made. No request has been made for  an  anonymity  order
    and pursuant to Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008, I find no reason to make a direction as to anonymity.









    Signed                                  Date


     M Robertson
    Sitting as Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal






