

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/39738/2014
                                                               IA/39744/2014
                                                               IA/39745/2014
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre    |              Decision and Reasons    |
|                                         |Promulgated                           |
|On 8 December 2015                       |              On 20 January 2016      |
|                                         |                                      |

                                   Before


                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        munir noormohamed jokhia (1)
                           anita munir jokhia (2)
                           arshad munir jokhia (3)
                          (no anonymity order MADE)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R O'Ryan instructed by Duhra Solicitors,


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant Secretary of  State  appeals  against  the  decision  and
    reasons  statement  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   Bell   that   was
    promulgated on 19 January 2015.

 2. The respondents are a family group, the first two being married to each
    other and the parents of the  third  respondent.   Judge  Bell  allowed
    their appeals against the immigration decisions of 26  September  2014,
    to remove them from the UK as  overstayers,  because  she  found  there
    would be very significant obstacles to their  integration  into  Kenya.
    In addition, Judge Bell found that the third appellant was over 18  and
    under 25 and by the date of hearing had spent more than half  his  life
    in the UK.

 3.  In  reaching  these  conclusions,  Judge   Bell   applied   paragraphs
    276ADE(1)(v) and (vi) as they were in force at  the  date  of  hearing.
    Because she found the appellants succeeded under the provisions of  the
    immigration rules, she did not need to consider article 8 directly  and
    allowed the appeals because the requirements of the  immigration  rules
    were met.

 4. From what I have already recorded, it will be evident that  Judge  Bell
    considered the appellants' circumstances and the law as  they  were  at
    the date of hearing and not  when  the  applications  were  made.   The
    applications, which were human rights claims,  were  made  on  18  July
    2013. Their claims were initially refused on 13 August 2013 but without
    a right of appeal.  After further legal proceedings,  the  Home  Office
    consented to issue fresh decisions (those of 26 September 2014) against
    which there was a right of appeal and which began these proceedings.

 5. The appellant Secretary of State's  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal initially focus on whether Judge Bell erred in her application
    of the law and  facts  as  they  were  at  the  date  of  hearing  when
    considering  whether  the  provisions  of  paragraph  276ADE   of   the
    immigration rules was met.  The Secretary  of  State  argues  that  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE meant that they were restricted to the
    situation as at the date of application.

 6. I address this issue before considering the other grounds because it is
    easily resolved.  As I indicated at  the  end  of  the  hearing,  I  am
    satisfied that Judge Bell erred in law by relying on paragraph  400  of
    the immigration rules.  However, this error cannot be material  because
    the very concern the judge raised is present in paragraph 276A0 of  the
    rules.  To understand why there is a legal error but no material  error
    it is necessary to examine the provisions of these paragraphs as at the
    date of the decision appealed against and at the date the appeals  were
    heard by Judge Bell.

 7. The date of decision was  26  September  2014  and  at  that  date  the
    immigration rules provided.

        276A0. For the purposes of paragraph 276ADE the requirement to make
        a valid application will not apply when  the  Article  8  claim  is
        raised:
        (i) as part of an asylum claim, or as part of a further  submission
        in person after an asylum claim has been refused;
        (ii) where a migrant is in immigration detention;
        (iii) where removal directions have been set  pending  an  imminent
        removal;
        (iv) in an appeal; or
        (v) in response to a (one stop) notice issued under section 120  of
        the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.


        400. Where a person claims that their removal under paragraphs 8 to
        10 of Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971,  section  10  of  the
        Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 or section 47 of  the  Immigration,
        Asylum and Nationality Act 2006  would  be  contrary  to  the  UK's
        obligations under Article 8 of the  Human  Rights  Convention,  the
        Secretary of State  may  require  an  application  under  paragraph
        276ADE (private life) or Appendix FM (family life) of these  rules.
        Where an application is not required, in assessing that  claim  the
        Secretary of State or  an  immigration  officer  will,  subject  to
        paragraph 353, consider that claim against the requirements  to  be
        met under paragraph 276ADE or Appendix FM and  if  appropriate  the
        removal decision will be cancelled.

 8. At the date of hearing, which was 6 January 2015,  the  rules  were  as
    follow.

        276A0. For the purposes of paragraph 276ADE(1) the  requirement  to
        make a valid application will not apply when the Article 8 claim is
        raised:
        (i) as part of an asylum claim, or as part of a further  submission
        in person after an asylum claim has been refused;
        (ii) where a migrant is in  immigration  detention.  A  migrant  in
        immigration detention  or  their  representative  must  submit  any
        application or claim raising Article  8  to  a  prison  officer,  a
        prisoner custody officer, a detainee custody officer or a member of
        Home Office staff at the migrant's place of detention; or
        (iii) in an appeal (subject to the  consent  of  the  Secretary  of
        State where applicable).


        400. Where a person claims that their removal under paragraphs 8 to
        10 of Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971,  section  10  of  the
        Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 or section 47 of  the  Immigration,
        Asylum and Nationality Act 2006  would  be  contrary  to  the  UK's
        obligations under Article 8 of the  Human  Rights  Convention,  the
        Secretary of State  may  require  an  application  under  paragraph
        276ADE(1) (private life) or under  paragraphs  R-LTRP.1.1.(a),  (b)
        and (d), R-LTRPT.1.1.(a), (b) and (d)  and  EX.1.  of  Appendix  FM
        (family life as a partner or  parent)  of  these  rules.  Where  an
        application is not required, in assessing that claim the  Secretary
        of State or an immigration officer will, subject to paragraph  353,
        consider that claim against the requirements to be met (except  the
        requirement to make a valid application) under paragraph  276ADE(1)
        (private life)  or  paragraphs  R-LTRP.1.1.(a),  (b)  and  (d),  R-
        LTRPT.1.1.(a), (b) and (d) and EX.1. of Appendix FM (family life as
        a  partner  or  parent)  of  these  rules  as  appropriate  and  if
        appropriate the removal decision will be cancelled.

 9. Although the wording of both paragraphs changed  between  the  date  of
    decision and the date  of  hearing,  nothing  turns  on  those  changes
    themselves.  What is clear is that paragraph 400 is  addressed  to  the
    Secretary of State or an immigration office and requires  the  decision
    maker to consider whether a  person  should  be  required  to  make  an
    application under appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE  or  to  apply  those
    provisions directly, with the exception of the requirement to  make  an
    application.


10. As such, paragraph 400 relates to  how  the  decision-maker  handles  a
    human rights claim where a person is facing removal under s.10  of  the
    1999 Act.  It is difficult to see how a  judge  at  an  appeal  hearing
    could apply this provision because within both versions of the rules it
    would appear that whether an  application  is  required  or  not  is  a
    discretionary matter.  It is well established in public  law  that  the
    Tribunal cannot review  a  discretion  unless  a  discretion  has  been
    exercised or there has been a decision not to exercise discretion.


11. It is because there was no evidence to indicate that the  Secretary  of
    State had exercised discretion in respect of paragraph 400 that I  must
    find that Judge Bell erred in relying on this provision.


12. But this is a technical error because as can be seen from the provision
    of paragraph 276A0, irrespective of which version  is  considered,  the
    requirement to make a  valid  application  under  paragraph  276ADE  is
    waived in an appeal.  I mention for clarity that because  the  date  of
    decision is before the coming into force of s.15 of the Immigration Act
    2014, the issue of whether the Secretary of State's consent is required
    is irrelevant.  It would only apply if the amended version of  s.85  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 applied, which it does
    not.


13. It follows from these considerations, that if Judge Bell  was  able  to
    consider paragraph 276ADE directly, then as per the version of s.85  in
    force at the date of hearing, she was entitled to consider evidence  up
    to that date.  This can only mean that  she  was  entitled  -  in  fact
    required - by law to examine the appellants' circumstances  as  at  the
    date of hearing.


14. The Secretary of State's other grounds of appeal challenge the findings
    made by Judge Bell.  The Secretary of State argues that  she  erred  in
    her understanding of what is meant by "very  significant  obstacles  to
    integration" in paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) and in finding that  the  third
    appellant could benefit from the passage of  time  after  the  date  of
    decision to secure his position under paragraph 276ADE(1)(v).


15. It is appropriate to set out the provisions of paragraph 276ADE as they
    were at the date of application.  As far as I can  ascertain,  this  is
    the version that was also in force at the date of hearing  and  remains
    in force.

        276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
        remain on the grounds of private life in the UK  are  that  at  the
        date of application, the applicant:
        (i) does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in Section S-
        LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. in Appendix FM; and
        (ii) has made a valid  application  for  leave  to  remain  on  the
        grounds of private life in the UK; and
        (iii) has lived continuously in  the  UK  for  at  least  20  years
        (discounting any period of imprisonment); or
        (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the
        UK for at least 7 years (discounting any  period  of  imprisonment)
        and it would not be reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the
        UK; or
        (v) is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has  spent  at
        least half of his life living continuously in the  UK  (discounting
        any period of imprisonment); or
        (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or  above,  has
        lived continuously in the UK for less than  20  years  (discounting
        any period of imprisonment) but there  would  be  very  significant
        obstacles to the applicant's integration into the country to  which
        he would have to go if required to leave the UK.
        276ADE (2). Sub-paragraph (1)(vi) does not apply, and  may  not  be
        relied upon, in circumstances in which it is proposed to  return  a
        person to a third country pursuant to Schedule 3 to the Asylum  and
        Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc) Act 2004.

16. In light of my findings in relation to the first ground of  appeal,  it
    follows that I am satisfied that it was open to Judge Bell to  consider
    the third appellant's situation as at the date of hearing.  He was born
    on 13 June 1996 and arrived in the UK  on  18  September  2001.   By  6
    January 2015 he was nearly 18 years and seven months old and had  spent
    over 13 years here, as Judge Bell confirmed  in  paragraph  21  of  her
    decision.  Although I have explained that there is legal error  in  how
    Judge Bell came to apply the law as at the date of hearing, as  I  have
    indicated that error is in no sense material because she was  right  to
    consider the facts as at the date of hearing.  I conclude that there is
    no reason to set aside her decision in relation to the third appellant.


17. The Secretary of State's challenge to the judge's decisions in relation
    to the first and second appellants is twofold.  The first  argument  is
    that Judge Bell should not have had regard to paragraph  276ADE  as  at
    the date of application and I need say no more about that.  The  second
    issue, and to which I now turn, is what is the meaning of  the  phrase,
    "very significant obstacles to integration".


18. Neither representative was aware of  any  legal  authorities  regarding
    this specific phrase and nor am I.  This is not to say that  the  Court
    of Appeal has been silent on the issue.  A search on  Bailii  indicates
    that the Court of Appeal has used the phrase on a number  of  occasions
    but in each has been asked to  consider  questions  of  proportionality
    under article 8(2) ECHR.  The Court of Appeal has associated the phrase
    to other tests such as "insurmountable obstacles"  and  proportionality
    in general.  It is obvious  that  the  phrase  must  be  considered  in
    respect of a person protected private life rights because  as  is  well
    known, paragraph 276ADE and its associated provisions  were  introduced
    to give legislative  effect  to  the  UK's  obligations  to  respect  a
    person's private life rights under article 8.


19. Turning to the provision itself, I find the adjectival usage shows that
    this provision imposes a high threshold that an appellant must overcome
    but that the barrier is not so high as to be unachievable.  It is  also
    obvious that the rules do not  require  a  person  to  show  the  "most
    significant obstacles" and that the requirement of this provision is to
    see what obstacles there are to integration into the country to which a
    person will return and then to evaluate how significant those obstacles
    are.  In my view, the rule envisages that there  will  always  be  some
    obstacles to integration but that it will  often  be  proportionate  to
    expect a person to overcome those obstacles in order to resume life  in
    their country of nationality or a country in which they are entitled to
    live.  The rule will be satisfied where it is no longer  reasonable  to
    expect a person to overcome the obstacles they face, either because  of
    the severity of those obstacles, because they  are  numerous  or  other
    very significant reason.


20. In addition to these factors, I also see there is a need to examine the
    situation in the country to which the person will have  to  go  because
    the provisions require consideration of whether a person can  integrate
    into the country to which they will be removed.  The focus must  be  on
    the country of destination and whether a person has integrated into the
    UK is immaterial in relation to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).


21.  Having  considered  the  meaning  of  the  phrase,  "very  significant
    obstacles to integration",  I  turn  to  consider  whether  Judge  Bell
    properly applied the test.


22. In paragraphs 25 and 26, Judge  Bell  considers  the  medical  concerns
    raised by the appellants.  The  first  appellant  suffers  from  Crohns
    disease and the second from  rheumatoid  arthritis  (RA),  interstitial
    lunch disease and NSIP secondary  to  RA.   The  second  appellant  has
    significant mobility problems as a result.  Judge Bell's  spends  quite
    some time in paragraph 27 comparing the available medical treatment  in
    the UK and Kenya.  At the end of paragraph 27 Judge Bell concludes this
    part of her findings with the observation, "This is  relevant  to  [the
    second appellant's] ability to integrate in Kenya as  it  would  reduce
    her ability to socially or economically integrate."


23. Before considering Judge Bell's other findings, I  make  the  following
    observations.  Although Judge Bell has recorded the  medical  needs  of
    both appellants and the available medical care, at no  point  does  she
    find that the appellants should be allowed  to  remain  in  the  UK  to
    receive better medical treatment.  As is clear from the  last  sentence
    of paragraph 27, Judge Bell focused  on  how  the  appellants'  medical
    conditions might affect their ability to  integrate  into  Kenya.   She
    found that  the  very  serious  mobility  problems  facing  the  second
    appellant would be a very significant obstacle  to  integration.   This
    approach  is  clearly  consistent  with  the   wording   of   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) as I have outlined above.


24. In paragraphs 28 and 29, Judge Bell examines what other  obstacles  the
    appellants face on return to Kenya.  She recognised that the appellants
    have not lost touch completely with relatives in Kenya but that contact
    is minimal.  In paragraph 29 Judge Bell  took  into  consideration  the
    fact that the appellants have Indian ancestry and would  face  problems
    of discrimination in Kenya.  She accepted the appellants'  accounts  of
    the security problems  they  experienced  in  Kenya  and  the  lack  of
    resources in that country.


25. It is clear from her decision that Judge Bell  focused  on  identifying
    what  obstacles  to  integration  the  appellants  would   face.    She
    identified that the second appellant had significant mobility problems,
    which would persist should she  return  to  Kenya  because  the  second
    appellant would not be able to expect the same level of  medical  care.
    Judge Bell also identified that the appellants faced discrimination  in
    Kenya  because  of  their  Indian  ethnicity  and  that  the  level  of
    discrimination they had experienced in the past had  been  significant.
    Discrimination prevents integration,  particularly  as  the  appellants
    would have significant difficulties securing  a  livelihood  in  Kenya.
    Judge Bell also took into consideration the long absence the appellants
    had had from Kenya and their minimal contact with the society there.


26. Judge Bell then considered whether these factors could amount  to  very
    significant obstacles to integration and looking at them in  the  round
    concluded that their combined effect reached  the  relevant  threshold.
    In other words, in all the  circumstances  it  was  not  reasonable  to
    expect the appellants to return to Kenya to integrate because to do  so
    would be to put them in an extreme adverse situation.


27. Because it is possible to follow Judge Bell's line of reasoning in this
    way, I cannot find  that  her  findings  are  in  any  sense  perverse.
    Because her findings are sound, her decision must be upheld in relation
    to the first and second appellants.


28. I mention that when considering paragraph 276ADE  Judge  Bell  was  not
    required to carry out a balancing exercise because the rules  permit  a
    person to stay who has very significant obstacles to  integration.   If
    that test is met - as here - then there is no reason  to  carry  out  a
    full proportionality assessment.  Because of this, once Judge Bell  had
    identified factors that would make  the  appellants'  integration  into
    Kenyan society very difficult, it was open to  her  to  find  that  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) were met.


29. However, if it was necessary to carry out a classic  Razgar  assessment
    in relation to  the  appellants'  rights  under  article  8,  from  the
    findings made by Judge  Bell,  the  outcome  would  be  the  same.   In
    summary:


        a. The appellants have established private and family life  in  the
           UK because of the time they have been here  and  the  activities
           they have undertaken.


        b. The immigration decision to expel them would fundamentally alter
           how they enjoy their private and family life.


        c. The decision is in accordance with the law.


        d. There is public interest in expelling the appellants because  of
           the need to maintain effective immigration controls and for  the
           economic wellbeing of the country.


        e. The appellants' personal circumstances,  however,  make  removal
           disproportionate because there are very significant obstacles to
           them enjoying private and family life in Kenya.


30. So, even if I am wrong and there is an  error  in  the  application  of
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), it too would  be  immaterial  because  on  the
    findings made the appellants would  succeed  under  article  8  applied
    directly.  But this is merely an alternative approach.  If anything, it
    reinforces the findings made by Judge Bell in  that  the  same  outcome
    should be reached by either path since the purpose of paragraph  276ADE
    is to make transparent the application of article 8 rights.



Decision

Although there is legal error in  the  decision  and  reasons  statement  of
First-tier Tribunal Judge Bell, it is not such as to require  the  decisions
to be set aside.  I uphold the decisions made on all three appellants.



                               Signed                     Date


                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
