
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/39114/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 17th November 2015                     | On 20th January 2016             |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                                 mr ALI RAZA
                          (no ANONYMITY order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Holt, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 20th November 1980.  The
    Appellant has an extensive  immigration  history  having  been  granted
    leave to enter the UK as a student on 20th April 2006.   Subsequent  to
    that his leave was extended  on  four  occasions.   Thereafter  on  9th
    August 2014 he made a combined application for leave to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur)  Migrant  under  the  points-
    based system and for a biometric residence  permit.   That  application
    was refused on 6th October 2014.  Detailed reasons are set out  in  the
    Notice of Refusal - Appendix  A:  Attributes.   It  was  noted  by  the
    Secretary of State that the Appellant stated that he had access  to  at
    least �50,000 held to invest in business in the UK as  specified  under
    provisions (d) in Table 4 of Appendix A of the Immigration  Rules,  but
    on the basis of the documents provided the Appellant  did  not  qualify
    for the award of points in  this  area.   Thereafter  the  reasons  for
    decision were detailed with specific reference to paragraph 41-SD(e) of
    the Immigration Rules which states the evidence that must be  submitted
    to demonstrate that the business was actively trading.

 2. The Appellant appealed.  It is appropriate to note at this  stage  that
    the initial application and appeal was  a  joint  application  with  Mr
    Kamran Mukhtiar.  I am advised that Mr Mukhtiar does not seek to appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal.  On 2nd June 2015 the appeal came  before  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Malik sitting at Manchester.  In a  decision
    and reasons promulgated on 15th June 2015 the  Appellant's  appeal  was
    dismissed.  On 25th June 2015 the Appellant lodged Grounds of Appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal.  The Grounds of Appeal were settled by Counsel.  In
    essence they contended that the judge:

      i) gave no adequate reasons  for  finding  that  the  distribution  of
         business cards did not amount to "publication" thereof; and

     ii) failed to give adequate reasons  for  her  proportionality  finding
         under Article 8.

    On 3rd June 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Cox  granted  permission  to
    appeal.  He stated that the first ground raised  an  interesting  issue
    which he considered arguable.  As far as the second ground is concerned
    he stated:

         "I suspect Ground 2 may be raised more in  hope  than  expectation,
         given that As' tenure in the UK  has  always  been  precarious  and
         there seems little reason to think  that  removal  would  adversely
         affect their physical and moral integrity, but I am disinclined  to
         exclude  it  at  this  stage  because  it  is  supported  by  legal
         argument."

 3. On 14th September 2015 the Secretary of State responded to the  Grounds
    of Appeal.  That Rule 24 response contended that the Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal directed herself appropriately.   The  Rule  24  response
    submits that the findings at paragraph 21, that the business  cards  do
    not amount to advertising or marketing material that has been published
    locally or nationally, is a finding entirely open to the Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal to make.  The response goes on to state that it  is
    arguable that any other finding on this  point  could  be  said  to  be
    perverse.  The point in the grounds at  paragraph  11  that  the  Rules
    should be given a purposive approach is resisted on the basis that  the
    Rules  should  be  interpreted  as  "black  letter   law   and   contra
    preferentum" is a creature of contract law.  It was  further  submitted
    that the findings at paragraph 26 were entirely open to  the  judge  to
    make and are more than adequately reasoned and that the grounds are  no
    more than disagreement with findings of fact  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 4. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed
    Counsel Mr Holt.  Mr Holt is extremely familiar with this  matter.   He
    appeared before the First-tier Tribunal and he is  the  author  of  the
    Grounds of Appeal for the  Upper  Tribunal.   The  Secretary  of  State
    appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Ms Johnstone.

Background

 5. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan  originally  granted  leave  to
    remain in the UK as a student and eventually  being  granted  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant.  Following the changes to
    the Immigration Rules in 2014 the Appellant sought to apply  for  leave
    to remain as a Tier 1  (Entrepreneur)  Migrant.   His  application  was
    refused on 6th October 2014 on the basis that he had failed to  provide
    advertising/marketing material for the required period (this  being  no
    older than three months but must predate 11th July 2014).

 6. The appeal has been brought on two bases.  Firstly that  the  Appellant
    succeeded under the Rules  and  that  if  otherwise  found  refusal  be
    proportionate and that the appeal is sought on the basis that the judge
    at first instance had erred in finding that the Rules were not met  and
    secondly had erred in finding that the refusal was proportionate.

The Law

Paragraph 41-SD(e)

        7. 41-SD. The specified documents in Table 4 and paragraph 41,  and
           associated definitions, are as follows:
           (e)    If the applicant is applying for  leave  to  remain,  and
                has, or was lasted granted, leave  as  a  Tier  1  (General)
                Migrant or a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant, he must  also
                provide the following evidence that he meets the  additional
                requirements set out in Table 4:
                (i)    his job title,
                (ii)   the Standard Occupational Classification  (SOC)  code
                    of the occupation that the applicant has been working in
                    since  before  11  July  2014  or  6  April   2015   (as
                    applicable), up to the date of  his  application,  which
                    must appear  on  the  list  of  occupations  skilled  to
                    National Qualifications Framework level 4 or  above,  as
                    stated in the Codes of Practice in Appendix J,
                (iii)  one or more  of  the  following  specified  documents
                    showing that the business was active before 11 July 2014
                    or 6 April 2015 (as applicable)  and  that  it  remained
                    active throughout the period leading up to the  date  of
                    his application (if the applicant or his entrepreneurial
                    team  member  does  not  own  the  domain  name  of  the
                    business's website, then the evidence in (2) may not  be
                    provided, and he must instead provide one or more of the
                    documents specified in (1),(3),(4) or (5)):
                    (1)     dated   advertising   or   marketing   material,
                        including printouts  of  online  advertising  other
                        than on the business's own website, that  has  been
                        published locally or  nationally  and  showing  the
                        name of the business and the business activity, or
                    (2)    if the applicant  (or  his  entrepreneurial  team
                        member) owns the  domain  name  of  his  business's
                        website and submits evidence to this effect,  dated
                        printouts from the business's website detailing the
                        service or  product  provided  by  the  applicant's
                        business, or
                    (3)     dated  article(s)  or  online  links  to   dated
                        article(s) in  a  newspaper  or  other  publication
                        showing the name of the business together with  the
                        business activity, or
                    (4)    dated information from a trade fair, at which the
                        applicant has had a stand or given  a  presentation
                        to market his business, showing  the  name  of  the
                        business together with the business activity, or
                    (5)    personal registration with a UK trade body linked
                        to the applicant's occupation; and
                (iv)   one or more  of  the  following  specified  documents
                    showing that the business was  trading  before  11  July
                    2014  or  6  April  2015  (as  applicable)  and   traded
                    continuously throughout the period  leading  up  to  the
                    date of his application:
                    (1)    one or more contracts for service.  If a contract
                        is not an original the  applicant  must  sign  each
                        page.  Each contract must show:
                        (_a)   the name of the business,
                        (_b)   the  service  provided  by  the  applicant's
                             business;
                        (_c)   the name  of  the  other  party  or  parties
                             involved in  the  contract  and  their  contact
                             details, including their full  address,  postal
                             code, telephone contact number  and  any  email
                             address; and
                        (_d)   the duration of the contract or, if it is  a
                             rolling contract  with  no  defined  end  date,
                             confirmation of when this arrangement began and
                             a   letter   from   the   customer   or   their
                             representative confirming that the contract has
                             not been  terminated,  dated  no  earlier  than
                             three months before the date of application; or


                    (2)    one or more original  letters  from  UK-regulated
                        financial institutions with which the applicant has
                        a  business  bank  account,  on  the  institution's
                        headed paper, confirming the dates the business was
                        trading during  the  period  referred  to  at  (iv)
                        above.



The Issue

 8. It is the contention of  the  Secretary  of  State  that  the  evidence
    submitted in relation to advertising material is not acceptable  as  it
    does not cover a continuous period commencing before 11th July 2014  up
    to no earlier than three months before  the  date  of  the  Appellant's
    application as the newspaper advertisement supplied  does  not  show  a
    date and the Gumtree advertisements were printed off on 7th August 2014
    and also show no dates.

Submissions

 9. Mr Holt refers me to the relevant Rule (recited  above)  and  asks  the
    question as to how does an Appellant satisfy the criteria.   He  points
    out that there is no definition given in the Immigration Rules  of  the
    phrase "published locally or nationally".  On that basis he  says  that
    it is for the Tribunal to do so and that it is for the Tribunal to take
    a purposive approach and for an Appellant to show that he  had  engaged
    in business activity.  He submits that the  definition  of  publication
    should be given a purposive approach.  He contends  that  the  material
    error of  law  is  to  be  found  at  paragraph  21  of  Judge  Malik's
    determination.  Here she has stated:

         "The business cards submitted with the application I  find  do  not
         amount to 'advertising or marketing  material  ...  that  has  been
         published locally or nationally' as again business cards  are  just
         that - given to individual contacts and not published."

    Mr Holt submits that  the  judge  thereafter  fails  to  give  adequate
    reasons for that finding and that that amounts to a material  error  of
    law.

10. Further at paragraph 23  of  the  determination  the  judge  finds  the
    Appellants were operating a business but he submits that she has failed
    to say why.  He notes that at paragraph 9 of the judgment  Judge  Malik
    had noted that the Appellants in the original appeal had to  show  they
    already had a business before 11th  July  2014.   Consequently  adverts
    placed after that date were effectively inadmissible.  He contends that
    there are material errors of law in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and asked me to set the  judgment  aside  and  to  remake  the
    decision allowing the appeal.

11. Ms Johnstone takes me to the Rule 24 reply which  she  says  succinctly
    sets out the Secretary of State's position and that the judge was fully
    entitled to make the finding that she  did  and  that  handing  over  a
    business card is, she submits, not  publishing  it.   She  acknowledges
    that there is no definition of published.  The judge had  the  evidence
    and found that the handing over of the business card did not amount  to
    publication.  She states that that was a finding the judge was entitled
    to make.  As far  as  the  reference  to  an  entrepreneurial  team  is
    concerned she submits that that amounts to an application to  vary  the
    current application and in any event the Appellant is now an  Appellant
    on his own and that the maintenance documents produced have to have his
    name on them to show that he meets the Rules.  She submits that even if
    an error were to be found  the  Appellant  could  not  succeed  on  the
    argument based on the "team position" because as  she  points  out  the
    team no longer exists.  She asked me to find that there is no  material
    error of law.

12. Mr Holt responds by taking me to paragraph 52 of Appendix A - a section
    entitled Entrepreneurial Teams: Notes.  He submits that a transfer from
    a joint application  would  not  affect  the  issues  in  this  appeal.
    Turning to the position regarding the business cards  Mr  Holt  submits
    that Ms Johnstone's response is that there is no  evidence  before  the
    Tribunal to say the business cards constituted published material.   He
    submits that the question is whether or not this is acceptable evidence
    and submits that it is, pointing out that business cards  were  printed
    and provided and that this finding is to be found at  paragraph  21  of
    Judge Malik's determination.

13. As far as Article 8 is concerned Mr Holt submits that  the  judge  made
    findings at paragraph 23 that the business was  formed  prior  to  11th
    July 2014 and therefore the terms of Appendix 41-SD of the  Rules  are,
    he submits, met.  He submits that if the failure is only technical then
    the argument can be pursued and if I am satisfied it would not  have  a
    negative effect on the wellbeing of the country then it is open  to  me
    to allow the appeal.

14. In response to this Ms Johnstone points out that  effectively  what  Mr
    Holt is seeking to do is  to  address  this  aspect  on  a  "near-miss"
    approach and that that approach cannot succeed under Article 8.

The Law

15.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

16. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.



Findings

17. It is important to address this matter on the basis upon  which  it  is
    put before me.  Initially I am required to  determine  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  In this case, particularly bearing in mind that  I  am
    asked quite specifically by Mr Holt to make a ruling with regard to the
    issue as to  whether  or  not  business  cards  amount  to  publication
    pursuant to paragraph 41-SD, I have  gone  into  this  matter  in  some
    detail with regard to the  submissions  that  are  put  to  me.   As  a
    starting point I find that whilst the First-tier Tribunal Judge made  a
    finding,  namely  that  "business  cards  are  just  that  -  given  to
    individual contacts and not published"  but  has  gone  no  further  to
    explain as to why that does not amount  to  publication,  I  find  that
    there is an error of law and I set aside the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal.  Having done that I proceed to remake the decision.

18. I am not influenced in my decision in this matter by the fact that only
    one of the two original Appellants proceeds in his appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Documentation required herein is set out in Appendix  A  41-
    SD(e)(iii)(1).  Those documents are set out above.  They  are  referred
    to in considerable detail at paragraphs 18  to  21  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's determination.  The  judge  found  that  the  business
    cards submitted with the application did not amount to "advertising  or
    marketing material that  has  been  published  locally  or  nationally"
    finding that  business  cards  were  just  that,  given  to  individual
    contacts and not published.  I actually consider it  debateable  as  to
    whether the judge needed to go further but I am persuaded that this  is
    a point of some importance.  The Rule requires advertising or marketing
    material  being  published  locally  or  nationally.   Such  a  process
    indicates, by the very nature of  the  words,  a  holding  out  to  the
    general public either in a local manner or in a  national  manner  that
    the enterprise which the entrepreneur seeks to become  involved  in  is
    being published.  Clearly what is specifically aimed at is  a  form  of
    newspaper advertisement  but  I  acknowledge  that  in  these  days  of
    technological development that it is not restricted to such a  form  of
    marketing or advertising and indeed the Rule makes  specific  reference
    to online advertising.  What it  does  not  do  is  make  reference  to
    business  cards.   By  their  very  nature  business  cards  are  small
    individual documents personally handed out at a  face-to-face  meeting.
    It cannot be construed as constituting local or national advertising or
    marketing.  It is specifically targeted marketing or advertising handed
    to an  individual.   If  the  Rule  intended  to  include  within  such
    definition a business card then it would  have  said  so.   Effectively
    what Judge Malik says is absolutely correct,  namely  that  a  business
    card is given to an individual  contact.   It  is  not  published.   To
    construe it in that manner would be to give a totally different meaning
    to the Rule and in such circumstances the Appellant does not  meet  the
    specific requirements of the Immigration Rules.

19. So far as Article 8 is concerned I again remake  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The judge has looked at this matter in some
    detail at paragraphs 24 onwards.  Mr Holt submits to  me  that  if  the
    only failure is technical then  the  appeal  should  be  allowed  under
    Article 8.  I disagree with Mr Holt  that  this  is  merely  technical.
    Indeed it is fundamental and both parties in  view  of  the  manner  in
    which this has been raised before me effectively acknowledged that  for
    they seek a ruling on the point.  I support the views and endorse  them
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and I remake and reiterate them and  I
    agree with the submission made by Ms Johnstone that effectively what is
    being relied upon is a near-miss approach.  In  all  the  circumstances
    this is an appeal that cannot succeed for all the above reasons and the
    Appellant's appeal consequently is dismissed.

20. I acknowledge that the Appellant may well  still  wish  to  pursue  his
    business venture but of course he now wishes to pursue it in a capacity
    as  a  sole  trader  rather  than  in  partnership  with  the  previous
    Appellant.  It is a matter for the Appellant to discuss with his  legal
    advisors as to the process that he should now follow and as to  whether
    a further application would be appropriate.  That is not a matter to be
    addressed before this Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of  law
and is set aside.  The decision is remade dismissing the Appellant's  appeal
both under the Immigration Rules and pursuant to Article 8 of  the  European
Convention of Human Rights.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
