
[pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39619/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 March 2016                             |On 11 May 2016                |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  UMER RIAZ
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. M. A. Bilal, Rana & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. A. McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge McDade, promulgated on 30 July 2015, in which
    he allowed Mr. Riaz's appeal against the Secretary of State's  decision
    to refuse to grant further leave to remain in the United Kingdom.




 2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to Mr. Riaz as the  Appellant
    and to the Secretary  of  State  as  the  Respondent  reflecting  their
    positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


    "It is arguable that the judge has given inadequate reasons for finding
    that the  evidence  produced  by  the  Respondent  is  insufficient  to
    discharge the burden of proof [4]."


 4. The Appellant attended the hearing.  I heard oral submissions from both
    representatives, following which I announced  that  I  found  that  the
    decision involved the making of an error of law.  I set out my  reasons
    in full below.


Error of law

 5. Paragraph [4] of the decision states:


    "Apart from the very generic evidence about the way in which  the  Home
    Office have borne down upon those they suspect  of  dishonesty  in  the
    sitting of these tests for example by using proxy or by having  someone
    else give them the answers, there was no cogent evidence in relation to
    this Appellant as to what precisely he was alleged  to  have  done.   I
    adjourned one hearing for a period of six weeks in order  to  give  the
    Home Office an opportunity to produce any evidence they had in  respect
    of this.  However no evidence was forthcoming.  The burden  is  clearly
    and strongly upon the Respondent to prove the case where there has been
    an allegation of dishonesty.  In this, as in many  similar  cases,  the
    Respondent has palpably failed to do so.  As such this appeal  must  be
    allowed."


 6. The judge fails give any further reasons or to examine  in  any  detail
    the evidence produced by the Respondent.  This consisted of the witness
    statements from Peter Millington and Rebecca Collings,  as  well  as  a
    further document entitled ETS SELT SOURCE DATA.


 7. I find that in the absence of giving any consideration at  all  to  the
    evidence which had been provided, the judge has failed to give adequate
    reasons for why the Respondent has not discharged the burden of  proof.
    I find that the decision involves the making of  a  material  error  of
    law, and I set the decision aside to be remade.

Submissions


 8. Mr. Bilal submitted that the Respondent had been given  the  chance  to
    produce further evidence but none had been forthcoming.  The judge  had
    not  accepted  the  Respondent's  evidence.   He  submitted  that   the
    spreadsheet from ETS was not evidence of deception.  It was an  undated
    document and the Respondent had not provided any evidence to  show  who
    had  invalidated  the  Appellant's  results  or  when  they  had   been
    invalidated.   There  was  no  evidence  of  the  basis  on  which  the
    allegation of deception was made out.  There was no indication  of  who
    had issued the document.  Nobody was identifiable  from  this  document
    and it was not evidence of deception.


 9. He submitted in relation to ETS that they had previously been  declared
    not credible yet the Respondent was now  relying  on  information  from
    them.  He submitted that the Respondent had not discharged  the  burden
    of proof.


10. He submitted that the Appellant had a family life in the United Kingdom
    and  his  child  had  medical  issues.   He  provided  a  copy  of  the
    Appellant's child birth certificate, and some correspondence  from  the
    hospital relating to the Appellant's  child.   He  submitted  that  the
    Appellant had now passed an English language test at level 7, which was
    above the level required.


11.  Mr.  McVeety  submitted  that  the  Respondent  had  provided  witness
    statements from Peter Millington, Rebecca Collings and a printout  from
    ETS.  The Respondent had nothing to do with ETS and it was ETS who  had
    invalidated the certificate because of fraud.


Remaking

12. I have carefully considered the evidence provided by the Respondent.  I
    have also considered the case of  R  (Gazi)  v  SSHD  (ETS  -  judicial
    review) [2015] UKUT 00327 (IAC).


13. The Appellant applied for leave to remain as a spouse.  The  Respondent
    refused his  application  on  the  basis  that  he  did  not  meet  the
    suitability requirements.  The Respondent stated in  paragraph  [8]  of
    the reasons for refusal letter:


    "During an administrative review process, ETS have confirmed that  your
    client's test obtained was through deception.  Because the validity  of
    your client's test results could not be  authenticated,  your  client's
    scores from the test stated 28 November 2012 have been cancelled.  Your
    client is specifically considered a person who has sought to  leave  to
    remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  by  deception  following  information
    provided to us by Educational Testing Service (ETS),  that  an  anomaly
    with your client's speaking test indicated the presence of a proxy test
    taker."


14. As evidence  to  show  this,  the  Respondent  provided  two  witnesses
    statements.  The first is from Peter Millington, an Assistant  Director
    at the Home Office, dated 23 June 2014.  The second, also dated 23 June
    2014, is from Rebecca Collings, a Grade 6 civil  servant  at  the  Home
    Office.  These witness statements are now familiar  to  judges  in  the
    First-tier and Upper Tribunals.  They set out  what  was  done  by  ETS
    together with the Respondent following  the  Panorama  programme  which
    exposed  problems  with  ETS  testing.   The  witness  statements  were
    prepared in connection with another case, and there is no reference  in
    either of them to the Appellant.


15. The only other evidence provided by the Respondent is a document  which
    takes the form of two lines of data in table form.  It is  headed  "ETS
    SELT SOURCE DATA", but there is nothing to confirm where this  document
    has come from, nor where the data contained in it has come from.  There
    is no statement from ETS setting  out  that  they  have  provided  this
    information to the Respondent, or from the Respondent setting  out  how
    they have obtained this information.  Without more, the  heading  alone
    is not enough to confirm that ETS have provided  this  document.   This
    document records that the certificate number ending 0061,  relating  to
    an Umer Riaz, date of birth 17 January 1989, relating to tests taken on
    the 28 November 2012 is invalid.  The same information is  produced  in
    both lines of the table, the only difference being the record number in
    the first column.


16. The reasons for  refusal  letter  stated  that  the  anomaly  with  the
    speaking test "indicated the presence of  a  proxy  test  taker".   The
    reasons for refusal letter appears to be clear that the reason that the
    Appellant's test result was invalidated was because the  speaking  test
    was conducted by a proxy test taker.  However, even if I attach  weight
    to the document headed "ETS SELT SOURCE DATA", it does not  corroborate
    the claim in the reasons for refusal letter.  It merely indicates  that
    the test result has been declared invalid.   It  is  clear  from  Peter
    Millington's witness statement that "an individual's  test  result  may
    still be invalidated on the basis of test  administration  irregularity
    including the fact that their test was taken at  a  UK  testing  centre
    where numerous other results have been invalidated on the  basis  of  a
    "match"."  There is no evidence before me as to  what  happened  on  28
    November 2012 at South Quay College and whether numerous other  results
    from the centre for that date were invalidated.   I  have  no  specific
    evidence relating to  the  Appellant's  test  beyond  the  unidentified
    document which indicates that the Appellant's test result  is  invalid.
    The reason that it was declared invalid is not clear from this document
    alone.  I find that this document in and of itself is not evidence that
    the Appellant has practised  deception.   Neither  is  it  evidence  of
    deception when read in conjunction with the generic witness statements,
    which have themselves been held insufficient  to  discharge  the  legal
    burden of proof owing to multiple shortcomings.


17. The Respondent provided only the  generic  witness  statements  and  an
    unidentified document purporting to indicate that the Appellant's  test
    result  was  invalid.   The  Respondent  provided  no  further  details
    relating specifically to this Appellant, to the centre  where  he  took
    his test or the date on which he took the test, despite stating in  the
    reasons for  refusal  letter  that  the  speaking  test  indicated  the
    presence of a proxy  test  taker.   In  the  absence  of  any  reliable
    evidence specific to the Appellant, or to the tests conducted at  South
    Quay College on 28 November 2012, I find that the Respondent has failed
    to show that  the  application  should  have  been  refused  under  the
    suitability requirements.  Accordingly I find that  the  Appellant  met
    the suitability requirements of the immigration rules.


18. The Respondent considered that, were it  not  for  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant did not meet the suitability requirements, he would have  met
    the eligibility requirements as a partner.  The  Respondent  considered
    paragraph EX.1 in relation to the  Appellant's  relationship  with  his
    partner, but considered that  he  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph EX.1.  This was because the Respondent did not consider  that
    there were "insurmountable obstacles" to the Appellant  continuing  his
    relationship with his partner overseas.


19. However, in paragraph [3] of the decision, it states:


    "Although that letter  contains  a  number  of  objections  it  is  now
    accepted by the Respondent that the only  impediment  that  remains  is
    that it was not accepted that the Appellant had himself sat the English
    language test that resulted in his obtaining the necessary  certificate
    to satisfy the Immigration Rules."


20. This part of the decision has not been  challenged.   It  appears  from
    this  that  the  Respondent  accepted  that  the  Appellant   met   the
    requirements for leave to remain as a partner save for the  suitability
    requirements.  Mr. McVeety did not raise any issue in relation to  this
    concession.  Accordingly, given that I have found that the  application
    should not have been  refused  for  failure  to  meet  the  suitability
    requirements, I find on the balance of probabilities that the Appellant
    meets the requirements of the immigration rules.


21. I have not made an anonymity direction.


Notice of Decision


22. The decision involves the making of a material error of law and  I  set
    it aside.


23. I remake the decision allowing the appeal under the immigration rules.


Signed   Date 6 May 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
