
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39164/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |                   Decision & Reasons |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 27th August 2015                   |                   On 22nd September  |
|                                      |2015                                  |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                mrs irene judith annick mouNtefou neE makosso
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Otchie, Counsel instructed by Shan & Co.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On 11th October 2014 the Appellant (hereafter "The Secretary of  State"
    or "SSHD") refused entry to the Respondent (hereafter the Claimant)  at
    Heathrow Airport.  The Claimant was travelling with the benefit  of  an
    entry clearance granted in Congo as a visitor valid for the  period  of
    1st July 2014 to 1st January 2015.  The Claimant had previously entered
    and left the United Kingdom within the validity of that visa.

 2. The SSHD noted that the Claimant had obtained emergency  NHS  treatment
    during her previous period of stay and concluded that she  intended  to
    access further follow-up treatment, to  the  point  that  she  was  now
    seeking leave to enter for "medical purposes" rather than as  a  family
    visitor. The SSHD relied on  Paragraph 320(5) of HC 395 which states:

         "Grounds on which entry clearance or  leave  to  enter  the  United
         Kingdom is to be refused:

         (5)  failure, in the case of a visa national,  to  produce  to  the
             Immigration Officer a  passport  or  other  identity  document
             endorsed with a valid and current UK  entry  clearance  issued
             for the purpose for which entry is sought;"

 3. The notice of decision identified that the Claimant only had an out  of
    country appeal save on race relations/human rights grounds.

 4. The claimant appealed complaining that the decision interfered with her
    Article 8 private and family life rights, and maintained that  she  was
    seeking leave to enter for  a  purpose  permitted  by  the  Immigration
    Rules, namely a family  visit  to  see  her  brother  and  she  had  no
    intention of obtaining medical treatment.  She explained that  she  had
    had to have  treatment  on  an  emergency  basis  previously,  she  had
    provided her passport to the  treating  authority,  who  had  exercised
    discretion  not  to  charge.   The  Claimant  had  previously  received
    treatment in India and carried with her information about  her  medical
    history for no other reason than to ensure that in the event she became
    unwell her medical history was available.

 5. The Claimant's appeal  was  heard  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which
    decided, having had the benefit of hearing and seeing the Claimant  and
    her sponsoring brother give evidence that both were credible witnesses.
    The panel concluded that the Claimant was  making  an  application  for
    leave to enter as a family visitor and had a valid entry clearance  for
    that purpose, to the point that,  contrary  to  the  substance  of  the
    impugned decision, the Claimant did not fall foul of  paragraph  320(5)
    of HC 395.

 6. The SSHD sought permission to appeal on the basis that:

      i) The Tribunal did not have  jurisdiction  because  the  decision  to
         refuse leave to enter under Section 82(2)(a)  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, is caught  by  the  provisions  of
         Section 92(3A-C) of the same Act, so that  the appeal  against  the
         substance of the decision is out of country only.

     ii) In the alternative:

          a) The panel misdirected, addressing the Claimant's intention  at
             the time of making her  entry  clearance  application  in  the
             Congo as opposed to on arrival and/or

          b) The panel failed to deal with the evidence militating  against
             the  Claimant's  credibility,  set  out  in  the  reasons  for
             refusal.

The Hearing at the Upper Tribunal

 7. The Claimant had  returned  to  the  Congo.  The  matter  proceeded  on
    submissions only. Although permission had been granted  in  respect  of
    jurisdiction it was not  expressly  limited  however,  the  only  issue
    pursued with vigour before me was  that  of  jurisdiction.    Mr  Tufan
    argued that as the jurisdictional point had been raised in  the  notice
    the Tribunal should not have proceeded to hear  the  appeal.  Mr  Otchi
    argued that the Claimant was in similar circumstances to the Appellants
    Anwar and Pengeyo in the case of Anwar and Another v SSHD  [2010]  EWCA
    Civ 127, because the Tribunal had reached findings of fact  which  made
    the Secretary of State's decision demonstrably wrong to the point  that
    the decisions were unlawful.  This was a case where it was now too late
    for the Secretary of State to take the point.

My Consideration and Findings

 8. Neither representative who appeared before  me  as  the  representative
    before the First-tier Tribunal. The Record of Proceedings of the  First
    -tier tribunal came to light following the hearing, and at  it  records
    at start of the hearing the following:

         "HO - not pursuing 'no right of appeal' point".

 9. I wrote to the parties advising that in light of that record I proposed
    to dismiss the jurisdiction ground of appeal after seven  days  in  the
    event that I heard nothing further from them.  The  case  of  Anwar  is
    binding upon me to the point that the SSHD's decision not to pursue the
    point before the First-tier means that a challenge  to  the  Tribunal's
    decision on that basis at this late stage is not available.

10. The other grounds were not withdrawn but they have no merit.  The panel
    correctly self-directed in terms of assessing the Claimant's  intention
    at the time of application. In setting out the chronology and directing
    their minds  to  the  matter  of  the  application  it  is  clear  from
    paragraphs 16 to 20 that the panel correctly addressed their  minds  to
    the issue of intention as at the time of the  application  at  Heathrow
    Airport.  As  a  matter  of  law  (Aiyegbeni  and  Others,  R  (on  the
    application of) v SSHD [2009] EWHC 1241) in circumstances where holders
    of entry clearance who leave and re-enter the country, so  as  to  face
    examination by an Immigration Officer under Schedule 2, paragraph 2A of
    the Immigration Act 1971, they are deemed to make an application at the
    point of re-entry.

11. The ground challenging the reasoning concerning the reasons for refusal
    letter fails to take into account that the  panel  reasoning  addresses
    the case as made on the day, and, in particular it was conceded by  the
    SSHD's representative that  there  was  no  deception,  either  by  the
    Claimant or her sponsoring brother, so  that  the  credibility  matters
    raised in these grounds fell away on the day and are not  now  properly
    open to the Respondent.

12. For all these reasons the appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge


