
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39745/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  16th July 2014                            |On 17th July 2014            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before


                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MISS NAZIA HUSSAIN
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: None

Interpretation:
Ms N Saher in the Urdu language

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State but I will refer to  the
       parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

    2. The appellant is a citizen of India born on 22nd February 1989.  She
       arrived in the UK on 13th February 2013 as  a  visitor  to  see  her
       father. Her father is Mr Mohammed Hussain who is a  British  citizen
       by birth, who suffered a heart attack in 2002 and who is now heavily
       disabled. On 5th July 2013 she  applied  to  remain  for  a  further
       period of time as his carer.  This application was refused  on  16th
       September 2013. Her appeal against the decision  of  the  respondent
       was  allowed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   J   Simpson   in   a
       determination promulgated on the 25th April 2014.

    3. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       Reid on 22nd May 2014 on the basis that it  was  arguable  that  the
       First-tier judge had erred in law in conducting his  proportionality
       assessment in failing  to  take  into  account  the  fact  that  the
       appellant was trying to circumvent immigration control and that  her
       father had  travelled  to  India  for  emergency  medical  treatment
       between December 2013 and March 2014.

    4. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions & Evidence

    5. The appellant and Mr Hussain confirmed that  they  could  understand
       the interpreter and that the language was Urdu. Mr Hussain  in  fact
       gave most of his evidence in English.

    6. Ms Everett did not have the documentary evidence that was before the
       First-tier Tribunal so I clarified with Mr Hussain as to whether  he
       had travelled to India for medical treatment between  December  2013
       and March 2014. He confirmed that he had done this. He had  gone  to
       India  because  he  had  been  waiting  for  a  long  period  of  an
       appointment  with  Dr  Shovlin  at  the   respiratory   service   at
       Hammersmith Hospital. He was afraid that he would die and so  wanted
       to travel to India to check the medical advice he was  receiving  in
       the UK. He travelled to India by plane with oxygen. He had been  met
       by his wife and family in India and was cared for by them whilst  he
       was there. He returned to the UK as  the  medical  advice  from  the
       doctors in India was that  he  was  receiving  the  correct  medical
       treatment in terms of medication from his UK  doctors  and  that  he
       should wait for the appointment at  the  Hammersmith  hospital.  The
       fact of his trip is also set out in letter  of  Dr  Lieske  Kuitert,
       consultant respiratory physician at the London Chest Hospital  dated
       1st April 2014, which was before Judge Simpson. This letter confirms
       that he had a CT scan and blood tests at a large private hospital in
       India, and clearly had brought this evidence  back  to  the  UK.  Dr
       Kuitert makes clear that Mr Hussain went to India against her advice
       due to his reliance on oxygen and her professional opinion  that  he
       might not survive the flight.

    7. Ms Everett submitted that she relied upon the grounds of appeal. She
       also submitted that the fact that Mr Hussain had travelled to  India
       should have been placed in the balancing exercise by Judge  Simpson.
       She also submitted that the evidence suggested  that  the  appellant
       was only in the UK to care for her father  because  social  services
       could not do the job properly and there was no proper evidence  that
       this was the case.

    8. Mr Hussain explained that he had called social services and they had
       told him on the telephone they would only supply  help  for  between
       one and one and a  half  hours  a  day  assistance.  (This  is  also
       recorded at paragraph 7 of Judge Simpson's determination).

Conclusions

    9. The grounds of appeal allege that Judge Simpson should have factored
       into his consideration and ultimately dismissed the  appeal  because
       the appellant entered the UK intending to remain as a  carer  rather
       than a visitor. But this is not the evidence that was  before  Judge
       Simpson: in the appellant's statement she clearly sets out that  she
       came to the UK for a period of six months as a visitor  hoping  that
       she could take her  father  with  her  back  to  India  but  it  had
       transpired that his condition was such she  did  not  feel  able  to
       return home due to the care her father needed  in  the  UK,  and  so
       applied to remain longer. This argument discloses no error of law on
       Judge Simpson's part. It is also clear that  Judge  Simpson  factors
       into his consideration of the appeal the  fact  that  the  appellant
       cannot meet any provision of the Immigration Rules, see paragraph  9
       of his determination.

   10. Judge Simpson notes the  respondent's  contention  that  Mr  Hussain
       should have his treatment in India and be supported by family  there
       at paragraph 9 of his determination. However at paragraph 12 of  his
       determination he clearly rejects this argument as he finds  that  Mr
       Hussain: "is a British citizen and as such is entitled  to  live  in
       the UK and receive medical treatment here."

   11. Mr Hussain attended the First-tier Tribunal and gave evidence (as he
       did before the Upper Tribunal) despite being constantly  reliant  on
       an oxygen cylinder - see paragraph 5 of the determination  of  Judge
       Simpson. It is unclear from the records before me if Mr Hussain  was
       asked about his experience seeking medical treatment in  India  when
       he appeared before the First-tier Tribunal, however it is clear that
       evidence was before the First-tier Tribunal about the trip  he  made
       to India for further medical tests, and the fact that Mr Hussain had
       returned to the UK despite the  very  severe  risks  to  his  health
       associated with air travel. This is set out  in  the  letter  of  Dr
       Kuitert which is at page 5 of the appellant's bundle.

   12. I find that Judge Simpson has  adequately  considered  the  argument
       that Mr Hussain should return to India to receive medical  treatment
       ain his determination and was entitled to conclude that Mr Hussain's
       decision to receive medical treatment in the UK  was  reasonable  in
       all the circumstances. At paragraph 16 of  his  determination  Judge
       Simpson notes that he has  carefully  considered  all  the  evidence
       before him.  Before Judge Simpson was the letter of Dr  Kuitert,  at
       page 5 of the appellant's bundle, from which it is also  clear  that
       Mr Hussain would not be assessed as medically fit to travel to India
       by his treating physician so could not  reasonably  be  expected  to
       travel there for treatment.

   13. I find that Judge Simpson properly assessed that family life existed
       between the appellant and her father, Mr Hussain. He cited  evidence
       which he found heartfelt at paragraph 8 of  his  determination,  and
       concluded that there was a loving bond between  them  in  which  the
       appellant placed her father's interests above her own and wished  to
       care for him in his final stages of life reciprocating the love  and
       care he provided to her as a child, see paragraphs 12 and 13 of  his
       determination.

   14. I also find that full consideration had been given to the  issue  of
       what Social Services could provide in the way of care  and  support.
       At paragraphs 7 and 12 of the determination  it  was  accepted  that
       some lesser amount of care could be provided by Social Services  but
       ultimately Judge Simpson found that due to the "loving bond" between
       the appellant and her father that Social Services assistance was  no
       adequate substitute.  There is no error of law in relation  to  this
       issue either.

Decision

   15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making
       of an error on a point of law.

   16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal on human
       rights grounds is upheld.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley
16th July 2014
