
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Numbers:
IA/39506/2013

                                          IA/39533/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 21 October 2014                       |On 3 December 2014        |
|                                         |                          |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                (1) Mr A K A
                                (2) Ms A K Q
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr L Wilcox, Counsel (instructed by Sutovic &
Hartigan)
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant (the Secretary of State) appealed with  permission
           granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Colyer on 16  October  2014
           against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Warren  L
           Grant who had allowed the Respondents' appeals  against  removal
           on human rights (Article 8  ECHR)  grounds  in  a  determination
           promulgated on 3 September 2014.


      2.    The Respondents are nationals of Ghana, respectively born on  18
           April 1964 and 11 March 2005.  It is  not  necessary  to  repeat
           their immigration history which is set out  at  [7]  to  [9]  of
           Judge  Grant's  determination.   In  essence  the   Respondents'
           husband/father had been granted DLR following an appeal  to  the
           First-tier Tribunal, in which  his  Article  8  ECHR  claim  was
           allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Dawson (as  he  then  was).
           First-tier Tribunal Judge Dawson had  stated  that  his  removal
           would also breach the Article 8 ECHR rights of his wife and son,
           i.e., the First Respondent and Second Respondent in the  present
           appeal.  The First Respondent and Second Respondent had  however
           not been granted leave to remain in line with  that  granted  to
           their husband/father because they had  not  submitted  fee  paid
           applications.  Judge Grant noted that by 10 September  2016  the
           husband/father  would  have  accrued  not  less  than  25  years
           residence in the United Kingdom which would enable him to comply
           with paragraph 276ADE of  the  Immigration  Rules.  Judge  Grant
           considered that he was bound by  Devaseelan  (Second  Appeals  -
           ECHR - Extra-Territorial Effect) Sri Lanka * [2002] UKIAT  00702
           and allowed the Respondents' Article 8 ECHR appeals.


      3.    Permission to appeal was granted because it was considered  that
           it was arguable that the judge had erred in law in his  approach
           and had not followed Gulshan (Article 8 - new  rules  -  correct
           approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC)  and  Nagre  [2013]  EWHC  720
           (Admin).   The  judge  had  not  identified  any  compelling  or
           exceptional factors.  EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ  874  was
           relevant.   The judge's proportionality analysis had  failed  to
           take account of section 117B the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
           Asylum Act 2002, and the public interest generally.


      4.    Standard directions were made by the tribunal,  indicating  that
           the appeal would be reheard immediately if a material  error  of
           law were found.  A rule 24 notice opposing the appeal  had  been
           filed on the Respondents' behalf.










      Submissions - error of law


      5.    Mr Bramble for the Appellant relied on the grounds of onwards of
           appeal and the grant of permission to appeal.  He submitted that
           the judge's findings and  reasoning  had  been  superficial  and
           inadequate, such that the appeals ought to  be  revisited.   The
           determination was extremely brief.   The  judge  had  not  given
           sufficient attention to the components of section 117B, nor  the
           fact that the Respondents  had  not  satisfied  the  Immigration
           Rules.


      6.    Mr Wilcox for the Respondents relied on  his  skeleton  argument
           and the rule 24 notice.  There had never been any claim that the
           Respondents satisfied the Immigration  Rules.   Section  117B(4)
           was not satisfied as the sponsor husband/father only had DLR and
           so  was  not  settled  within  those  provisions.   The   Second
           Appellant  was  required  to   attend   school   by   law.    EV
           (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874 was not relevant because there
           both parents were to  be  removed.   The  judge  had  reached  a
           properly reasoned decision.


      7.    Mr  Bramble  addressed  the  tribunal  briefly  in  reply.   The
           Respondents and their sponsor could continue their  family  life
           in Ghana without difficulty.


      8.    The tribunal indicated that it found no material  error  of  law
           and reserved its determination which now follows.




      No material error of law finding


      9.    The judge's treatment of the evidence was sufficient and he  set
           out his essential findings.  The  judge  explained  why  he  was
           bound by the tribunal's findings in 2009 concerning  the  family
           life between the Respondents and their sponsor, indicating  that
           he did not necessarily endorse them, but that the  Secretary  of
           State  had  made  no  challenge,   despite   having   had   full
           opportunity.  Those unchallenged  findings  from  2009  were  in
           effect reinforced  by  the  subsequent  evidence  of  continuing
           family life presented to the judge.  The judge carefully set out
           the current law including discussion of MM (Lebanon) [2014] EWCA
           Civ 985 which post dated Gulshan and Nagre.  The judge also  set
           out sections 117A and 117B of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
           Asylum Act 2002 in full and  plainly  paid  close  attention  to
           them.  The determination was not unduly brief at  all,  but  was
           rather incisive and succinct,  taking  full  account  of  public
           interest issues such as the disputed access  to  the  NHS.   The
           particular factual matrix found by the judge was not covered  by
           the Immigration Rules, specifically the wife and son of a person
           granted DLR in 2009, who had neither been granted  DLR  in  line
           with him nor removed. They had made applications to  be  treated
           in line with their son/father, not simply  remained  unlawfully.
           The Secretary of State's position was hardly  logical.   It  was
           open to the judge to find that it was disproportionate  for  the
           Respondents to be removed in all the circumstances.


      10.   The tribunal accordingly finds that there was no error of law in
           the determination and there is no basis for interfering with the
           judge's decision.


      DECISION


      The making of the previous decision did not involve the making  of  an
error on a point of law and stands unchanged

      Signed                                  Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell








