
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/39355/2014
                                                               IA/39356/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st October 2015                  |On 21st October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          THE HONOURABLE LORD BURNS
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                   (1) MR MAHAMARAKKALA PATABENDIGE COORAY
                 (2) MRS DILSHANI LAKSHIKA SABREENA SALGADOE
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Faisal Safee (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Tony Melvin (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Maxwell, promulgated on 13th May 2015, following a hearing on 5th
    May 2015 at Richmond.  In the determination, the  judge  dismissed  the
    appeals  of  Mr  Mahamarakkala  Patabendige  Cooray  and  Mrs  Dilshani
    Lakshika Sabreena Salgadoe.  The Appellants subsequently  applied  for,
    and were granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and  thus
    the matter comes before us.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are husband and wife.  They are citizens of  Sri  Lanka.
    The first Appellant, the husband, was  born  on  25th  May  1980.   The
    second Appellant, his wife, was  born  on  4th  May  1983.   The  first
    Appellant applied for leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier 1
    (Entrepreneur) Migrant  and  the  second  Appellant  as  his  dependent
    spouse.  On 2nd October 2014,  the  applications  were  refused  and  a
    decision made to remove the Appellants.

The Appellants' Claim

 3. The Appellants claim is that the claim did not succeed only because  of
    the failure of the first Appellant to submit a  letter  from  his  bank
    when he lodged his application to confirm that  he  had  the  requisite
    funds in order to meet the provisions of paragraph  245AAA.   Secondly,
    that even if this was the case, given  that  the  first  Appellant  had
    originally come to the UK on 22nd October 2004, he had clocked  up  ten
    years of  lawful  stay  in  the  UK,  thus  enabling  him  to  make  an
    application under the so-called ten year Rule.  If he  could  show  ten
    years of continuous lawful residence, then he would have the  right  to
    remain in that capacity.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge observed how the Appellant had initially come to  the  UK  on
    22nd October 2004 with leave to remain as a  working  holidaymaker  for
    two years.  He then left the UK on 12th September 2006, but returned on
    17th January  2007,  having  been  granted  entry  as  a  student  (see
    paragraph 8).  He was thereafter granted further leave to remain  as  a
    student until 30th September 2008,  following  which  he  made  further
    applications (see paragraph 8).

 5. The judge went on to state that there was a clear historic timeline set
    out by paragraph 276B, which was ten years' continuous lawful residence
    in the United Kingdom.  However,

         "In the present instance, putting the first Appellant's case at its
         highest,  the  timeline  commenced  on  22nd  October  2004.    The
         Respondent made a decision to refuse the  original  application  on
         2nd October 2014.  It follows that by the date of the decision  the
         first Appellant did not have ten years' continuous lawful residence
         in the United Kingdom ..." (paragraph 14).

    The timeline set out by the Appellant (paragraph 15 was accepted by the
    Judge.

 6. As for the failure to submit the bank statement  at  the  time  of  the
    application, he held that its subsequent submission  could  not  remedy
    the earlier error because,

         "In the present instance, the document in question  does  not  meet
         the criteria set out in sub-paragraph (b)  [of  paragraph  245AAA].
         It is a 'stand alone' document rather than one of a sequence and as
         it did not exist at the  date  of  the  application  it  cannot  be
         suggested it might otherwise fit  within  this  scheme"  (paragraph
         19).

 7. That left the application of human rights law.   The  judge  here  held
    that the Appellants could not succeed under Article  8  either  because
    they could not comply with paragraph 276ADE, not having been in the  UK
    for twenty years, and as far as looking at their situation outside  the
    Immigration Rules, there was nothing exceptional  in  their  situation,
    with the result that with the application of  the  "Razgar  principles"
    (see paragraph 29), the appeal would fail on this basis as well.

 8. The appeals were dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 9. The grounds of application state that the judge failed to  give  proper
    consideration to the Respondent's "evidential flexibility policy", with
    the result that if a document had been submitted late, and not with the
    application, it could still have been taken into consideration, and the
    application allowed on that basis  by  the  Secretary  of  State.   The
    grounds  also  asserted  that  the  judge   failed   to   give   proper
    consideration to the Appellants' long residence in the UK.

The Hearing

10. At the hearing  before  us  on  1st  October  2015,  Mr  Faisal  Safee,
    appearing on behalf of the Appellants, submitted  that  the  Appellants
    had continuing leave under Section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971.   On
    22nd October 2014, they had clocked up ten years of lawful residence in
    the UK.  The first Appellant's application  had  been  refused  on  2nd
    October 2014, and he had leave  for  the  duration  of  his  time  here
    pending the outcome of his appeal hearing.  He directed  our  attention
    to the well-known cases  of  AS  (Afghanistan)  [2011]  1  WLR  385  at
    paragraphs 83 and 35 and to Patel [2014] AC 651 at  paragraph  34.   In
    relation to paragraph 276A and B he drew  our  attention  to  the  long
    residence policy of the Respondent Secretary of State, a copy of  which
    he handed up (dated 8th May 2015).  He submitted  that  the  Appellants
    would have succeeded on these bases.

11. In reply, Mr Melvin submitted that the Appellants could not succeed for
    the following reasons.  First, the first Appellant did not  submit  the
    required  certified  document  for  Tier  1.   The  case   of   Durrani
    (Entrepreneurs: bank letters; evidential flexibility) [2014] UKUT  295,
    makes it quite clear that  this  is  so.   Therefore,  this  particular
    Ground of Appeal has no merit whatsoever.

12. Second, in relation to the claim based on  long  residence,  Mr  Melvin
    submitted that the judge was again correct.  This is because,  although
    the Appellant had first come to the UK as  a  working  holidaymaker  in
    2004, he had then returned back to Sri Lanka  in  2007,  only  then  to
    return in a different capacity, as a student.  His continuous residence
    had been broken.  The Appellant could only have come  back  in  another
    lawful capacity if he had done so within 28 days of his  return.   This
    was not the case here.  As a result, the correct timeline in  his  case
    was not 2004, but 2007, which was the period when he returned  back  to
    the UK as a student.

13. In his reply, Mr Safee submitted that the Home Office's own policy (see
    guidance - long residence - v13.0) makes it clear (at page  13  of  54)
    that "breaks in continuous residence" are permissible and there was  no
    requirement that a person should return back in the  same  capacity  of
    legal leave as he had initially entered.  It was an unlawful one.

No Error of Law

14. We are satisfied that the making of the decision by the judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that we should set aside the decision  and  remake  the
    decision (see Section 12(2) of TCEA 2007).  Our reasons are as follows.



15. First, the judge was plainly right in concluding that the  despatch  of
    the  bank  statement  after  the  first  Appellant   had   lodged   his
    application, did not comply with paragraph 245AA(b) in that this was  a
    document which was not one of a sequence of documents missing from  the
    original submitted application, as it did not exist at the date of  the
    application.  The established case law confirms this.  The  "evidential
    flexibility policy" is not intended to cover the situation in which the
    present Appellants found themselves.

16. Second, the first Appellant did  not  have  continuing  leave  when  he
    returned back to the UK in 2007 in the capacity  of  a  student.   This
    means that he could not avail himself of the long residence Rule on the
    basis of having had ten years' continuous residence  in  the  UK.   The
    Home Office document "guidance - long residence - version 13.0"  (dated
    8th May 2015) contains the explanation at page  13  under  the  heading
    "Breaks in  continuous  residence".   It  recognises  that  time  spent
    outside the UK does not break continuous residence, provided  that  the
    applicant is not absent from the UK for six months, and  provided  that
    they "departed the UK after  expiry  of  their  leave  to  remain,  but
    applied for fresh entry clearance within 28 days of the previous  leave
    expiring".

17. The first Appellant in this case did  not  apply  for  entry  clearance
    within 28 days of the previous leave expiring.  Therefore, although  he
    returned to the UK with valid leave, the continuous  residence  had  by
    that stage been broken on account of his having returned to  Sri  Lanka
    at the end of his existing leave as  a  working  holidaymaker  on  12th
    September 2006, but then returning only on 17th January 2007.   It  has
    not been the Appellant's case  before  this  Tribunal,  or  before  the
    Tribunal below, that he did apply for entry clearance within 28 days of
    the previous leave expiring.  Accordingly, the Appellant  cannot  avail
    himself of the ten years' continuous residence Rule.

18. Third, the  Appellant  cannot  succeed  under  Article  8  ECHR  either
    because, for the reasons given by the judge at paragraphs 24 to 42, the
    Appellants had not been in the UK for twenty years, and  although  they
    had a child in the UK, this was  not  a  qualifying  child  within  the
    meaning of Section  117D  (see  paragraph  36).   It  was  the  judge's
    findings that, "neither Appellant has had a reasonable expectation that
    their leave would be extended at any point.  Both of them came  to  the
    United Kingdom with leave that was transient in  nature  and  have,  in
    effect, hopped from one form of leave to another" (paragraph  38).   In
    the circumstances, it cannot be said that the judge's determination was
    perverse or one that was not otherwise reasonably open  to  him.   This
    appeal fails for all these reasons.

Notice of Decision

19. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

20. No anonymity order is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    21st October 2015

