
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39902/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th August 2015                  |On 20th August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         mrs thi thanh huyen nguyen
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Nizami, Counsel instructed by Gulbenkian
                    Andonian Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Ms Nguyen is a national of Vietnam (referred to as  the  claimant)  who
    applied for a derivative residence card from the Secretary of State  as
    confirmation of a derivative right of residence in the United  Kingdom.
    That was refused but her subsequent appeal to First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Gillespie was allowed under the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations.   The
    essence of the judge's reasoning was that  the  judge  found  that  the
    claimant's son was still suckling at the breast of  Ms  Nguyen  and  as
    such remained completely dependent upon his mother.   Were  she  to  be
    removed in the present circumstances he too would be obliged  to  leave
    the United Kingdom.

 2. The grounds of application lodged by the Secretary of  State  challenge
    his findings pointing out that the child could continue to reside  here
    with his father if the claimant were required to leave.  There  was  no
    finding that the claimant's partner would not care for the child should
    Ms Nguyen leave the United Kingdom and as such the child would  not  be
    compelled to leave the European Union.  Reference was made to MA and SM
    (Zambrano: EU children outside EU) Iran [2013] UKUT 380.

 3. Permission was granted on the  basis  that  the  judge  did  not  fully
    consider the EEA Regulations and that this was  an  arguable  error  in
    law.

 4. Before me Ms Isherwood for the Home Office relied on her  grounds.   In
    particular reliance was placed on MA with reference made to  paragraphs
    55 and 56.  There was no suggestion that the Sponsor was not capable of
    looking after the children in MA and the same applied on the particular
    facts of this case.  The right of residence was a right  to  reside  in
    the territory of the EU and was not a right to any  particular  quality
    of life or to any particular standard of living.

 5. I was asked  to  set  the  decision  aside  and  re-make  the  decision
    dismissing the appeal.

 6. For Ms Nguyen it was submitted that this was simply an attempt  by  the
    Secretary of State to reargue the  case.   It  was  unsatisfactory  for
    permission to have been granted in the manner it had been,  namely  the
    judge finding that the matter was arguable - see what was said  by  the
    President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey, in the case of MR (permission
    to appeal: Tribunal's approach) Brazil [2015] UKUT 29 (IAC) on such  an
    approach.  The judge had given reasons why Mrs Nguyen was  the  primary
    carer.  At the date of the hearing he was entitled to find that no  one
    else could look after the baby given that she was still  breastfeeding.
    Such a finding was unimpeachable.  Even if the finding could be said to
    be generous that was not the same thing as an error in law.   Reference
    was made to Mukarkar v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1045 when it was said  that
    the mere fact that one Tribunal had reached what may seem "an unusually
    generous view of the facts" did not mean that it had made an  error  in
    law.

 7. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

 8. The judge gave very clear reasons for finding that  Mrs  Nguyen  was  a
    primary carer of the infant, Reims.  He accepted that she was a nursing
    mother and noted that the hearing of the appeal had to  be  interrupted
    in order that the child might suckle.  He considered that for  as  long
    as the child was nursing at the breast  and  had  no  other  source  of
    nourishment his mother had to be regarded as  the  primary  carer.   He
    observed that the claimant admitted that from time to time she fed  the
    child small quantities of thin rice soup  but  nevertheless  the  child
    took no solids and was dependent on the breast.  The judge set out  the
    relevant Regulations and was satisfied, for reasons he gave,  that  the
    child would be unable to remain in the United Kingdom if Ms Nguyen  was
    required  to  leave.   He  was  therefore  attaching   a   considerable
    importance to breastfeeding concluding that the  interruption  of  that
    would not be tolerable and as such the Regulations were satisfied.

 9. It seems to me important to note that the judge was correct to view the
    issue as one which had to be considered at the date of  the  hearing  -
    see Boodhoo (EEA regs: relevant evidence) [2013] UKUT 00346 (IAC).   By
    definition the act of breastfeeding is  not  a  permanent  one  but  is
    temporary in nature particularly given that the child in this case  was
    aged 16 months.  It may be that the act of  breastfeeding  was  nearing
    its end.  However the judge was not looking at the future,  but  rather
    was considering the position before him as it stood as at the  date  of
    the hearing as he was bound to do.

10. It can readily be seen that it was open to the judge to  conclude  that
    the act of breastfeeding was so fundamental to the welfare of the child
    that he would have had to leave the  United  Kingdom  with  his  mother
    should  the  decision  have  gone  the  other  way.  The   element   of
    "compulsion" referred to in the grounds of application can be  inferred
    from the judge's clear findings.  It may  be,  of  course,  that  other
    judges would have decided the case differently and in a more robust way
    and very much on the basis of the grounds set out by the  Secretary  of
    State. It might well be  said  that  the  decision  was  undoubtedly  a
    generous one.  That may be so but in my view this is  not  at  all  the
    same as saying that Judge Gillespie erred in  law.   In  my  view,  the
    reasons he gave can be said to be coherent and do not cross  over  into
    the territory of perversity or irrationality. He was bound to  look  at
    the circumstances as they were as at the date of the hearing before him
    in respect of which he made decisive findings which he was entitled  to
    make.

Decision

11. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

12. I do not set aside the decision.

13. There is no need for an anonymity order.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald

