
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/39651/2014
                                                               IA/49149/2014
                                                               IA/49155/2014
                                                               IA/49162/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 September 2016                 |On 20 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                 ABIODUN [F]
                                 ADEOLA [F]
                                    [E F]
                                    [J F]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Adewoye, Prime Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge S Taylor promulgated on 10 March 2016 in  which  he
    dismissed their appeals against the decisions of the Secretary of State
    to refuse them leave to enter the United Kingdom  and  to  remove  them
    from the United Kingdom.

 2. The first and  second  appellants  are  citizens  of  Nigeria  and  are
    married. The third  and  fourth  appellants  are  their  children.  The
    younger child was born in the United  Kingdom.   All  are  citizens  of
    Nigeria.  The history of the family and the fact they  have  overstayed
    here and have never had leave to remain  here  other  than  an  initial
    visit visa in the case of the first  of  the  appellants,  is  set  out
    adequately in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. Their applications for leave to remain were made prior to the change in
    the Immigration Rules of July 2012. Nonetheless, the Secretary of State
    took a decision pursuant to what the "new" Rules, concluding  that  the
    appellants did not meet the requirements of Appendix  FM  or  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  It was not contended before the First-
    tier Tribunal that the requirements of the Immigration Rules were  met,
    rather it was submitted that on the particular facts of this case  that
    it would be in breach of the United Kingdom's obligations  pursuant  to
    Article 8 to remove the appellants from the United Kingdom.

 4. In his  decision  the  judge  noted  the  immigration  history  of  the
    appellants and considered in some detail their immigration history.  He
    also considered the position of the third and fourth appellants  noting
    in particular that they have been educated in the  United  Kingdom.  He
    was also clearly aware that they had been as at  the  date  of  hearing
    (but not at the date of application) present in the United Kingdom  for
    seven years.   He noted also the submissions made on  their  behalf  in
    particular the reports which had been prepared  by  social  workers  in
    support of the application that they should not be returned to Nigeria.



 5. The judge found that whilst the best interests of the  children  are  a
    primary consideration it was not the only consideration, and that these
    interests  should  be  taken  into  account  with  other  factors,   He
    considered that the  adult  appellants'  poor  immigration  record  was
    particularly relevant and concluded, viewing the facts  as a whole that
    the maintenance of immigration control was in the public  interest  and
    was not on the facts of this case  outweighed,  the  judge  considering
    that it would be reasonable to expect  the children to leave the United
    Kingdom.

 6. The appellants sought permission to appeal against that decision on the
    grounds primarily that the judge had  failed  properly  to  conduct  an
    enquiry into the best interests of the children, failing properly to go
    into the factors  and  material  as  identified  in  EV  (Philippines).
    Second, that there was insufficient attention paid to the fact that the
    children had been present for seven years in the United Kingdom. Third,
    that the judge focused improperly on the circumstances of  the  parents
    rather than the children.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Colyer
    who concluded having set out and summarised the grounds that the  judge
    misdirected himself as averred.

 8. I observe at this point that since leave  was  granted,  the  Court  of
    Appeal has handed down MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ  705  which  is  a
    case which I must take into account although of  course  it  post-dates
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. Mr Adowoye for the appellants stressed that the judge in this case  had
    erred in that he had failed to attach significant weight  to  the  fact
    that the children had been present in  the  United  Kingdom  for  seven
    years and that in this context and also in light of the position in  EV
    (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874 the analysis of the  children's  best
    interests was flawed in that it was to a significant degree infected by
    improper considerations  as  to  the  children's  parents'  immigration
    history.

10. Mr Melvin submitted that the decision was sustainable relying primarily
    on the Rule 24 notice. He submitted further that although MA (Pakistan)
    did post-date it the judge had not erred in his approach  to  the  best
    interests of the children and it was sufficiently clear that the  judge
    had had proper regard to the fact that the children had been  here  for
    seven years and had properly had regard to that factor, the  conclusion
    that it was reasonable for them to return to Nigeria being clearly open
    to him.  He submitted further that the  judge  had  not  erred  in  his
    application of EV (Philippines) and that the judge had been entitled to
    consider all the factors in reaching his conclusion as to the interests
    of children.

11. I am satisfied that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve
    the making of an error of law for the reasons which I now  set  out  in
    brief.

12. Primarily, the judge appears to have fallen into error in not attaching
    the significant weight which is due to the fact that the children  have
    been present in the United Kingdom for seven years. That is dealt  with
    in several passages in MA (Pakistan) particularly  at  paragraphs  [46]
    and [47] and also in the conclusions at paragraph [103].

13. It follows that the fact that a child has  spent  seven  years  in  the
    United Kingdom is an important factor in determining his  or  her  best
    interests.   I consider that in this case in addition  to  the  failure
    properly to give significant weight to that as the Court of  Appeal  in
    MA indicates must be given to the seven years that  the  children  have
    lived here.  Equally the analysis of their  best  interests  must  take
    that into account as a starting point which, the judge did  not  appear
    to do in his analysis of their best interests.

14. Equally, it can be argued that the analysis in EV  (Philippines)  needs
    to be read through the lens of the fact, firstly that that  was  not  a
    seven years' residence case, and secondly, the observations made by the
    Court of Appeal in MA  (Pakistan)  in  relation  to  EV  (Philippines).
    Bearing in mind the factors that would need to be  taken  into  account
    and to which significant weight would need to be awarded, that  is  the
    seven year's residence, the judge's decision is defective.

15. Taking these factors together I do not consider that that the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal is adequately reasoned or sustainable and  I
    therefore set it aside. The question then arises as to whether this  is
    remade in the Upper Tribunal whether it s remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for it to make a fresh decision.

16. The difficulty I foresee in remaking the decision in the Upper Tribunal
    is that it would now appear that an application has been made  for  the
    younger child who was born in the United Kingdom to  be  registered  in
    the United Kingdom as a British citizen given that she  has  now  lived
    here for ten years continuously.  Were that to be established then that
    would be a significant factor which would need to taken  into  account.
    It would also presumably in effect make the  position  different  if  a
    fresh application for leave to remain were made.

17. Having heard submissions from both representatives, I am satisfied that
    the proper course of action would be to remit the appeal to the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  Consideration also needs to be given to an  application
    under the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  for
    confirmation of the derived  right  of  residence  under  reg.  15A  in
    respect of  the  appellants,  if  and  when  the  fourth  appellant  is
    registered as a British Citizen.



Summary of conclusions


 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remit the decision to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision to
    be made on all issues. None of the findings of fact are preserved.


Signed                                  Date   19 September 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

