
IAC-AH-DN-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39681/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19th June 2015                    |On 6th July 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            elisa mabborang sibal
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms F Beach of Counsel instructed by Selvarajah & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a decision of  Designated  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Manuell promulgated on 2nd February 2015.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and I will refer to her as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a female citizen of the Philippines who arrived in  the
    United Kingdom on 10th October 2013 with leave as an overseas  domestic
    worker.  The visa was valid between 4th September 2013  and  4th  March
    2014.

 4. The Claimant was subsequently granted further leave to  remain  outside
    the Immigration Rules,  based  on  the  Secretary  of  State's  carer's
    concession, which leave was valid from 14th May 2014 until 14th  August
    2014.

 5. Prior to the expiry of that leave  the  Claimant  applied  for  further
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom to  enable  her  to  care  for  a
    British citizen Mrs Marian Gold born 20th June 1926.

 6. The Claimant's application was refused on 22nd September 2014, and  the
    Secretary of State issued a Notice of Immigration Decision refusing  to
    vary leave to remain, and deciding to  remove  the  Claimant  from  the
    United Kingdom.

 7. The Secretary of State's reasons for refusal are set out  in  a  letter
    dated 22nd September 2014 and may be summarised  as  follows.   It  was
    noted that the Claimant had previously been granted three months' leave
    outside the Immigration Rules so that alternative  care  for  Mrs  Gold
    could be  organised.   It  was  noted  that  Mrs  Gold's  children  had
    interviewed some applicants but they were  deemed  unsuitable,  and  no
    evidence had been submitted to confirm that any other type of care  had
    been sought, such as social services care.

 8. The Secretary of State's view was that the local authority  and  social
    services are under a duty to provide suitable  care,  and  it  was  not
    accepted  that  Mrs  Gold's  family  had  explored  and  exhausted  all
    alternative arrangements for care.  It was  noted  that  Mrs  Gold  had
    family  members  in  the  United  Kingdom  who  were  not  subject   to
    immigration control, and the Secretary of State was not satisfied  that
    the Claimant was required to remain in the United Kingdom in  order  to
    arrange alternative care.  The Secretary of State believed  that  there
    would be other people available in the  United  Kingdom  who  could  be
    employed as a carer and did not find that the Claimant's  circumstances
    were such  that  warranted  discretion  to  be  exercised  outside  the
    Immigration Rules, and the application was therefore  refused  pursuant
    to paragraph 322(1) of the Immigration Rules.

 9. The Claimant's appeal was heard by Judge Manuell (the  judge)  on  20th
    January 2015.  The judge heard  evidence  from  the  Claimant  and  Mrs
    Gold's daughter, describing both witnesses as frank and reliable.   The
    judge found that removal of  the  Claimant  would  interfere  with  her
    private life rights under Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention  on
    Human Rights (the 1950 Convention), and also the private life rights of
    Mrs Gold.  The judge allowed the  appeal  under  Article  8,  making  a
    recommendation that the Secretary of State should  grant  discretionary
    leave to remain for a period of six months initially.

10. The Secretary of State was granted permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal and the appeal came before me on 22nd May 2015.

11. In brief summary while I found that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was compassionate and had been prepared  with  care,  I  found
    that the judge had failed to demonstrate that he had had regard to  the
    considerations set out in section 117B of the Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act), and in particular section  117B(5).
    Because of this I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, as
    the proportionality assessment had  been  carried  out  without  having
    regard to the section 117B considerations.

12. On a separate point, my view was that the judge had misdirected himself
    in law by extending the principles in Beoku-Betts  [2008]  UKHL  39  to
    include the private life of Mrs Gold, the Claimant's employer,  as  Mrs
    Gold was not a member of the Claimant's family.

13. The hearing was adjourned at the request of Ms Beach to enable  her  to
    prepare submissions on the principles in Beoku-Betts.

14. Full details of the application for permission to appeal, and the grant
    of permission by Judge Hollingworth, and  my  reasons  for  finding  an
    error of law are contained in my decision dated 26th May 2015.

Re-making the Decision

Preliminary Issues

15. I ascertained I had received all documentation upon which  the  parties
    intended to rely.  I had received the Claimant's bundle  comprising  47
    pages, with a further witness statement made by the Claimant dated 13th
    May 2015, and a skeleton argument prepared by Ms Beach.

16. Ms Beach confirmed that no further oral evidence was to be given by  or
    on behalf of the Claimant, and reliance was placed  upon  the  evidence
    given to the First-tier Tribunal.

The Claimant's Submissions

17. Ms Beach relied upon her skeleton argument dated 15th  June  2015.   It
    was submitted that the key issue was whether the Secretary  of  State's
    decision  to  refuse  leave  to  remain  was  proportionate.   It   was
    acknowledged that the Claimant had not formed a family  life  with  Mrs
    Gold in the sense of blood relations but  it  was  submitted  that  Mrs
    Gold's Article 8 rights should still  be  considered  as  part  of  the
    proportionality assessment.

18. Reliance was  placed  upon  Beoku-Betts  [2008]  UKHL  39  and  it  was
    submitted  that  the  Claimant  and  Mrs  Gold   had   a   quasi-family
    relationship in that there was a particular bond between  the  Claimant
    and Mrs Gold which went beyond a normal employer/employee relationship.

19. It was accepted  that  the  Claimant  could  not  satisfy  any  of  the
    Immigration Rules in relation to Article 8, but I was  asked  to  allow
    the appeal in relation to Article 8 outside the rules.  I was  referred
    to UE (Nigeria) [2010] EWCA Civ 975, in support of the contention  that
    the wider interests of the community should be taken into account  when
    assessing proportionality.  I  was  asked  to  take  into  account  the
    Article 8 rights of the  Claimant,  Mrs  Gold,  and  Mrs  Gold's  adult
    children.

20. In relation to section 117B of the 2002 Act, I was asked to  note  that
    the Claimant speaks English and  is  financially  independent.   I  was
    asked to note the report of Dr Kanakaratnam which  confirmed  that  Mrs
    Gold is particularly dependent on the Claimant.  It was submitted  that
    considerable weight should be placed upon this.  I was  also  asked  to
    take into account that if the Claimant had to leave the United Kingdom,
    then some of the care  provided  for  Mrs  Gold  would  necessarily  be
    provided by the state thus incurring further costs.

The Secretary of State's Submissions

21. Ms Everett submitted that the appeal should be dismissed.  I was  asked
    to find that it was not realistic to suggest that  care  could  not  be
    provided to Mrs Gold if the Claimant had to leave the  United  Kingdom.
    Ms Everett submitted that the focus should be on the Claimant's private
    life rather than on the private life rights of Mrs Gold and her family.

22. I was asked to note that the  Claimant  had  always  had  a  precarious
    immigration status since arriving in the United Kingdom in October 2013
    and therefore little weight should be given to  her  private  life,  in
    accordance with section 117B(5).

23. Ms Everett  accepted  that  there  may  be  difficulties  in  arranging
    suitable care for Mrs Gold, as is the case with  many  elderly  people,
    but she contended that Article 8 should not be  used  in  a  case  like
    this, to allow the Claimant leave to remain, even though she could  not
    satisfy the Immigration Rules.  I was asked to find that there were  no
    exceptional circumstances in this  appeal  which  should  therefore  be
    dismissed.

The Claimant's Response

24. Ms Beach pointed out that the  Claimant's  private  life  involves  Mrs
    Gold, and it was found by the First-tier Tribunal (paragraph  22)  that
    the Claimant derives personal fulfilment from caring  for  others,  and
    therefore her removal would have an adverse effect upon her as well  as
    Mrs Gold.  Ms Beach submitted that Mrs Gold's private life rights  were
    engaged, and they should not be marginalised.

25. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

26. I have taken into account all the evidence placed before  me,  together
    with the submissions made by both representatives.  I  have  considered
    the circumstances as at the date of hearing.

27. In considering an Article 8  claim  the  starting  point  must  be  the
    Immigration Rules, and Appendix FM which deals with  family  life,  and
    paragraph 276ADE which deals with private life.

28. It has been conceded by  the  Claimant  that  she  cannot  satisfy  the
    Immigration Rules in relation to Article 8 and I so find.

29. The Secretary of State did not argue  that  Article  8  should  not  be
    considered  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.   It  is  appropriate  to
    consider Article 8 if the Immigration Rules are not  a  complete  code.
    In my view it is in this case appropriate to consider Article 8 outside
    the rules.

30. I have followed the principles set out in Razgar [2004] UKHL  27  which
    involves answering the following questions;

          1) Will the proposed removal  be  an  interference  by  a  public
             authority with  the  exercise  of  the  applicant's  right  to
             respect for his private or family life?

          2) If so,  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such
             gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

          3) If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

          4) If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic  society
             in the interests of national security, public  safety  or  the
             economic well-being of the  country,  for  the  prevention  of
             disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals,  or
             for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others?

          5) If so, is such interference proportionate  to  the  legitimate
             public end sought to be achieved?

31. I do not find that the Claimant has established a family  life  in  the
    United Kingdom.  Her family members, including her children, remain  in
    the Philippines.  I do not accept that the Claimant has  established  a
    "quasi-family life" with Mrs Gold.  The Claimant is paid  to  care  for
    Mrs Gold, and the evidence indicates that she does  so  very  well.   I
    accept that Mrs Gold is dependent upon her, and it is absolutely  clear
    from the evidence that Mrs Gold needs a high level  of  care.   However
    the relationship between the Claimant and Mrs Gold is that of employer-
    employee and does not amount to family, or quasi-family life.

32. I do not find the principles in Beoku-Betts assist the Claimant in this
    case, as the decision in that case related to family members.

33. Dealing with the Razgar questions,  I  accept  that  the  Claimant  has
    established a private life in the United Kingdom, and that her  removal
    will be an interference with that  private  life,  which  would  engage
    Article 8.

34. I find that the proposed interference with the Claimant's private  life
    is in accordance with the law because she cannot  satisfy  any  of  the
    Immigration Rules in order to be granted leave to remain.  The proposed
    interference is necessary in the  interests  of  maintaining  effective
    immigration control which is necessary to maintain the  economic  well-
    being of the country.

35. The key issue in this appeal relates to proportionality which  involves
    a balancing exercise.

36. In considering proportionality I take into account the Claimant  wishes
    to remain in the United Kingdom, and Mrs Gold and her family also  wish
    her to remain.  I accept that the  Claimant  is  Mrs  Gold's  full-time
    carer, and that Mrs Gold depends upon her.  I  place  weight  upon  the
    medical evidence which confirms that Mrs Gold requires a high level  of
    care, and that this care is being provided by the Claimant.

37. In relation to the reliance placed upon EU (Nigeria), I note that  this
    decision was made prior  to  the  introduction  into  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 of section 117B.

38. I take into account that the Claimant has  only  lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom since 10th October 2013 and has only ever had limited leave  to
    remain.  I also take into account that Mrs Gold's family have made some
    efforts to find an alternative carer but have not yet been successful.

39. The Upper Tribunal in Dube  [2015]  UKUT  00090  (IAC)  confirmed  that
    judges are duty bound to "have regard" to the specified  considerations
    in sections 117A-117D of the 2002 Act.  These sections are  essentially
    a further elaboration of Razgar's question 5 which is essentially about
    proportionality and justifiability.

40. Section 117B(1) confirms that the maintenance of effective  immigration
    controls is in the public interest.  Sub-sections (2) and  (3)  confirm
    that it is in the public interest that a person seeking  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom can speak English and  is  financially  independent.
    The level of the Claimant's English has not been proved, but  I  accept
    that she is able to communicate in English and that by  virtue  of  her
    employment is financially independent.  However the Upper  Tribunal  in
    AM Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC) confirmed that a Claimant  can  obtain
    no positive right to a grant of leave to  remain  from  either  section
    117B(2) or (3) whatever  the  degree  of  fluency  in  English  or  the
    strength of financial resources.

41. I set out below section 117B(5);

         'Little weight should be given to a private life established  by  a
         person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration   status   is
         precarious.'

42. It was confirmed in AM Malawi that a  person's  immigration  status  is
    precarious if their continued presence in the UK will be dependent upon
    their obtaining a further grant of leave.  The Claimant  has  therefore
    always had a precarious immigration status since her arrival in October
    2013.  I am constrained by statute therefore, to attach  little  weight
    to the private life that she has established in this country.

43. That is important, when conducting  the  balancing  exercise  which  is
    necessary to ascertain whether the Secretary  of  State's  decision  is
    proportionate.

44. I have to attach weight to the fact that the  Claimant  cannot  satisfy
    any of  the  Immigration  Rules,  that  the  maintenance  of  effective
    immigration controls is in the public interest, and that little  weight
    can be given to her private life.  I do take into  account  the  effect
    that the Claimant's removal would have upon Mrs Gold,  in  that  it  is
    clear that arrangements will have to be  made  to  provide  alternative
    care for her.  I do not accept that it would be impossible  to  provide
    the high level of care that is currently provided.  I accept  that  the
    Claimant and Mrs Gold and her family wish the  current  arrangement  to
    continue, but in my view the weight that must be attached to  the  need
    to maintain effective control and the fact that little weight should be
    given to the Claimant's private  life,  means  that  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision to refuse to vary leave to remain, and to  remove  the
    Claimant from the United Kingdom is proportionate and does  not  breach
    Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and  was
set aside.  I substitute a fresh decision.

The Claimant's appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  anonymity  direction.   There  has
been no request to the Upper Tribunal for anonymity, and no anonymity  order
is made.



Signed   Date 22nd June 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The Claimant's appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.



Signed   Date 22nd June 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

