

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/39411/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated on              |
|5 January 2015                       |16 February 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                              BEYSAGUR BAZORKIN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Malins QC
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the appellant, a  citizen  of  Russia,  against  a
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision made on 6 September 2013 refusing his application
    for leave to remain on the grounds of his long residence and to  remove
    him from the UK. Permission to appeal was  granted  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in a decision dated 19 November 2014.



Background

 2. The appellant's immigration history is set out in [3] of  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal. In brief summary, he first entered  the  UK
    on 2 July 2001 with a six month visit visa. He was  granted  a  further
    visit visa in 2002 which was extended until August 2003. On  31  August
    2003 he entered the UK with entry clearance as a student and his  leave
    in this capacity was extended on a number of subsequent occasions until
    26 February 2013. On 25 February 2013 he applied for  indefinite  leave
    to remain on the basis of 10 years continuous residence.  However,  his
    application was refused because he was unable to meet the  requirements
    of the rules relating to continuity of residence as he had been  absent
    from the UK for a total of 587 days  between  31  August  2003  and  28
    October 2012. His application was also considered under appendix FM but
    for the reasons the respondent gave, summarised in [6] of the  decision
    he was not able to meet  those  requirements.  The  appellant  appealed
    against this decision.

 3. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, it was conceded that the
    appellant could not meet  the  requirements  of  the  rules  either  in
    relation to his long residence application or with  regard  to  private
    and family life set out in appendix FM [29].  Accordingly,  the  appeal
    proceeded on article 8 grounds only.

 4. The judge accepted that the respondent's decision interfered  with  the
    appellant's right to respect for his private life [33]. His sister also
    lived in the  UK  but  the  judge  found  that  there  was  no  special
    dependency between them above and beyond  that  which  normally  exists
    between adult members of the same family. The appellant was married and
    lived with his wife in the UK. She is a Russian citizen and  has  leave
    to remain as a student until March 2015. At the  time  of  the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal the appellant's wife was pregnant (a son
    was subsequently born on 1 December  2014).  The  judge  accepted  that
    there might be some practical short term difficulties for the appellant
    or  his  wife  should  he  be  required  to  leave  either  before  her
    confinement or shortly after but she was not satisfied that  the  short
    term consequences for the appellant or his wife's family life  were  of
    such gravity to engage article 8.

 5. However, taking into account the fact that the appellant had spent most
    of the last 12 years living in the UK and stood to lose the opportunity
    of conducting business affairs here and the extent of his ties  to  the
    community in general, the judge was satisfied that the consequences  of
    removal  were  of  sufficient  gravity  to  engage   the   respondent's
    obligations under article 8. There  was  no  issue  about  whether  the
    respondent's decision was in accordance with the law or whether it  was
    for a legitimate aim  within  article  8(2).  As  the  judge  correctly
    identified, the issue for her was whether the proposed removal  of  the
    appellant was necessary and proportionate to a legitimate aim.

 6. The judge referred to the opinion of Lord Bingham in Huang v  Secretary
    of State [2007] 2AC 167 and to the provisions contained in section 117B
    of the 2002 Act as  introduced  by  the  Immigration  Act  2014.  These
    require that when considering the public interest question  a  Tribunal
    must in particular have regard  in  all  cases  to  the  considerations
    listed in section 117B. These were set out in full by the judge at [32]
    of her decision. Having referred to the observations of Lord Bingham in
    Huang about the importance of the Immigration Rules  in  providing  the
    framework for immigration control she commented [41] that whilst it was
    true that there were no obvious  language,  economic  or  other  public
    policy considerations  mentioned  in  section  117B  that  fell  to  be
    considered in the appellant's case, the important  fact  remained  that
    the requirements of the rules were not met.

 7. The judge went to set out her findings as follows:

          "42 The appellant's private life has  been  built  up  whilst  his
         status remains temporary with no  legitimate  expectation  that  he
         would be entitled to settle, set up his business and  make  a  life
         for himself and his wife here. He has not lost all ties to  Russia,
         he speaks the language spoken there and there are  no  barriers  to
         him re-establishing himself there of  any  significance  given  his
         financial and  educational  standing.  The  public  interest  being
         served by the application of the rules in  a  consistent  and  fair
         manner triumphs over the appellant's  personal  considerations  and
         those of his wife.

         43 It is also relevant to the balancing exercise that the appellant
         can seek to enter or remain in another capacity either as a Tier  1
         Entrepreneur or as a dependant of his student  wife.  I  accept  Mr
         Malins' submission that  qualification  under  such  rules  or  the
         intention of the appellant to make an application under the tier  1
         route is in one sense a separate matter. However the appellant  has
         in part based his claim on  his  ability  to  be  financially  self
         reliant and his business activities that he would not  be  able  to
         pursue.

         44 To allow the appellant to rely on his entrepreneurial endeavours
         as forming part of the reasons  why  his  article  8  claim  should
         succeed would  run  the  risk  that  he  is  favoured  above  other
         potential candidates for entry or leave to remain in such capacity.
         The requirement that he should make the  relevant  application  and
         demonstrate that he qualifies for leave to remain in this  capacity
         would  be  removed.  This  would  serve  to  override  the   proper
         application of immigration controls and would not be in the  public
         interest.

         45 The appellant appears to have been honest, hardworking  and  law
         abiding whilst studying in  the  United  Kingdom.  His  application
         under the long residence rule appears to have been misplaced rather
         than disingenuous in any way.  If  he  seeks  to  be  admitted  and
         qualifies for entry and/or leave to remain in other capacity  there
         is nothing to suggest that he would be anything other than an asset
         to the community.  Nevertheless,  having  had  regard  to  all  the
         evidence I find that the respondent's decision  is  both  necessary
         and proportionate and is not unlawful as  being  incompatible  with
         the respondent's obligations under article 8 of the ECHR."

 The Grounds

 8. Mr Malins submitted that the judge erred in law firstly  by  giving  no
    weight whatever to the fact that the appellant was  fluent  in  English
    and secondly by positively rejecting the  requirement  in  the  Act  in
    respect of financial independence as being in the  public  interest  by
    directing herself at [43] and [44] of her decision that  this  was  not
    relevant and that it was adverse to the article 8 case  that  he  could
    qualify as a Tier 1 applicant, further erring by saying that  to  allow
    the appellant to rely on his entrepreneurial endeavours as forming part
    of the reason why his article 8 claim should succeed would run the risk
    that he was favoured above other potential candidates for entry in such
    capacity.

 9. It was Mr Malins' submission that this in fact was what Parliament  had
    intended: financial independence  for  whatever  reason  was  a  matter
    properly to be taken into account as a factor in the  public  interest.
    Finally, he submitted that the judge had erred  by  proceeding  on  the
    basis that an article 8 case should be decided only by reference to the
    rules by commenting that whilst it was true that there were no  obvious
    language economic or other public policy  considerations  mentioned  in
    section 117B to be considered in the appellant's  case,  the  important
    fact remained that the requirement of the rules were not met.

10. Mr Tarlow submitted that the judge did not err in law.  She  had  taken
    all relevant factors into account. The individual factors  set  out  in
    s117B, whether taken individually or cumulatively, could not be treated
    as a trump card for either party. There had been no material  error  in
    the judge's approach to or assessment of the evidence.

Assessment of whether there is an Error of Law

11. The issue for me at this stage of the hearing is whether the First-tier
    Tribunal erred in law such that the decision should be  set  aside.  In
    substance the submission on behalf of the appellant is that  the  judge
    has failed to comply with the statutory  obligation  in  s117A(2)  that
    when considering the public interest question she  must  in  particular
    have regard in all cases to the considerations listed in section  117B.
    It was argued firstly that the judge failed to give any weight  to  the
    fact that the appellant was fluent in English as required by  s117B(2).
    It is clear from the evidence that the appellant is able  not  just  to
    speak English but is fluent. His evidence on this  matter  at  [20]  is
    confirmed by the extent of his education in English  [12]  and  in  any
    event the judge described the appellant as honest, hardworking and  law
    abiding whilst studying in the UK and so clearly accepted his  evidence
    on issues of primary fact.

12. In respect of the provision of s.117B(3)  the  complaint  is  that  the
    judge in effect discounted this factor  on  the  basis  that  it  would
    favour the appellant over other potential candidates seeking  leave  to
    enter under the rules. An application under the rules turns  simply  on
    whether the requirements of the rules are met. The fact that  there  is
    an application which might successfully be made under  the  rules  does
    not without more prevent an  article  8  case  succeeding  and  is  not
    justification in itself for discounting a factor otherwise required  to
    be taken into account by primary  legislation.  Nonetheless,  the  fact
    that there is or may be a route within the rules to obtain leave  is  a
    relevant  matter  to  be  considered  in  the  overall  assessment   of
    proportionality.

13. The statutory requirement is to have regard to all  the  considerations
    listed in s117B and the fact that an applicant  is  able  to  meet  the
    requirements of s117B (2) and (3) does not simply mean  that no adverse
    inferences should be drawn against him but they are to  be  treated  as
    positive  factors  to  put  into  the  balance.  I  accept  Mr  Malins'
    submission that the judge failed to give the appellant the  benefit  of
    those positive factors in the  assessment  of  proportionality  and  so
    erred in law. I am satisfied that the error is such that  the  decision
    should be set aside.

14. Finally, it was argued that in  essence  the  judge  thought  that  the
    article 8 case should be decided only by reference to the rules  but  I
    am not satisfied that this submission is made out. The point the  judge
    was making was that article 8 has to be assessed in the context of  the
    immigration rules, a point which comes out of Lord  Bingham's  comments
    in Huang referred to by the judge and reaffirmed by the  provisions  of
    paragraph FM of the current Immigration Rules.

15. In summary, I am satisfied that the judge erred in law  by  failing  to
    have proper regard to the positive element in the  public  interest  of
    the matters set out in s117B (2) and (3)  rather  than  regarding  them
    simply as matters not being counted to the detriment of the appellant.

16. I was satisfied after hearing submissions on  what  the  proper  course
    would be if I found that there was an error of law, that  I  should  to
    proceed to re-make the decision. I gave the parties an  opportunity  of
    making further submissions.  Mr  Malins  accepted  that  there  was  no
    dispute about the facts and referred to the judge's findings  that  the
    appellant appeared to be honest, hard-working and law abiding  and  the
    fact that she had accepted his evidence.  The  only  additional  matter
    since the hearing before the judge was the birth of the appellant's son
    on 1 December 2014 at UCL, paid  for  privately  with  no  recourse  to
    public funds. He emphasised the appellant's  fluency  in  English,  his
    entrepreneurial skills and his actual  and  potential  contribution  to
    society in the UK. He submitted  that  these  factors  taken  with  the
    positive elements in the public interest identified in s117B  indicated
    that the respondent's decision was unnecessary and disproportionate. Mr
    Tarlow did not seek to make any further submissions.

Re-making the Decision

17. I need not repeat the facts which are set out above and in the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal. This is a case where the appellant was  not
    able to meet the requirements of the rules he had sought to rely on  in
    his application. He could not bring himself within the  long  residence
    requirements as he could not show 10 years continuous lawful  residence
    nor could he meet the requirements of para 276 ADE. In the light of the
    provisions of appendix FM the respondent went on  to  consider  whether
    there were any sufficiently compassionate or compelling  issues  making
    it appropriate to allow the appellant to remain in the UK exceptionally
    outside the rules.

18.  The  approach  to  the  assessment   of   proportionality   in   these
    circumstances has  been  considered  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MF
    (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192  and  more  recently  in  R(MM)  Lebanon
    [2014] EWCA Civ 985. Where the immigration rules  are  not  a  complete
    code as in the present case the proportionality test will  be  more  at
    large albeit guided by the Huang test in UK and by Strasbourg case law.
    In the light of the provisions of 117A, regard must now be had  to  the
    considerations set out in statute.

19. The appellant is entitled to have taken to account in  his  favour  his
    length of residence in the UK, the social ties he has  formed  and  the
    actual and  potential  financial  benefits  to  the  community  of  the
    projects he has been involved with. He is fluent in English and  he  is
    financially independent. He is a potential asset to the  community  and
    that is a factor to  be  taken  into  account  in  accordance  with  UE
    (Nigeria) [2010] ECWA Civ975. The other side of  the  balance  is  that
    whilst his private life has not being established as at  time  when  he
    has been in the UK unlawfully  nor  has  his  immigration  status  been
    precarious, the fact remains that his status has been temporary with no
    legitimate expectation that he would be entitled to settle. Further, he
    cannot meet the requirements of the rules that he sought to rely on  in
    his appeal.

20. In evidence before the First-tier Tribunal the appellant was asked  why
    he had not made an application for leave to remain as  an  entrepreneur
    and his response was that if could succeed on the  basis  of  10  years
    residence, there was no reason for him to make such an application [25]
    and in re-examination he said he  was  in  the  process  of  making  an
    application for leave to remain in that category and felt that  he  met
    the requirements [26]. The fact that he might be  able  to  meet  these
    requirements in the circumstances of this appeal is part of the factual
    background when assessing proportionality. The fact that  a  successful
    article 8 appeal would mean that he  could  stay  without  meeting  the
    requirements of the rules does not in itself  mean  that  he  is  being
    favoured over other applicants as each case turns on its own facts  and
    is not a factor which in itself should count against him. But the  fact
    remains that if he wishes to remain  as  an  entrepreneur  there  is  a
    public interest in requiring him to meet the requirements of the  rules
    and this is a factor, albeit not determinative, to take into account.

21. This is not a case where the appellant has lost his ties to Russia. The
    judge found that he retained significant family and social  ties  there
    and that there would be no  barriers  to  him  re-establishing  himself
    there given his financial and educational standing. His wife is Russian
    as is their son. His best interests are to  be  with  his  parents  and
    there is nothing to suggest that they would act in any way contrary  to
    those best interests.

22. I am not satisfied that the factors in favour of the appellant outweigh
    the public interest in maintaining a policy  of  effective  immigration
    control: see not only Lord Bingham in Huang at [18] but also Laws LJ in
    UE (Nigeria) at [36]. In summary, taking all the relevant factors  into
    account and having regard to the provisions of  s117B  I  am  satisfied
    that whilst article 8 (1) is engaged, the respondent has shown that the
    decision to refuse further leave to remain and to remove the  appellant
    is necessary and proportionate to a legitimate  aim  within  article  8
    (2).



Decision

23. The first-tier Tribunal erred in law and I set aside  the  decision.  I
    substitute a decision dismissing the appeal  on  both  immigration  and
    human rights grounds.



Signed        Date 28 January 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Latter

