
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39761/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport          |Determination Promulgated        |
|On 25th March 2015                        |On 10th April 2015               |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 BOCHEN LAN
                           (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Irwin Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Christopher Lane, Counsel


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. In this decision I will refer to the parties in  the  style  in  which
      they appeared before the First-Tier Tribunal.

   2. The appellant is a male citizen of  China,  born  29  July  1980.   He
      entered the United Kingdom in October 2002 with a visa as  a  student.
      He  subsequently  made  a  number  of  successful   applications   for
      extensions before finally being granted further leave to remain  as  a
      post study worker and then again as a student until 26  January  2013.
      It appears common ground that the appellant has been lawfully  in  the
      United Kingdom between October 2002 and January 2013.  On  14  January
      2013, he made an in time application for indefinite  leave  to  remain
      based on long period of residence.

   3. On 24 July 2013, the respondent refused the application  by  reference
      to paragraph 276B(iii) of the Immigration Rules.   This  decision  was
      based upon the appellant having  an  unspent  conviction  for  driving
      without due care and attention.

   4. The appellant appealed against  that  decision  and  his  appeal  came
      before Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal  Eldridge  sitting  at  Hatton
      Cross on 21 October 2014.  Both parties were represented.

   5. In a determination dated 24 October 2014,  Judge  Eldridge  stated  at
      paragraph 30 "I allow  this  appeal  on  all  grounds  raised  by  the
      appellant".

   6. The Secretary of State sought  leave  to  appeal.   The  first  ground
      alleges an error in the way the judge dealt with the appeal under  the
      Immigration Rules and reference is made in the  grounds  to  paragraph
      322(1C)(iv) because the appellant had "within 24 months preceding  the
      date of the application (sic) been  convicted.....of  a  non-custodial
      sentence.....recorded on their criminal  record.....".   As  such  the
      application fell for mandatory refusal.

   7. Ground 2 challenged the decision of  the  judge  with  regard  to  the
      appellant's human rights and in particular Article 8 ECHR, in that the
      judge's conclusions were based on "incorrect conclusions".

   8. The matter then went before another judge of the  First-Tribunal,  who
      in granting leave found, simply, that the "grounds of appeal raise  an
      arguable error of law".

   9. Thus the matter came before me in the Upper Tribunal.

  10. Just before the commencement of the hearing, I was handed  a  skeleton
      argument prepared by Mr Lane.  I explained to him at the start of  the
      hearing that I had not had an opportunity to read that document.

  11. In his submission Mr Richards relied upon the grounds  seeking  leave.
      Judge Eldridge had found that paragraph 322 did  not  apply,  when  in
      fact it did apply.  The judge's assessment of Article 8  was  infected
      by this error as can be seen from paragraph 25 of  the  determination.
      The judge's error on the question of paragraph 322 of the rules had  a
      knock on effect throughout the decision.

  12. Mr Lane led me  through  his  skeleton  argument.   The  Secretary  of
      State's  refusal  letter  was  incorrect  in  its  reference  to   the
      Immigration  Rules  that  applied  and  that  it  was  now   "slightly
      hypocritical" to criticise the judge for missing a provision when  the
      respondent had herself applied a rescinded provision in the decision.

  13. Mr Lane indicated that if the respondent had  raised  at  the  initial
      hearing the provision that is now relied upon, it is most likely  that
      Judge Eldridge would have found the decision "not in  accordance  with
      the law" and remitted it back for a fresh decision.  In  essence,  the
      respondent is now seeking to benefit from  her  own  failure  and  the
      principles of fairness (Thakur) should be applied.

  14. As to Article 8, Mr Lane submitted that there  was  no  exceptionality
      test.  It was necessary to consider anything that was not set  out  in
      the rules.  There would be a low public interest  in  this  particular
      case, especially bearing in mind that 24 months has now passed.

  15. Mr Lane also pointed out that the removal directions mentioned  Japan,
      whereas the appellant is a citizen of China.

  16. At the end of the hearing I reserved my determination as I  wished  to
      have the opportunity  to  consider  Mr  Lane's  skeleton  argument  in
      detail.

  17. Regrettably the history of this case is  littered  with  errors.   The
      first errors are contained in the respondent's refusal  letter.   That
      purported to base the decision upon paragraph 276B(iii)  in  that  the
      appellant had an unspent conviction.  It is not necessary  for  me  to
      comment on that conviction, but I do note  that  it  was  for  driving
      without due care and attention.  The other error was in  the  decision
      to remove the appellant to Japan, when  clearly  the  appellant  is  a
      Chinese national with no connections  with  Japan.   The  respondent's
      error with regard to refusing the application under the rules was that
      as from December 2012 paragraph 276B(iii) had been altered so that  it
      was then necessary to consider if the  application  fell  for  refusal
      under (in this case) paragraph 322 and in particular 322(1C)(iv).

  18. The wording of sub-paragraph (iv) as at the time  of  the  application
      and decision states the following:

         "They have, within 24 months, been  convicted  of  or  admitted  an
      offence for which they have received a non-custodial sentence or other
      out of court disposal that it recorded on their criminal record".

  19. As from the 1 December 2013 and therefore after  the  application  and
      decision the words "prior to the date  on  which  the  application  is
      decided"  were  added  after  the  words  "within  the   24   months".
      Accordingly I  do  not  consider  that  those  additional  words  were
      relevant when  Judge  Eldridge  was  considering  the  decision  under
      appeal.

  20. The determination of Judge Eldridge does show that  consideration  was
      given as to the dates and the correct rule to be taken  into  account.
      However I fear Judge Eldridge misdirected  himself  (paragraph  16  in
      particular) as to which rule, if any, prevented  the  success  of  the
      appellant.

  21. I therefore consider that Judge Eldridge did make an error of  law  in
      the way that he directed himself with regard to the rules.   I  accept
      the submission of  Mr  Richards  that  this  error  then  went  on  to
      seriously infect  the  way  that  the  judge  dealt  with  Article  8.
      Paragraph 25 of the determination clearly shows that  judge  used  his
      view that the decision was "not lawful" in reaching a conclusion under
      Article 8.  The next error that  I  must  record  is  in  the  grounds
      seeking leave.  Paragraph 6 adds the words "preceding the date of  the
      application".  That is both an inaccurate quote and refers to addition
      to the rules that did not apply at the time.  However  having  pointed
      that error out it has limited effect on the  outcome  of  this  appeal
      before me.

  22. I now have to consider  whether  the  errors  of  Judge  Eldridge  are
      material.  I conclude that they are.  The judge misdirected himself on
      a material issue and as a result allowed the  appeal  both  under  the
      rules and Article 8.  The second aspect having been seriously infected
      by the decision under the first.

  23. As a result I set aside  the  decision  of  Judge  Eldridge  and  then
      proceed to remake that decision.

  24. By reason of the errors contained in the respondent's  refusal  letter
      and in the decision  to  remove,  I  consider  that  the  respondent's
      decision was not in accordance  with  the  law  and  the  matter  thus
      remains outstanding with the respondent to produce a lawful  decision.
      The appeal is allowed to that limited extent.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Poole


