

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39834/2013
     IA/40028/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                    |Determination Promulgated         |
|on 22nd December 2014             |On 23rd December 2014             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                              YOLLY OJEDA DIAZ
                        ADRIAN DARIO HERMEMDEZ OJEDA
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Lotay of Derby Immigration Aid Consultants
For the Respondent:    Miss Johnstone - Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    1. This is an appeal against  a  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Bell promulgated on 23 July 2014 following a hearing at  Stoke.
       The appellants are a mother and her adult son born on 27 August  1969
       and 24 October 1990 respectively. They are both citizens of Venezuela
       who entered the United Kingdom as  visitors,  lawfully,  on  5  March
       2012.  On 3 September 2012 they made  an  application  for  leave  to
       remain which will was refused on 28 August 2013.


    2. Judge Bell considered the evidence made available and the  merits  of
       the appeal both under the Immigration Rules and Article 8 outside the
       Rules. The finding under the Rules is set out at paragraph 30 of  the
       determination, that neither appellant can meet  the  requirements  of
       the Rules for further leave to remain.  Although  this  is  an  issue
       challenged on the grounds of appeal  Mr  Lotay  conceded  before  the
       tribunal today that  he  was  no  longer  able  to  sustain  such  an
       argument.


    3. The Judge then moved on to consider Article 8 at paragraphs 31 to  37
       of the determination making  the  following  substantive  finding  in
       paragraph 36:


          36. I am not satisfied that arguably good grounds been put forward
             as to why leave should  be  granted  outside  the  immigration
             rules. The rules defined partner and the first  appellant  did
             not meet that definition when she applied to vary  her  leave.
             Even if she had passed that hurdle the rules  do  not  provide
             for switching from visitors  status  to  partner  status.  The
             sponsor and 1st appellant state they wish to get  married  but
             have not yet been able to do so. They can  do  this  and  then
             apply for entry clearance to return as a spouse.  The  sponsor
             will  not  have  any  difficulty   meeting   the   maintenance
             requirements  of  the  rules  for  entry  clearance.  The  2nd
             appellant does not need to return alone.  The  evidence  shows
             that the 2nd appellant is at present totally  reliant  on  his
             mother and he would therefore be able to make  an  appropriate
             application for entry clearance as a dependent relative  under
             the immigration rules.



Discussion


     4. The grounds on which permission to appeal is sought are  commendably
        brief  and  focused.  The  challenge  to  the  decision  under   the
        Immigration Rules is no longer being pursued  and  has  no  arguable
        merit. In relation to Article 8 it is submitted in Ground 4 that the
        Judge has not considered Article 8 at all. I find this ground has no
        arguable merit. A reading  of  the  determination  shows  the  Judge
        considered the evidence made available with the required  degree  of
        anxious scrutiny. Adequately reasoned findings have been  made.  The
        Judge sets out the relevant law between paragraphs 10 to 14  of  the
        determination including reminding herself of recent Court of  Appeal
        case-law setting out the approach to be taken if Article 8 is to  be
        considered in relation to a case involving the Rules.


     5. This is not a case in which the Judge dismissed the appeal under the
        Rules and  then  did  nothing  further.  Not  only  does  the  Judge
        specifically consider Article 8 as  a  freestanding  aspect  of  the
        case, she finds that she was not satisfied that there were  arguably
        good grounds put forward for why leave should be granted outside the
        Rules. This is a proportionality finding. Had the Judge  found  good
        reasons why such leave should  be  granted  outside  the  Rules  the
        decision would have been found to be disproportionate. As it is, the
        evidence did not support such a finding.


     6. The Judge analysed  the  position  of  both  the  first  and  second
        appellant and noted that the second appellant is  reliant  upon  his
        mother for his care because of his disabilities, albeit that  he  is
        over 18 years of age. He received treatment  for  his  condition  in
        Venezuela. The assertion in the submissions that the Judge failed to
        consider the evidence made available has no arguable merit  and  has
        not been  substantiated  as  a  reading  of  the  evidence  and  the
        determination clearly demonstrates.


     7. A property reasoned proportionality decision is only susceptible  to
        challenge on Public Law grounds. It was asserted  the  findings  are
        irrational but it has not been established that the finding  is  out
        with the range of permissible decisions a  reasonable  person  could
        make if appraised of the facts and law.   The  assertion  the  Judge
        failed to consider the position of the first appellant's partner, Mr
        Stocks, has no arguable merit as he is  clearly  referred  to  on  a
        number of occasions in the  determination  and  even  if  he  cannot
        return to Venezuela with  the  appellants  to  live  for  employment
        reasons, it has not been  established  that  he  cannot  visit  long
        enough to marry or that the consequences of the appellants returning
        where they can make a valid lawful application to re-enter  will  be
        such that the decision should be found to be disproportionate.


     8. There are no economic concerns in this case as Mr Stocks is  clearly
        able to support the family.


     9. It is an established principle that Article  8  does  not  allow  an
        individual to choose where they wish to live. The Higher Contracting
        States also have a margin of appreciation under  Article  8.   Under
        such provision the Secretary of State has set out the way  in  which
        she considers Article 8 should be assessed which is within the  body
        of the Immigration Rules. The appellants failed under the Rules  and
        the reason why, namely the  inability  to  switch  as  well  as  the
        inability to prove the appellant could satisfy the partner  criteria
        with Mr Stocks, is relevant.  Both  appellants  entered  the  United
        Kingdom as visitors with no  legitimate  expectation  they  will  be
        entitled or permitted to remain. Domestic law prevents visitors from
        switching and any relationship  that  has  been  formed  or  further
        developed has been  so  at  a  time  when  all  parties  knew  their
        immigration situation was precarious.


    10. In this case it has not been established  there  is  any  procedural
        irregularity  in  the  approach  adopted  by  the   Judge   to   the
        consideration of the appeal or that the conclusions  arrived  at  by
        the Judge can be said to be perverse, irrational, or contrary to the
        evidence or the law.


Decision

   11. There is no material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


   12. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules
       2005. I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal
       Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 22nd December 2014


