
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39751/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 18th July 2014                               |On 4th August 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                                Mr Amir Aftab
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Kyakwita, legal representative
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 24th January 1982.   The
    Appellant's immigration history is set out in  detail  under  a  letter
    dated 20th September 2013.  On 29th August 2012 the  Appellant  applied
    for indefinite leave to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  reasons
    outside the Immigration Rules.  That application was considered  by  an
    official acting on behalf of the Secretary of State and by reasons  for
    refusal letter dated 20th September 2013  the  Appellant's  application
    was refused.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Drabu sitting at Taylor House on 6th March  2014.   In  a
    determination promulgated on 9th April 2014 the Appellant's appeal  was
    allowed.

 3. On 23rd April 2014 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds of  Appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  Those grounds contended that the judge  had  erred
    in law in failing to consider the first  Appellant's  Article  8  claim
    under Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of the Rules.  On 21st May  2014
    Upper Tribunal Judge Renton granted permission to appeal.  Judge Renton
    noted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had allowed the appeal because
    he found the Respondent's decision disproportionate as contrary to  the
    best interests of the Appellant's minor  son.   However  he  noted  the
    judge did not consider whether the Appellant met  the  requirements  of
    Appendix  FM  of  HC   395   and   therefore   the   consequences   for
    proportionality of her failure to do so and the Gulshan test  and  that
    this amounted arguably to an error of law.

 4. It is on that basis that this appeal comes before me.  I note that this
    is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  For the purpose of  continuity
    within all proceedings Mr Aftab is recited herein as the Appellant  and
    the Secretary of State as the Respondent despite the fact that this  is
    the  Respondent's  appeal.   The  Appellant  appears   by   her   legal
    representative Ms Joy Kyakwita.  Ms  Kyakwita  is  familiar  with  this
    matter having appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.   The  Secretary
    of State appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Bramble.

Submissions

 5. Mr Bramble submits that the issue is simple in this matter namely  that
    the judge failed to actually consider the appeals under the Immigration
    Rules and that the judge has merely concluded that the Appellant should
    be  granted  discretionary  leave  on  the  basis  of  ongoing   family
    proceedings.

 6. Miss Kyakwita submits that whilst she appreciates what is being said by
    Mr Bramble on behalf of the Secretary of State  she  submits  that  the
    judge ultimately got the decision correct  and  the  question  for  the
    Tribunal to decide is whether or not there was  an  error  of  law  and
    whether it is material.

The Law

 7.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 8. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

 9. It is incumbent upon an Immigration Judge to follow appropriate process
    when considering an appeal of this nature.  Firstly it is necessary  to
    consider whether or not a claim should be allowed under the Immigration
    Rules.  If it is found that a claim should not succeed under the  Rules
    and if it does not succeed under the Rules then it  is  appropriate  to
    consider whether or not it should be allowed outside the Rules pursuant
    to Article 8 of the European Convention of Human Rights.  In this  case
    the judge has  not  even  made  any  reference  to  the  Rules  in  his
    determination.  He has merely noted that  Ms  Kyakwita  asked  for  the
    appeal to be allowed on the basis of exceptional features that made its
    favourable consideration under Article 8 justified and  concluded  that
    the Appellant has a close relationship with his  son  and  consequently
    that it is in the best interests of a child of his son's  age  to  have
    the company, love and protection of both his parents and  therefore  he
    allowed the appeal.   That  is  not  the  correct  approach.   In  such
    circumstances there is a material error of law in the determination  of
    the First-tier Tribunal and I set aside the  decision  and  proceed  to
    remake the decision.

Findings on the Remaking of the Decision

10. It is conceded  by  the  Appellant's  legal  representatives  that  the
    Appellant does not meet the terms of the Immigration Rules.  These have
    been set out in some detail in the Notice of  Refusal.   The  Appellant
    fails to meet Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules and paragraph 276ADE
    where the basis of his claim is that of private life.   However  it  is
    accepted and acknowledged that  on  21st  October  2010  the  Appellant
    applied for  leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  person
    exercising contact rights to a child and that on 16th May 2011  he  was
    granted leave outside the Immigration Rules valid  till  November  2011
    and that that leave was subsequently extended until June 2012.

11. The Appellant has a son with whom he has contact subject to proceedings
    in the County Court.  I am provided with copies of the  contact  orders
    pursuant to Section 8 of the Children Act 1989.  The last contact order
    is one dated 18th June 2012 stating that a  contact  order  for  up  to
    three hours at a contact centre or venue agreed by the  parties  is  to
    take place and that the matter would be listed for review on the  first
    available date after 1st June 2012.  I am referred to a letter  of  7th
    February  2014  from  the  Appellant's   former   spouse's   solicitors
    confirming contact and I  am  advised  that  the  parties  agreed  that
    contact would take place on the basis of the previous order without the
    matter being restored in the County Court.  A copy of  the  Appellant's
    attendance record at the contact centre where he exercises  contact  to
    his son is produced and is not challenged by  Mr  Bramble.   Indeed  Mr
    Bramble does not seek to challenge the finding of  credibility  of  the
    Appellant's evidence made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

12. The impact of Family Court proceedings on immigration  proceedings  was
    considered in RS  (immigration  and  Family  Court  proceedings)  India
    [2012] UKUT 00218 where it was held that:

    (i)  Where a claimant appeals against a decision to  deport  or  remove
         and there are outstanding family proceedings relating to a child of
         the claimant, the First-tier Tribunal Judge should first consider:-

         (a)  Is the outcome of the contemplated family  proceedings  likely
             to be material to the immigration decision?

         (b)  Are there compelling public interest reasons  to  exclude  the
             claimant from the United Kingdom irrespective of  the  outcome
             of the family proceedings or the best interest of the child?

         (c)  In the case of contact proceedings initiated by  an  Appellant
             in an immigration appeal, is there any reason to believe  that
             the family  proceedings  have  been  instituted  to  delay  or
             frustrate removal and not to promote the child's welfare?

    (ii) In assessing the above questions, the judge will normally want  to
         consider the degree of the  claimant's  previous  interest  in  and
         contact with the child, the timing of contact proceedings  and  the
         commitment with which they have been progressed, when a decision is
         likely to be reached, what materials (if any) are already available
         or can be made available to identify pointers to where the  child's
         welfare lies?

13. I acknowledge that in this instant case the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    did conclude that the  contact  proceedings  were  not  brought  in  an
    attempt to circumvent  the  Immigration  Rules  and  that  contact  was
    regularly  exercised  both  for  the  benefit  of  the  child  and  the
    Appellant.

14. In this case there is clear evidence that contact is being  maintained,
    that it is not  disputed  that  the  Appellant  and  his  son  have  an
    established and ongoing relationship and I am satisfied the finding  of
    such a relationship and that it is in the best interests of  the  child
    was one that the First-tier Tribunal Judge was entitled to reach albeit
    that  the  manner  in  which  he  has  addressed  the  issue   in   his
    determination is far from clear.

15. The issue therefore remains as to whether this appeal should be allowed
    outside the Rules.  It is necessary to draw some conclusions.

16. In any consideration of an Article 8 claim the starting  point  is  the
    law itself.  Article 8 states:

      i) everyone has the right to respect for his private and family  life,
         his home and his correspondence;

     ii) there should be no interference by a public body with the  exercise
         of this right except such as is in accordance with the law  and  is
         necessary in a democratic  society  in  the  interest  of  national
         security, public safety or the economic well-being of the  country,
         for the prevention of disorder or  crime,  for  the  protection  of
         health or morals, or for the protection of the rights  and  freedom
         of others.

17. In LD [2010] UKUT 278 (IAC) the Tribunal stated:-

         "The interests of the  minor  children  and  their  welfare  are  a
         primary consideration in the balance of competing considerations in
         this  case  and  their  educational  welfare  as  part  of  the  UK
         educational system point strongly to their continued residence here
         as necessary to promote those interests."

18. The law was recently considered in Zoumbas v the Secretary of State for
    the Home Department [2013] UKSC 74.  Paragraph 10 of that determination
    sets out the basic principles the court needs to follows:

        a. the best interests of a  child  are  an  integral  part  of  the
           proportionality assessment under Article 8 ECHR;

        b. in making that assessment, the best interests of a child must be
           a primary consideration although not  always  the  only  primary
           consideration;  and  the  child's  best  interests  do  not   of
           themselves have the status of paramount consideration;

        c. although the best interests of a child can be outweighed by  the
           cumulative   effect   of   other   considerations,   no    other
           consideration can be treated as inherently more significant;

        d. while different judges might approach the question of  the  best
           interests of a child in different ways, it is important  to  ask
           oneself the right questions in an orderly  manner  in  order  to
           avoid the risk that the best  interests  of  a  child  might  be
           undervalued when other important considerations were in play;

        e. it is important to have a clear idea of a child's  circumstances
           and of what is in a  child's  best  interests  before  one  asks
           oneself whether those interests are outweighed by the  force  of
           other considerations;

        f. to that end there is no substitute for a careful examination  of
           all relevant factors when the interests of a child are  involved
           in an Article 8 assessment; and

        g. a child must not be blamed for matters for which he  or  she  is
           not responsible such as the conduct of a parent.

19. The Tribunal in Gulshan made clear and  has  repeated  subsequently  in
    Shahzad  (Article  8:  legitimate  aim)  [2014]  UKUT  00085  (IAC)  at
    paragraph (31):

         "Where an  area  of  the  rules  does  not  have  such  an  express
         mechanism, the approach in R (Nagre) v Secretary of State  for  the
         Home Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) ([29]-[31]  in  particular)
         and Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013]  UKUT
         640 (IAC) should be followed: i.e. after applying the  requirements
         of the rules, only if  there  may  be  arguably  good  grounds  for
         granting leave to remain outside them is it necessary for Article 8
         purposes  to  go  on  to  consider  whether  there  are  compelling
         circumstances not sufficiently recognised under them."

20. Drawing all the threads from the relevant case  law  and  applying  the
    basic principles set out in Razgar I am satisfied firstly that the best
    interests of the child are best served by his having contact  with  his
    father and general contact with both parents albeit that  they  do  not
    live in a family environment.  Secondly that it would not  be  possible
    for contact to be maintained if the Appellant were to be  removed  from
    the UK.  In such a situation there are exceptional  circumstances  that
    enable this  case  to  be  considered  outside  the  Immigration  Rules
    applying the test  originally  set  out  in  Gulshan  and  the  general
    principles  set  out  in  Razgar  it  would   be   a   disproportionate
    interference with the Appellant's family life and not in the  interests
    of  immigration  control  to  refuse   the   Appellant's   appeal   and
    consequently the Appellant's appeal will be allowed under Article 8 for
    all the above reasons.

Decision

21. The appeal under the Immigration Rules is dismissed.

22. The Appellant's appeal is allowed  under  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention of Human Rights.

23. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.   No
    application is made to vary that order and none is made.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

