
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39352/2014
                                                               IA/39361/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 November 2016                  |On 24 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

             Indika Pushoa Kumamara Munasinghe Munasinghe Imiyage
                          FATHIMA BUSHRA MUNASINGHE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Jegarajah, Counsel, instructed by Chris Raja
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of Sri Lanka who was born  on  12  February
    1972.  Having refused their claims for asylum, the Secretary  of  State
    decided to remove the appellants to Sri Lanka by a  decision  dated  17
    September 2014.  The appellants appealed against that decision  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Monson), who, in a decision  promulgated  on
    27 May 2016, dismissed the appeal.  The  appellants  now  appeal,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. This appeal has had a long litigation history.  Unfortunately, and  for
    the reasons I give below, the appeal will have to be heard again in the
    First-tier Tribunal.  On the last  occasion,  the  appeal  came  before
    Judge Monson at Taylor  House  on  4  May  2016,    a  Ms  Kadurugamuwa
    appeared with the appellant in order to apply for an adjournment of the
    hearing on the grounds that Counsel had been unable  to  represent  the
    appellant as a result of illness.   The  judge  records  [29]  that  Ms
    Kadurugamuwa had been "the person  at  the  solicitor's  firm  who  had
    personal conduct of the appellant's case [but who] did  not  feel  that
    she could present their case as she was only a trainee solicitor and it
    was a very complicated case."  Accompanying the grounds of appeal is  a
    letter from Ms Kadurugamuwa.  She explains that she was not  a  trainee
    solicitor but a qualified lawyer from Sri Lanka.  She also states  that
    she was not the person at Raja Solicitors who had conduct of  the  file
    on behalf of the appellant.  Ms Kadurugamuwa explained in her statement
    that she had been completely unaware that Counsel would  be  unable  to
    attend the hearing before her clients had told her that  the  reception
    officer at Taylor House had informed him that Counsel was  unwell.   Ms
    Kadurugamuwa attempted in vain to contact Counsel so she contacted  the
    principal solicitor at her firm who advised Ms Kadurugamuwa to apply to
    the Tribunal for an adjournment.  She duly made such an application but
    the judge refused it as he records at [30].  The judge  refers  to  the
    overriding objective and also to a lengthy skeleton argument which  had
    been prepared by Counsel at a previous hearing.  The  judge  considered
    that the appellant's case was "precisely the same as it had been nearly
    a year earlier."  On that basis, he proceeded with the hearing.

 3. At the Upper Tribunal hearing on 14 November 2016, Mr  Duffy,  for  the
    Secretary of State, did not seek  to  defend  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision.  He told me that he acknowledged that the appellant had  been
    denied a fair hearing.

 4. I agree that the hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should,  in
    these particular circumstances, have  been  adjourned.   The  judge  is
    right to point out that there was a lengthy skeleton argument  prepared
    by Counsel for the previous hearing but he appears to  have  overlooked
    the fact that experienced Counsel, who had been properly briefed, would
    have been in a position to make submissions, which  may  have  included
    submissions arising from matters arising in  cross-examination  of  the
    appellant.  Ms Kadurugamuwa had attended before the Tribunal  expecting
    to sit behind Counsel and takes  notes  and  I  accept  that  she  was,
    through no fault of her own and, more particularly of the appellant, in
    no position to offer the same level  of  representation.   Indeed,  the
    judge makes little reference to Ms Kadurugamuwa's  involvement  in  the
    hearing whilst he refers extensively to the skeleton  argument  of  the
    previous Counsel.   In  effect,  the  appellant  was  in  no  different
    position than if he had  not  been  represented  at  all.   Given  that
    Counsel's illness occurred so late in the day and that the  failure  of
    Counsel to attend was no fault of the  appellants,  I  agree  that  the
    appellants have been deprived of a fair hearing in this instance.

Notice of Decision

The appeals are allowed. The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set
aside. The appeals shall be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  (not  Judge
Monson) for that Tribunal to remake the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 23 November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

