
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39699/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |               Decision & Reasons     |
|                                       |Promulgated                           |
|On 26 November 2015                    |               On 8 December 2015     |
|                                       |                                      |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           mr jagmohan singh dhesi
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Balroop, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is a respondent appeal but I shall henceforth refer to the parties
    in the original terms detailed in the decision of Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Bird following a  hearing  on  20  January  2015  and  11
    February 2015.  That decision was promulgated on 31 March 2015.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of India who appealed under  Section  82  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 against  the  decision
    of the respondent dated 17 September 2013 seeking to remove  him  from
    the United Kingdom under Section 10 of the Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    1999.

 3. The appellant's immigration history was found to be one of entering the
    United Kingdom in 2001 and then making an application for asylum  which
    was refused.  He appealed that decision  which  was  dismissed  and  he
    became appeal rights exhausted on 7 August 2002.  It was found  at  the
    First-tier Tribunal hearing that there was some confusion regarding the
    appellant's immigration history at that time and whether or not another
    application for asylum was made and/or refused.

 4. On 27 May 2010 a letter was submitted by  solicitors  representing  the
    appellant making further submissions on his behalf.

 5. Judge Bird records in her decision that the appellant's solicitors made
    an application under the legacy programme stating that the  appellant's
    asylum claim remained outstanding.  They stated that he had arrived  in
    the United Kingdom on 1 June 2002  and  had  made  an  application  for
    asylum on 28 June 2002.  Since arrival the appellant  has  continuously
    been in the United Kingdom and his asylum application was pending since
    June 2002 and hence he qualified for a grant of leave to  remain  under
    the legacy arrangement.  It was further asserted on his behalf that the
    appellant had established close  and  intimate  links  with  the  local
    community  resulting  in  the  establishment  of  private  life  and  a
    submission that to remove him would breach his rights under  Article  8
    of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR).  The solicitors once
    more wrote to the  respondent  on  9  September  2010  "chasing"  their
    earlier letter of May 2010.

 6. The respondent finally wrote to the  appellant  on  17  September  2013
    refusing the application made in May 2010.  The appellant's immigration
    history was set out therein and the respondent referred to a  statement
    made by the appellant on  17 February  2011  which  contained  further
    information not contained within his solicitor's  letters  of  May  and
    September 2010.  The appellant gave  information  about  his  wife  and
    children in India and also about a relationship  that  he  had  with  a
    British citizen in the United Kingdom with whom he had been  cohabiting
    since 2004.

 7. The respondent did not accept that the relationship  with  his  British
    citizen partner was genuine  or  that  Appendix  FM  was  engaged.   In
    considering whether or not the appellant had established  private  life
    in the United Kingdom the respondent noted that the  appellant  had  no
    business or property and further that he did not have any permission to
    work and was not a student.  He was 53 years  old  and  had  spent  the
    majority of his life in India and remains fluent in his native  tongue.
    The appellant could return to his native country and re-establish  both
    family and private life there.  The appellant's  application  was  also
    refused under paragraph 276ADE of the  Immigration  Rules  HC  395  (as
    amended).

 8. The appellant appealed that decision resulting in  the  above-mentioned
    hearing in the First-tier Tribunal before Judge Bird.  In her  decision
    she allowed the appellant's appeal under the "Human Rights Convention".



 9. The judge accepted the evidence before  her  from  the  appellant,  his
    partner and her daughter to the effect that the appellant had been with
    his partner and cohabiting since 2005 having met at  the  home  of  the
    appellant's aunt.  The appellant has no ties in India since his divorce
    from his first wife in 2005.  The appellant's  partner  works  and  the
    appellant provides support by looking after the home.   He  also  looks
    after his partner's daughter and attended to  any  matters  arising  in
    relation to her schooling.  The partner could not go to India  to  live
    because her daughter would be unable to accompany her there.

10. The nub of the judge's findings can be seen  at  paragraph  28  of  her
    decision which states:-

         "28. Whilst the appellant has been cohabiting with his partner  for
             a number of years, they are not married but have  been  living
             in a relationship akin to marriage for nearly ten years.   The
             appellant has also been a father figure in  the  life  of  his
             partner's daughter who has not had any contact  with  her  own
             biological father since 2005.  The appellant therefore can  in
             the circumstances be said to enjoy  a  family  life  with  his
             partner and her daughter.  Even if this were not  the  case  I
             find that substantial private life has been established by the
             appellant since his arrival in the United Kingdom in 2002  and
             Article 8 is therefore engaged."

11. The judge also found at paragraphs  31  and  32  of  her  decision  the
    following:-

         "31. From this the respondent concluded that the appellant  had  an
             appeal dismissed on 19 September 2002 and that  the  appellant
             was appeal rights exhausted sometime in 2003.  This  certainly
             is true for the application made  in  2001  but  not  for  the
             application made in 2002.  From Annex F it is clear  that  the
             Adjudicator's decision of 16 October 2001 in relation  to  the
             appellant's appeal dated 3 August 2001 was set aside on appeal
             and J Barnes Vice President decided that the appeal should  be
             heard afresh (see paragraph 2 on page 2  of  Annex  F2).   The
             appeal was heard afresh on 9  September  2002  and  dismissed.
             This appeal was against the respondent's refusal  of  19  July
             2001.

         32.  The appellant appears to have made another  application  which
             was considered and refused on 12 May 2003 (see Annex H to  the
             respondent's bundle).  From this information I have before  me
             there is no indication that the refusal was ever served on the
             appellant.  If  there  was  no  effective  service  then  that
             application remains outstanding.  The other relevant factor in
             the appellant's immigration history is the application made by
             Malik Law Solicitors on 27 May 2010 for the  appellant  to  be
             allowed to remain on the basis of his private life.  A  letter
             asking for an  update  was  sent  on  9  September  2010.   No
             response  was  received  from   the   respondent   until   his
             application was refused on 17 September 2013 and a decision to
             remove him taken under  Section  10  of  the  Immigration  and
             Asylum Act 1999.  There was therefore some delay between  2010
             and 2013 that could not be attributed to the appellant."

12. At paragraph 38 of her decision the judge stated:-

         "38. The appellant's partner has been living in the United  Kingdom
             for a number of years and has her own home which she bought in
             2005 and is in gainful employment.  Her daughter is completing
             a university degree.  Any removal to India would be an extreme
             upheaval given these circumstances.   Whilst  the  appellant's
             partner has lived in India in the past, her daughter has  not.
             The appellant from the evidence that I heard  because  of  his
             relationship  severed  contact  with  his  ex-wife  and  as  a
             consequence his relationships with  her  family  and  his  own
             family have been compromised.   The  appellant's  evidence  is
             that he has low employment prospects and has no accommodation.
               His  partner  will  similarly  have  difficulty  in  finding
             employment there.  Given these circumstances I  find  that  it
             would be unreasonable to expect his partner with her  daughter
             to accompany him to India to an uncertain future."

13.  Finally  she  dealt  with  the  issue  of  delay  in  the  appellant's
    application to be processed at paragraph 39 which states:-

        "39. The balance is between the appellant's rights and that of  the
             requirement to maintain an effective immigration control in the
             interests  of  the  general  public.   Given   the   particular
             circumstances of this appellant's claim I find that the  public
             interest would not be  best  served  in  the  removal  of  this
             appellant.  Although it is claimed that the appellant has  been
             in the UK without lawful authority since 2003, I have  seen  no
             evidence to show that the appellant was ever served the  letter
             of 12  May  2003.   For  all  intents  and  purposes  from  the
             appellant's   point   of   view   that   application   remained
             outstanding.  The appellant could of course be  criticised  for
             not chasing the matter up but he had placed it in the hands  of
             his legal representatives.  There is no information  before  me
             to say that they were ever served with the refusal.   When  the
             appellant applied in 2010 that application was not  decided  on
             until 2013."

14. The respondent sought permission to appeal the judge's  decision  which
    was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Smith in a decision dated  17  July
    2015 which states:-

         "1.  The appellant appeals against the respondent's decision  dated
             17 September 2013 to remove him from the UK.  The  appeal  was
             allowed by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bird  in  a  decision
             promulgated on 31 March 2015 ("the Decision").  The respondent
             now seeks permission to appeal.

         2.   The Judge allowed the appeal on the basis of  Article  8  ECHR
             finding in the circumstances of the case that removal would be
             a disproportionate interference with  the  appellant's  family
             life with his British citizen partner and her daughter and the
             appellant's private life (the appellant has  been  in  the  UK
             since about 2001).  The  Judge  also  took  into  account  the
             respondent's delay in dealing with the appellant's case.

         3.   Ground 2 raises the issue of whether  the  Judge  has  engaged
             with the provisions of section  117  Nationality,  Immigration
             and Asylum Act 2002.  Although section 117 is not specifically
             mentioned in the Decision, there is reference to the  need  to
             maintain  immigration  control  [39].   However,  the  Judge's
             findings in relation to  the  proportionality  of  removal  in
             relation to the interference with the appellant's private life
             at [39] are unclear.   It  is  not  clear  whether  the  Judge
             accepts that she is required to give  limited  weight  to  the
             private life on the  basis  that  this  was  formed  when  the
             appellant was in the UK unlawfully and it is not clear whether
             the Judge considered that the failure to serve the  letter  of
             12 May 2003 had any effect on the weight to be accorded to the
             private life and if so why.  Similarly,  the  Judge  finds  at
             [38] that it would be unreasonable to require the  appellant's
             partner and her (adult) child to return with the appellant  to
             India.  She does not, however, consider the public interest or
             reach any finding that the removal would therefore  constitute
             a disproportionate interference with that family life.

         4.   The Article 8 analysis in this case was considered against the
             backdrop of the Article 8 case law  and  not  the  Immigration
             Rules ("the Rules"), it having been found that the  Rules  did
             not apply [11].  Notwithstanding the concession  made  by  the
             respondent [11], there is also an arguable  error  of  law  in
             that approach in light of the judgment of Singh v SSHD  [2015]
             EWCA Civ 74.  Although the judgment post-dates the hearing  of
             the appeal (by one day), it pre-dates the promulgation of  the
             Decision.

         5.   There is therefore  an  arguable  material  error  of  law  in
             relation to the approach taken to Article  8  ECHR  -  whether
             that should be within or outside the Rules,  and  whether  the
             Judge has properly taken into account the public  interest  in
             maintaining  effective  immigration  control  and  the   other
             factors in section 117 when reaching her conclusions as to the
             proportionality of interference with the  appellant's  private
             and family life.  Although Ground 1 appears to  amount  to  no
             more than a disagreement with the Judge's findings, I  do  not
             confine the grant of permission to  Ground  2  since  some  of
             those findings may  need  to  be  revisited  when  considering
             Ground 2."

15. Thus the appeal came before me today.

16. Mr Kandola relied upon the grounds seeking permission  to  appeal.   He
    urged me to accept that the judge erred in  assessing  the  appellant's
    circumstances by placing determinative weight upon the delays that have
    occurred in  his  case  and  whilst  this  may  be  a  relevant  and  a
    potentially weighty factor it is not one that  is  determinative.   The
    material to be considered is the continuation of those rights protected
    under Article  8  and  whether  those  rights  could  be  continued  in
    comparative terms outside the United Kingdom.  It was  the  appellant's
    evidence  that  he  would  have  low  employment   prospects   and   no
    accommodation were he to return to his country of  origin  because  his
    relationship with his family has been compromised.  Mr  Kandola  argued
    that the relevant factor is in fact the appellant's  ability  (and  his
    family members) to reintegrate into Indian society.  There was  nothing
    within the appeal to suggest that the appellant,  his  partner  or  her
    child would be unable to so integrate.  The appellant could have had no
    legitimate expectation of remaining  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  his
    presence has been wholly precarious  (or  potentially  unlawful).   The
    relationships that the appellant has developed  whilst  in  the  United
    Kingdom have been entered into with  the  knowledge  that  his  initial
    claim for asylum had been refused.  It was open  to  the  appellant  to
    make  an  application  for  entry  clearance  on  the  basis   of   his
    relationship with his partner should he wish to do so.

17. Further the judge's decision and reasons  disclose  limited  engagement
    with the provisions of Section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.  He relied on  the  authority  of  Dube  (ss117A-117D)
    [2015] UKUT 90 (IAC) in asserting that Section 117  is  not  "an  �  la
    carte menu for consideration that it is at the discretion of the  judge
    to apply or not apply".  It was incumbent  upon  Judge  Bird  to  fully
    express the public interest in this case and in light  of  the  factual
    matrix found the public interest factors weigh in  favour  of  removal.
    Further having concluded that the public interest would not demand  the
    appellant's removal the judge has failed  to  state  why  this  is  the
    position and any delay in the  processing  of  the  appellant's  claim,
    relating  to  administrative  issues,  does  not  dissolve  the  public
    interest in maintaining effective immigration control.  The  judge  has
    failed to establish why it does.

18. Moreover, the judge failed to deal with issues  relating  to  financial
    independence and the appellant's ability to speak English.  There is no
    reason why the appellant should not in due course make  an  application
    for entry clearance.  I was invited to remake the decision here on  the
    basis of the factual matrix and it was urged  upon  me  that  a  proper
    application of the law should result in this appeal being dismissed.

19. Mr Balroop urged me to accept that the judge had given adequate reasons
    for coming to the decision that she did and was  entitled  to  conclude
    that there had been no effective service of a  decision  following  his
    application which was refused on 12 May 2003.  The appellant  developed
    his private  and  family  life  whilst  awaiting  the  outcome  of  his
    application and the judge was entitled to rely on the authority  of  VW
    (Uganda) [2009] EWCA Civ 5 and EB (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 41.   There  was
    no error in the judge's assessment of the public interest  although  he
    acknowledged that from his consideration of the evidence there  was  no
    evidence provided to the Tribunal to show that the appellant  satisfied
    the English language requirement.

20. I have deliberately set out at some length, earlier in  this  decision,
    the grounds upon which the respondent relies  in  contending  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision contains a material error  of  law  such
    that it should be set aside.

21. On my own analysis of  those  grounds  and  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision I am satisfied that material errors have  arisen  and  that  I
    should move to remake the decision in this appeal.

22. I appreciate that the judge referred to the public interest within  her
    decision but she has erred by failing to carry out an adequate analysis
    in this regard.  The "compelling" factors identified by the judge  were
    that the appellant's partner has been living in the United Kingdom  for
    a number of years and has her own home which she  bought  in  2005  and
    that she is in  gainful  employment.   Her  daughter  is  completing  a
    university degree and any removal to India would be an extreme upheaval
    for them both given the circumstances.  Whilst the appellant's  partner
    has lived in India in the past her daughter has not.  The relationships
    the appellant has with either his  former  wife's  family  or  his  own
    family in India have been compromised and that he  has  low  employment
    prospects and no accommodation in his country of origin.   His  partner
    will similarly have difficulty in finding employment there.  For  these
    reasons the judge concludes that it would be "unreasonable"  to  expect
    the appellant's partner and her daughter to accompany him to  India  to
    an uncertain future.

23. In reaching these findings the judge carried out either no analysis, or
    an inadequate analysis of the public interest considerations and failed
    to apply the authority of Dube  as  referred  to  in  the  respondent's
    grounds.

24. I also find that the judge erred in the weight that  she  gave  to  the
    issue of "delay" in this appeal.  The issue is not determinative of the
    appellant's appeal and it is plain that having placed  the  matters  in
    the hands of solicitors the appellant, over  a  substantial  period  of
    years, was not proactive in pursuing his  application.   Moreover,  the
    judge has failed to attach proper weight to his  precarious  status  in
    the United Kingdom during which  time  he  developed  the  private  and
    family life ties that he has.

25. There was no evidence that either his partner or her daughter could not
    integrate within Indian society.  I also note  that  albeit  throughout
    the judge's decision there is reference to  the  appellant's  partner's
    daughter (and also the fact that she has had no contact  with  her  own
    biological father since 2005).  The evidence from her witness statement
    is that she was born on 1 February 1994 so is an adult aged 21 years.

26. Accordingly I find with regard to the substantive appeal on  Article  8
    grounds and in relation to the issue of  Section  117B  the  judge  has
    erred  in  failing  to  take   into   account   the   public   interest
    considerations applicable and in  failing  to  carry  out  an  adequate
    analysis with regard to the same.

27. Accordingly I set the decision of the judge aside and proceed to remake
    the decision on the basis of the factual matrix found.

28. The judge concludes at paragraph 38 of her  decision  that  whilst  the
    appellant's partner has lived in India in the  past  her  daughter  has
    not.  However, as I say above this does not take account  of  the  fact
    that her daughter is an adult.  I do not accept that the fact that  the
    appellant's partner in the United Kingdom both works and  has  her  own
    property makes the respondent's decision  here  disproportionate.   The
    appellant looks after the home whilst his partner works.  I  appreciate
    he may be supported by his partner.

29. Even if he were not, little weight can be attached to the private  life
    and the relationship with his partner as both has been  established  by
    him at a time when he is subject to a  precarious  immigration  status.
    There  is  no  evidence  that  he  satisfies   the   English   language
    requirement.   There  is  nothing  within  the  factual  matrix   which
    identifies  relevant,  weighty  matters  rendering   the   respondent's
    decision disproportionate.  The maintenance  of  effective  immigration
    control is in the public interest and I am not persuaded that the issue
    of delay within this appellant's application process is at all weighty.
     It is certainly not determinative.  Likewise the employment  prospects
    of either him or his partner and any  uncertainty  about  their  future
    together in India.

30. I appreciate  that  as  the  public  interest  considerations  are  now
    contained in primary legislation they override, existing case  law  and
    while Section 117A(2) requires me to have regard to the  considerations
    listed in Section 117B and (where applicable 117C)  there  is  no  duty
    upon me to reach any specific conclusions or findings  as  the  factors
    listed are the ones which normally have always been taken into account.
     I am though conscious of my statutory duty to take these factors  into
    account when coming to my conclusion.  I am  also  aware  that  Section
    117A(3) imposes upon me a requirement to carry out a balancing exercise
    where an appellant's circumstances engaged  Article  8(1)  in  deciding
    whether  the  proposed  interference  is  proportionate  in   all   the
    circumstances.  In so doing I remind myself of the  guidance  contained
    within Razgar (On the application of) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27.

31. Not only have I reminded myself of  the  above-mentioned  authority  of
    Dube but also Forman (ss177A-C considerations) [2015]  UKUT  412  (IAC)
    where it was held, amongst other things, that the  public  interest  in
    firm immigration control is not diluted by  the  consideration  that  a
    person pursuing a claim under Article 8 has at no time been a financial
    burden on the state or is self-sufficient or is  likely  to  remain  so
    indefinitely.

32. I have also borne in mind the authority of R  (On  the  application  of
    Chen) v SSHD IJR [2015] UKUT 189 (IAC) and the light it throws  on  the
    authority of Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40.  In short it was for this
    appellant to place before  the  Secretary  of  State  evidence  that  a
    temporary separation from a family member, to enable an  individual  to
    apply for entry clearance abroad, will be disproportionate.   There  is
    in this appeal no such evidence.

33. In all the circumstances I find that there is nothing  disproportionate
    in the respondent's decision to remove this appellant.

Conclusions

34. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

35. I set aside the decision.

36. I remake the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.


Signed                              Dated:  30 November 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appeal there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Dated: 30 November 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard



