
IAC-AH-VP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39152/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 8th May 2015                          |On 21st May 2015                    |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                           mr fawaz lafi m alotibi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Armstrong (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Lucas promulgated on 20th January 2015, following  a  hearing  at
    Victory House on 7th January 2015.  In  the  determination,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal of Fawaz Lafi M Alotibi.   The  Secretary  of  State
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Saudi Arabia,  who  was  born  on
    23rd August 1971.  He appealed against the decision of the Secretary of
    State dated 8th October 2014 cancelling his leave to remain in  the  UK
    on the basis that there was evidence from Educational Testing  Services
    (ETS) that, in taking his English language test, the Appellant had used
    impersonation,  resulting  in  the  ETS  subsequently  cancelling   the
    Appellant's test score certificate.

 3. The Appellant maintains (see his witness  statement  of  17th  December
    2014) that he actually  took  a  train  from  Birmingham  to  Bradford,
    changed trains in Manchester, before arriving at  the  hearing  centre,
    and he describes the nature of his trip to the hearing centre, and what
    transpired there quite clearly, which has not been  challenged  by  the
    authorities.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge observed how the Appellant's leave to remain in  the  UK  was
    cancelled  in  the  letter  dated  8th  October  2014  with  a   proper
    explanation as to why that leave was cancelled.  This was that,

         "Using voice verification software, ETS is able to  detect  when  a
         single person is undertaking multiple tests.  ETS undertook a check
         of your test and confirmed to the SSHD that there  was  significant
         evidence  to  conclude  that  your  certificate  was   fraudulently
         obtained.  Your scores from the test taken on  6th  March  2013  at
         Millburn College have now been cancelled by ETS.  On the  basis  of
         the information provided to it by ETS, the Home Office is satisfied
         that  there  is  substantial  evidence  to   conclude   that   your
         certificate was fraudulently obtained ..."

 5. The judge also observed how there was a witness  statement  from  Peter
    Millington and from Rebecca Collings upon which reliance was placed  by
    the Respondent Secretary of State, as evidence from the ETS  that  some
    fraudulent activity had taken place in the taking  of  tests  and  that
    they had properly been able  to  identify  who  was  involved  in  this
    activity.  As the judge observed, however, "It was conceded,  ...  that
    neither of these statements related to this Appellant and were instead,
    general or generic in nature ..." (paragraph 12).

 6. The judge also had regard to the established case law of  AA  (Nigeria)
    where the Court of Appeal had said that there is a high civil  standard
    of  proof  applicable  when  dishonesty  is  asserted  and  that  "bare
    assertions" are in themselves insufficient to discharge this burden  of
    proof (see  paragraph  15).   The  judge  rejected  the  case  for  the
    Respondent Secretary of State.  He held  that  the  witness  statements
    relied upon  by  the  Respondent  "does  not  deal  at  all  with  this
    Appellant's case and are generic  in  nature  as  they  deal  with  the
    processes involved  with  ETS.   There  is  no  consideration  of  this
    Appellant's case at all" (paragraph 22).

 7. The judge also held that the methodology adopted by ETS is the use of a
    spreadsheet and emails to confirm that the reasons for the invalidation
    of the test  score  are  proper.   However,  "The  precise  reasons  or
    'substantial evidence' in support of this conclusion are not disclosed"
    (paragraph 22).

 8. The Appellant's appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

 9. The grounds of application state that insufficient reasons  were  given
    for rejecting the deception objection and that too higher  standard  of
    proof was imposed upon the Respondent.

10. On 9th March 2015, permission to appeal was granted.   It  was  granted
    specifically on the basis that,

         "In ETS cases such as this, the  Respondent  habitually  submits  a
         generalised  statement  and  a  line  from  a   bowdlerised   Excel
         spreadsheet bearing the Appellant's name.  This is  commonly  found
         not to  demonstrate  deception  to  the  requisite  standard.   The
         Respondent considers that such an approach amounts to an  error  of
         law.  This is a clear case in which the First-tier is  in  need  of
         guidance from the Upper-tier or above ..." (see paragraph 3).

Submissions

11. At the hearing before me on 8th May 2015, Mr Avery, appearing on behalf
    of the Respondent Secretary of State, submitted that an application had
    been made yesterday to the Tribunal  for  an  adjournment  because  the
    president of the Tribunal had only this week heard  the  case  of  Gazi
    which deals with the cogency of  evidence  required  in  a  Section  10
    appeal under the IAA 1999, which  is  an  appeal  arising  following  a
    removal to the country abroad.  Given that  the  emphasis  was  on  the
    degree of evidence that can form  the  basis  of  a  decision,  it  was
    important to wait until the outcome of that appeal,  such  that  proper
    guidance can be made available to all the Tribunals dealing with issues
    of evidence.

12. Mr Avery submitted that although such  an  application  had  been  made
    yesterday, it had been refused by the Tribunal, a matter  confirmed  by
    Mr Armstrong, appearing on behalf of the Appellant.  I  had  before  me
    the written application for an adjournment by Mr Avery  as  well  as  a
    written response by Mr Nick Armstrong opposing such an  application  in
    properly structured paragraphs, which were easy to  follow.   Mr  Avery
    submitted that although the application yesterday had  been  dismissed,
    he was instructed to renew the application before me today.

13. Mr Armstrong in reply submitted that he would  oppose  the  application
    for the reasons set out in his written response.  This  response  makes
    it clear that the application comes  very  late  in  the  day,  and  is
    contrary to paragraph 9 of the 13th November 2014 Practice Direction.

14. After due consideration, and bearing in mind the "overriding principle"
    which requires cases to be dealt with expeditiously and justly, I  have
    declined to  grant  an  adjournment,  and  not  least  given  that  the
    application before me is not in accordance with the Practice Direction,
    and has already been rejected once by the  Tribunal  yesterday.   There
    was no evidence before me when the  president  was  to  promulgate  his
    judgment in Gazi or what the precise relevance of that would be to  the
    narrow questions before this Tribunal today.

15. Subject to this, the hearing commenced.

16. Since it was Mr Avery's appeal on behalf of the Respondent Secretary of
    State, he began by submitting that the judge was wrong to have attached
    little weight to the witness statements of Rebecca Collings  and  Peter
    Millington.  These witness statements are significant for what they say
    at paragraphs 28 and 30 because they provide a background  to  how  the
    decision in this instant  case  was  made.   The  process  is  properly
    explained by Peter Millington in his witness statement.   Criticism  of
    the process is misconceived because the process is robust and reliable.
     The evidence that the Secretary of State used goes to the very process
    and the process would have been applied to the present applicant.  Yet,
    the judge in this case gives short shrift to the evidence.  He does not
    engage with the evidence.  The evidence is that the ETS  was  satisfied
    that they had reason, on the basis of the investigations that they were
    carrying out, to invalidate the test (see paragraphs 21  to  23).   One
    has to bear in mind that the threshold here was  a  civil  standard  of
    proof and this was clearly reached.

17. In reply, Mr Armstrong submitted that this was a  straightforward  case
    and that the refusal of the adjournment yesterday confirmed this to  be
    the case, and it was only right that the appeal was indeed heard before
    this Tribunal today.  The fundamental question was  whether  the  judge
    was wrong to say that the  evidence  was  not  of  sufficient  cogency.
    Plainly he was not wrong.  The key point here was that we did not  know
    how reliable the ETS evidence is in relation to its  processes.   There
    is no statement anywhere that 80% or 90% of their decisions  have  been
    found to have been accurate and correct.  This  was  important  because
    what was being relied upon was a generic process.   The  Appellant  had
    given evidence based on his witness statement before  the  judge.   The
    judge had observed that, "There were brief questions from  Miss  Appaih
    but these did not take the case any further" (see  paragraph  17).   In
    these circumstances, it was  plain  that  deception  to  the  requisite
    standard under the law had not been proven by the Respondent  Secretary
    of State.  The Appellant had given an account in six lengthy paragraphs
    about his going to the Millburn College to undertake the test and  this
    evidence had not been challenged or contested by Miss  Appaih  and  was
    not found to be wanting by the judge.  Accordingly, it simply would not
    do to rely upon generic evidence that was just as applicable to someone
    else as it was to this Appellant.

18. Mr Armstrong also drew my attention  to  the  use  of  the  spreadsheet
    system.  The Appellant was in the earliest batch  of  consideration  on
    24th March 2014 and thereafter, there was  haste  in  proceeding  these
    cases not least because of the Panorama programme which had highlighted
    sharp practices at a number of colleges where fraudulent behaviour  was
    practised by students.  He submitted it was important to look at  Peter
    Millington's witness statement at paragraphs 1, 7, 26, 29, 31, 39,  and
    paragraph 40.  My attention was also drawn to paragraphs 42, 44 and 46.



19. If one considered the position against this  background,  submitted  Mr
    Armstrong, it was clear that  by  June  2014,  there  was  some  33,000
    fraudulent cases that ETS was apparently concerned  about  and  80%  of
    these were said to have been subject to human verification.  Yet, given
    these enormously large numbers, it is important to know what the degree
    of accuracy was in such a large range of cases because the numbers were
    so huge that one had to allow for the possibility of error and if  that
    was the case, one could not exclude that  error  in  relation  to  this
    Appellant, when no specific mention had been made of him in any of  the
    evidence submitted by ETS or its witnesses.

20. What this meant was that if ETS had  taken  the  view  that  there  was
    fraudulent activity, the Tribunal  still  had  to  look  at  additional
    evidence to corroborate  the  existence  of  a  deception,  as  legally
    defined following the case of AA  (Nigeria),  because  in  itself,  the
    evidence of the ETS simply could not be said to be such  as  to  enable
    the Respondent to discharge the burden of  proof  that  was  upon  her,
    given that no specific mention  was  made  of  the  Appellant  in  this
    evidence.

21. Finally, should there be a finding of an error of law, it was important
    that evidence was heard in the  form  of  the  expert  report  from  Dr
    Harrison, who makes it quite clear that a reliance upon  the  processes
    of the ETS and its subsequent  decisions  is  fraught  with  difficulty
    because of its generic nature.  Dr Harrison's report was not before the
    original judge but it was before this Tribunal, and were  an  error  of
    law to be found there was no reason why this evidence could not now  be
    considered in remaking the decision.

22. In reply, Mr Avery submitted that it was not true  that  there  was  no
    challenge to the account given by the Appellant.  The very basis of the
    challenge was that the Appellant's account that he had himself sat  the
    English language test was implausible.

Error of Law

23. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision and remake the decision
    (see Section 12(2) of TCEA 2007).   I  have  come  to  this  conclusion
    notwithstanding Mr Armstrong's valid efforts to persuade me  otherwise.
    This appeal  is  based  on  a  very  narrow  premise.   Mr  Armstrong's
    submissions, carefully well prepared and measured in their delivery  as
    they are, remain for another place and at  another  time.   The  simple
    issue in this case is that the Appellant's ETS TOEIC  certificate  from
    ETS was invalidated by  ETS  themselves.   With  the  test  certificate
    invalidated the Secretary of State  had  no  option  but  to  terminate
    leave.

24. Second, it is arguable that if the Secretary of  State  has  set  up  a
    system she can place reliance upon that system when she looks to it for
    evidence of compliance with, as the case  is  here,  the  English  test
    certification.  The ETS is after all  a  global  organisation  properly
    constituted and used by government bodies.

25. Third, if the ETS has got a decision wrong, as is argued  in  the  case
    before this Tribunal, then the  proper  recourse  is  against  the  ETS
    itself.  This may well be in the form of a judicial review  challengeif
    it can be shown that it performs public functions  or  functions  of  a
    quasi public nature, but that would  be  a  matter  for  an  individual
    applicant as in this case.  What all of this points to, however, is  to
    the fact that if the certificate is withdrawn  or  invalidated  by  the
    ETS, there is simply no basis for  the  Secretary  of  State  to  grant
    leave.  This is what has happened here.  This must be the  end  of  the
    matter.

26. Finally, I should also add that the judge below cannot  be  correct  in
    stating, insofar as this is implied, that, "the precise reasons for all
    'substantial evidence' in support of this conclusion are not disclosed"
    (paragraph 23) because it cannot be  said  that  the  reasons  are  not
    disclosed.  The reasons are plainly known  to  the  Appellant  in  this
    case, namely, that it is suggested he is not the  person  who  sat  the
    test.  There can be no further obligation on the Secretary of State  to
    disclose anymore information in this respect.

Remaking the Decision

27. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before him, and the submissions I have heard today.
     I am dismissing this appeal for the reasons that I have set out above.
     This appeal cannot succeed  because  the  English  language  test  was
    invalidated by the Educational Testing Services (ETS).   The  reference
    given at paragraph 3 of the determination to the relevant part  of  the
    refusal letter of 8th October 2014 provides a complete  answer  to  why
    this appeal cannot succeed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original  judge.   I  remake  the  decision  as  follows.   This  appeal  is
dismissed.

No anonymity order is made.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    16th May 2015

