
IAC-AH-SAR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39285/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 7th April 2015                             |On 17th April 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                             MR APURBA KUMAR ROY
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Rahman, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 16th June  1983.   The
    Appellant made on 27th July 2013 a combined application  for  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom as a  Tier  4  (General)  Student  Migrant
    under the points-based system and for  a  biometric  residence  permit.
    That application was refused on 10th  September  2013.   The  Appellant
    appealed and the appeal came before Designated Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Digney sitting at Hatton  Cross  on  4th  September  and  30th
    October 2014.  In a determination promulgated on 1st December 2014  the
    appeal was dismissed.

 2. The Grounds of Appeal indicated that at paragraphs  24  to  27  of  the
    determination four witnesses were named to give evidence, none of  whom
    appeared before the Tribunal or had any  relevance  to  the  case.   In
    addition,  a  wrongly  named  Respondent  was  referred  to   and   the
    Appellant's date of birth was recited as being different from that that
    it was.  On 29th January 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew  granted
    permission to appeal being satisfied that there was an  arguable  error
    of law that the judge took into account evidence which did  not  relate
    to this particular case.  On 6th February 2015 the Secretary  of  State
    responded to the Grounds of  Appeal  under  Rule  24  and  invited  the
    Tribunal to determine  the  appeal  with  a  fresh  oral  (continuance)
    hearing  to  consider  the  Appellant's  case  properly  and  that  the
    Secretary of State did  not  oppose  the  Appellant's  application  for
    permission to appeal.

 3. It is on that basis that the appeal came before me.  The Appellant  was
    represented by his legal representative Mr Rahman.   The  Secretary  of
    State appeared by his Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Jarvis.

 4. In submissions made to me, it is clear that for some reason unknown the
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has  confused  another  case   with   this
    particular case in drafting his decision.  There was an  acceptance  by
    the Secretary of  State  therefore  that  the  case  had  been  wrongly
    considered   and   the   decision   was   clearly   therefore   unsafe.
    Unfortunately Mr Jarvis advised that he had not been provided with  the
    full Home Office file and  consequently  despite  noting  the  Rule  24
    response he was not in a position to  hear  the  matter  by  way  of  a
    continuance but he also indicated that there had not been a  clear  and
    proper First-tier Tribunal decision and in  such  circumstances  I  was
    invited by both legal representatives to remit the matter back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

 5. Such remittal requires the permission of the Upper Tribunal.   In  such
    circumstances pursuant to the  Upper  Tribunal  Rules  I  granted  that
    permission.  Unfortunately due  to  the  Kingsway  fire,  the  Tribunal
    centre had neither telephones nor computers available and it was agreed
    that the best way of dealing with this matter  was  merely  to  make  a
    direction remitting the case back and to invite the  administration  to
    fix the date with Hatton Cross at a later date.

Notice of Decision

 6. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law.  The decision is set aside  and  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal sitting at Hatton Cross to be heard  on  the  first  available
    date 28 days hence with an ELH  of  two  hours  before  any  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge other than Designated Judge Digney.  Leave is granted to
    the Appellant's solicitors to file and serve an  up-to-date  bundle  of
    evidence upon which they seek to rely at least seven days prior to  the
    restored hearing.  No interpreter is required.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to  Rule  13  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014.  No application is made to  vary  that  order  and
    none is made.



Signed        Date 7th April 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

