
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39183/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 December 2015                  |On 6 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                       Mohammed Maksudur Rahaman Momin
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms T. Kabir, instructed by Thamina Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Kola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 5 December 1988.  This
    appeal arises from the respondent's decision, dated 19 September  2014,
    whereby the appellant's application for leave to remain  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student under  the  Points  Based  System  was  refused.  The
    respondent also made a decision to  remove  the  appellant  by  way  of
    directions under section 47 of the Immigration Asylum  and  Nationality
    Act 2006.

 2. Two reasons were given for the refusal. The first was  that  there  was
    not a valid Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies  ("CAS").  It  seems
    that during the intervening period between  the  appellant  making  the
    application and the respondent making a  decision  the  institution  at
    which the appellant intended to study ceased to be listed as a  Tier  4
    sponsor.  The  second  reason  for  refusal  was  that  the  respondent
    determined the appellant had  submitted  a  bank  statement  which  the
    issuing authority confirmed was false and as  such  should  be  refused
    under paragraph 322(1A) on the basis of having used  deception  in  the
    application.

 3. The appellant appealed and his appeal was heard by First tier  Tribunal
    ("FtT") Judge Callender Smith. The FtT dismissed the appeal. In a brief
    decision, the FtT stated that the appeal had been adjourned about  five
    months earlier because the Document Verification Report (DVR)  produced
    by the respondent was not complete.  When the case resumed the full DVR
    had still not been served. The FtT found that it could not rely on  the
    DVR because it was vague and incomplete. It then stated that  it  would
    have expected the appellant to produce a letter from his bank attesting
    to the genuineness of the account and that the burden of proof  was  on
    the appellant. The FtT concluded:

         "I take the view that he [the appellant] has failed to satisfy that
         burden - by showing that he did have a genuine bank account because
         that was a live issue in this appeal..."

 4. At the commencement of the hearing Mr Kotas stated that  the  appellant
    now had evidence about the bank statement and the parties had conferred
    and reached an agreement, the terms of which were as follows:

 5. If the appeal is allowed to the limited extent that it is  remitted  to
    the respondent to consider the appellant's new evidence relating to the
    validity of the appellant's bank account, the Secretary of State  will,
    after considering the new evidence about the bank statement: (i) if  it
    is satisfied the bank  statement  is  genuine  grant  60  days  to  the
    appellant to obtain a new CAS; or (ii)  if  it  is  not  satisfied  the
    statement is genuine issue a new decision refusing the application.

 6. I asked Ms Kabir if she  was  in  agreement  with  what  Mr  Kotas  had
    described and she said that she was.

 7. In light of the agreement between  the  parties  described  above,  the
    appellant's appeal is allowed to the limited extent  that  I  find  the
    respondent's decision of 19 September 2014 was not in  accordance  with
    the law and the appellant's application for leave to remain as a Tier 4
    (General) Student remains outstanding for a lawful decision to be  made
    such decision to be made in accordance with the agreement reached by Mr
    Kotas and Ms Kabir as set out in paragraph 5 of this decision.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 30 December 2015              |

