
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/39235/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 January 2016                   |On 26 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

               The SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        SONIA HELEN PERERA BAMMANAGE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Sreeraman, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Mahmud, instructed by Malik Law Chambers
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Morgan.  The decision was promulgated on 28 July 2015.  It allowed  the
    Respondent's appeal finding that paragraph 276ADE  of  the  Immigration
    Rules was met.

 2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to the Secretary of State for
    the Home Department as the  respondent  and  to  Ms  Bammanage  as  the
    appellant, reflecting their positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The parties were in agreement that the appeal before me turned  on  the
    provisions contained in  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  This requires the appellant to show that there "would  be  very
    significant obstacles to the applicant's integration into  the  country
    to which he would have to go if required to leave the UK".

 4. The respondent's decision dated  18  September  2014  found  that  this
    provision was not  met  and  that  the  appellant  did  not  face  very
    significant obstacles to integration in Sri Lanka, the country to which
    she would be required to go if required to leave the UK.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge made the following  findings  at  [9]  to
    [13] of the determination:

         "(9) The appellant was born and brought  up  in  the  Sultanate  of
             Oman.  Her mother is a national of Pakistan and her father  is
             a national of Sri Lanka.  The appellant and  her  parents  are
             practising Catholics.  The appellant is a Sri Lankan  national
             but has never lived in Sri Lanka  and  has  only  visited  for
             short periods accompanied by her parents when she was a child.
              The appellant has never spent seven years in Sri Lanka as  is
             suggested in the letter of refusal.  The  appellant  has  only
             ever lived in  Oman  and  the  United  Kingdom.   Neither  the
             appellant nor her parents ever became  permanent  citizens  of
             Oman.  I accept the appellant's evidence that the family would
             not have been entitled to apply for this given  that  they  do
             not speak Arabic, are not Muslim and  are  foreigners.   Until
             she reached 18 the appellant  was  educated  at  international
             English schools in Oman.  The  appellant's  parents  are  both
             English teachers working for the Ministry of  Education.   The
             appellant completed her primary  and  secondary  education  in
             Oman.  The appellant is fluent in English which is her primary
             language and also speaks Urdu, which is the language in  which
             her parents communicate.  The appellant is illiterate in Urdu.
              The appellant does not speak either of the  languages  spoken
             in Sri Lanka and has never lived there.

         (11) The appellant's parents determined that her  higher  education
             would take place in the United Kingdom.  The  appellant's  two
             sisters, who attended the hearing, are both married, living in
             the United Kingdom and have been granted indefinite  leave  to
             remain.  The appellant has no other siblings.  The appellant's
             mother travelled with her from Oman in 2007 and the  appellant
             lived initially with her mother and sister.   The  appellant's
             parents relocated to Pakistan in 2008 and that is  where  they
             are  currently  living.   The  appellant's  father  is   still
             teaching English.  The appellant has some distant relatives of
             her father in Sri Lanka but her siblings  are  in  the  United
             Kingdom and her parents in Pakistan.

         (12) The appellant is financially supported by her sisters, one  of
             whom is a software engineer and  the  other  who  works  as  a
             cardiographer  at  the  Great  Ormond  Street  Hospital.   The
             appellant has now resided in  the  United  Kingdom  for  eight
             years, the entirety of her adult life.   She  has  very  close
             ties and has made a life for herself in  the  United  Kingdom.
             Whilst she is a Sri Lankan national by virtue of her  father's
             nationality she has never lived in Sri Lanka, does  not  speak
             the language, has no close family and has  only  ever  visited
             for holidays.  The entirety of the  appellant's  stay  in  the
             United Kingdom has  been  lawful.   She  currently  wishes  to
             pursue a Masters in Tourism and Hospitality but was unable  to
             apply for leave on this basis because she had not received her
             previous qualification prior to  making  the  application  for
             further leave.

         (13) In light of the evidence outlined above and what I find to  be
             the highly unusual circumstances of this case  I  have  little
             difficulty in finding  that  the  appellant  would  face  very
             significant obstacles to her integration into Sri Lanka.  As a
             young single woman without language or close family  returning
             to a country in which she has never  lived  I  find  that  she
             would face very  significant  obstacles  to  her  integration.
             This is not a reintegration case  because  the  appellant  has
             never lived in Sri Lanka.  She effectively has  no  ties  with
             Sri Lanka."

 6. The appeal was then allowed under the Immigration Rules.

 7. The challenge contained in the grounds of appeal was as follows:

         "(2) The FTTJ notes that the appellant was brought up in Oman where
             here (sic) parents were working and came to the United Kingdom
             for the purposes of study.  The FTTJ has allowed the appeal on
             the basis that  the  appellant  would  face  very  significant
             obstacles to the appellant's integration into Sri Lanka if she
             was removed.  The FTTJ notes however that the appellant  is  a
             Sri Lankan national and that her  father  who  is  Sri  Lankan
             still has family members  there.   The  FTTJ  notes  that  the
             appellant has only spent holidays in Sri Lanka as a child  and
             disputes the Secretary of State's claim  the  appellant  spent
             seven years there as a child.  The Secretary of State contends
             that as a national of Sri  Lanka  with  some  relatives  there
             these do not constitute  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
             appellant integrating into Sri Lanka.  The FTTJ refers to  the
             question of language, when it is clear that English is  spoken
             widely in Sri Lanka.  The FTTJ has also failed to reason why a
             26 year old, healthy, educated woman with some relatives there
             would be unable to establish herself successfully in Sri Lanka
             even if she had only spent holidays there in  the  past.   The
             appellant has two sisters settled in the United Kingdom; again
             this does not indicate they could not visit her in  Sri  Lanka
             or provide any assistance financially (as it  is  stated  they
             are doing at the moment) to her from the UK.  The  FTTJ  notes
             the appellant's parents reside in Pakistan and  that  her  Sri
             Lankan father is still in employment.  Again the FTTJ gives no
             reason why the parents could not provide her with  support  if
             required.  The lack of adequate analysis of 'very  significant
             obstacles to her integration in Sri Lanka' in this case  is  a
             material error of law."

 8. Although the wording at the end of this paragraph refers to a "lack  of
    adequate analysis" it appeared to me that it was  really  a  perversity
    challenge, the argument being that the decision  reached  was  not  one
    open to the First-tier Tribunal on the material provided.

 9. The Upper Tribunal may only interfere with a finding of fact  where  it
    is erroneous at a level capable of being an error of law, as set out in
    the decision of the Court of Appeal in R (Iran) and others v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ  982  at  subparagraph
    90(2):

         "90.(2)  A finding might only be satisfied for error of law on  the
                grounds of perversity if it was irrational  or  unreasonable
                in the Wednesbury sense, or one that was wholly  unsupported
                by the evidence."

10. Essentially, this was a fact based assessment for  the  judge  to  make
    and, having heard oral evidence, he  was  best  placed  to  do  so.  In
    Mukarkar v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ333 Carnwath LJ said this, at [40]:

         "Factual judgments of this kind are often not easy,  but  they  are
         not  made  easier  or  better  by  excessive  legal  or  linguistic
         analysis. It is of the nature  of  such  judgments  that  different
         tribunals, without illegality or irrationality, may reach different
         conclusions on the same  case  (as  is  indeed  illustrated  by  Mr
         Fountain's decision after the second hearing). The mere  fact  that
         one tribunal has reached what may seem an unusually  generous  view
         of the facts of a particular case does not mean that it has made an
         error of law, so as to justify an appeal under the old  system,  or
         an order for reconsideration under the new. Nor does it create  any
         precedent, so as to limit the Secretary of State's right  to  argue
         for a more restrictive approach on a similar case  in  the  future.
         However, on the facts of the particular case, the decision  of  the
         specialist tribunal should be respected."

11. In my judgement the conclusion  of  Judge  Morgan  cannot  be  properly
    characterised as perverse,  irrational  or  not  open  to  him  on  the
    evidence. The fact that  this  may  not  have  been  the  only  outcome
    possible on the facts does not disclose that the judge made an error of
    law and it has not been established  that  he  did  so  for  any  other
    reason. Certainly, English is widely spoken in Sri Lanka but  this  was
    not a major part of the findings of the First-tier Tribunal  where  the
    more potent factors of never having lived in Sri Lanka, being a  young,
    single woman and having only distant relatives there  were  capable  of
    attracting significant weight.

12. For these reasons I did not find that the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal disclosed an error on a point of law.

Notice of Decision

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
    point of law and shall stand.


Signed   [pic]    Date 25 January 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
