
IAC-AH-lr-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/39265/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 8 December 2014                              |On 16 December 2014        |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             shanelle soco jocoy
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Mr P Lewis of Counsel instructed by Kidd Rapinet LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS
The Respondent

 1. The Respondent to whom I shall  refer  as  the  "the  Applicant"  is  a
    citizen of the Philippines, born on 24 March 1984.  On 2 December  2009
    she arrived with leave to enter as a student.  Such leave was extended,
    expiring on 11 August 2013.

 2. On 9 August 2013, in time she applied for leave to remain on the  basis
    of her relationship with Lee Tang, a British citizen  born  on  18  May
    1983 in the United Kingdom.  They had first  met  in  about  May  2011.
    They began living together in June 2013  and  in  February  2014  their
    child was born.

 3. On 11 September 2013 the Appellant (the SSHD) refused  the  Applicant's
    application under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules  and  under
    Article 8 of the European Convention outside the Rules.  At the date of
    the decision, the Applicant was some two or three months pregnant.

 4. The Applicant appealed under Section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 as  amended  (the  2002  Act).   The  grounds  were
    generic and referred to Article 8 of the European Convention.

The First-tier Tribunal's Determination

 5. The  appeal  was  heard  on  4  August  2014  and  by  a  determination
    promulgated on 3 September 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Denson
    allowed the appeal on human rights  grounds  by  way  of  reference  to
    Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.  He referred to Section 55  of
    the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 as well  as  Sections
    117A-D of the 2002 Act which had come into effect on 28 July.  He noted
    the immigration history of the Applicant and that her partner had spent
    all his life  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  that  his  family  and  in
    particular his sister  lived  close  by  and  that  he  did  not  speak
    "Filipino" (Tagalog?).  He also had a medical condition  for  which  he
    had been operated upon and it was anticipated a further operation would
    be necessary.  The Judge found the relationship between  the  Applicant
    and her partner to be genuine,  loving  and  subsisting  and  that  the
    Applicant's partner supported the family who lived in the  family  home
    of her partner's parents.

 6. The Applicant could not satisfy the requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE
    and the Judge proceeded to consider the claim under Article  8  outside
    the Rules, referring extensively to Sections 117A and B.  He went on to
    allow the appeal.

 7. The SSHD sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the Judge  had
    erred in law by not considering the jurisprudence in Gulshan (Article 8
    - new Rules - correct approach) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 640  (IAC)  and  R
    (oao Nagre) v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720  (Admin).   The  SSHD  asserted  the
    Judge  had  failed  to   identify   any   compelling   or   exceptional
    circumstances and that there were no insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
    Applicant together  with  her  child  and  partner  relocating  to  the
    Philippines or to the Applicant  and  her  child  returning  there  and
    maintaining contact with her partner by modern means.

 8. On 5 November 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Holmes granted  the
    SSHD permission to appeal on the basis that in light of the guidance to
    be found in R (oao MM and Others) v SSHD [2014] EWCA  Civ  985  it  was
    arguable the Judge had not adequately engaged with the evidence or  the
    requirements of Section 117B of the 2002 Act.



The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 9. The Applicant, her child and her partner were in attendance.  I  showed
    to the parties the recent decision in R (oao Oludoyi and Others) v SSHD
    (Article 8 - MM (Lebanon) and (Nagre) IJR [2014] UKUT 00539 (IAC).

10. Mr Duffy for the Respondent  relied  on  the  grounds  for  appeal  and
    submitted the issue was  that  the  Judge  had  had  no  need  to  have
    considered Article 8 outside the Rules because this was  a  case  which
    engaged paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM of the Rules and that insofar  as
    relevant to this appeal paragraph EX.1 provided a complete code for the
    consideration of a claim under Article 8.   Consequently,  the  Judge's
    consideration of the claim under the Immigration  Rules  had  not  been
    sufficient.

11. For the Applicant Mr Lewis submitted the decision which the Judge  made
    was open to him.  He had had  ample  regard  to  the  relevant  factors
    including the matters referred to in Section 117B of the 2002  Act  and
    had  given   sustainable   reasons   for   concluding   that   it   was
    disproportionate to require the Applicant to leave the United  Kingdom.



12. Mr Duffy referred to the Applicant's notice under Procedure Rule 24  on
    the day of the hearing.  This set out the history  of  the  Applicant's
    immigration history and  the  history  of  her  relationship  with  her
    partner.  Sections 117A-D are set out in full and reference is made  to
    comments in R (oao MM and Others) rejecting the approach to  Article  8
    claims outside the Rules through what has become known as "the  Gulshan
    Gateway".  He also relied on the decision in R (oao Oludoyi).

13. He helpfully conceded that the grounds for appeal based on Gulshan  and
    Nagre were not now of any material substance but that the determination
    contained an error of law because the  Judge  had  failed  to  consider
    Appendix FM paragraph EX.1.  I noted the SSHD's grounds for appeal  did
    not take issue with the Judge's  treatment  of  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules. I also noted the Applicant's  child  had  been  born
    after the date of the decision under appeal but before the  hearing  of
    the appeal.

Consideration

14. Mr Duffy referred to the determination in Sanade and Others [2012] UKUT
    00048 which included the finding that where the  child  or  indeed  the
    remaining spouse is a British citizen and therefore a  citizen  of  the
    European Union, it is not possible to require them to re-locate outside
    the European Union or to submit that it would be reasonable for them to
    do so.

15. I noted the grounds for appeal lodged by the SSHD did not challenge the
    Judge's approach to the Rules but permission was granted on  the  basis
    that it was arguable the Judge had not adequately engaged  with  either
    or both of the evidence and Section 117B of the  2002  Act.   Mr  Duffy
    also submitted quite reasonably that the Applicant's circumstances were
    such that she had  an  arguably  good  claim  that  she  satisfied  the
    requirements of paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM but he emphasised that at
    the date of the decision the Applicant's child had not been born.

16. The Applicant was bound to  fail  under  the  provisions  of  paragraph
    276ADE because she could not meet the  residence  requirements  of  the
    Rule.  In such circumstances it is questionable whether  there  is  any
    merit in proceeding to a  consideration  of  Appendix  FM  because  the
    Appendix must logically be appended to the Rule so that if an Applicant
    were  to  satisfy  the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM  but   not   the
    requirements of the substantive paragraph, it is difficult to  see  how
    she could succeed under the Rules: see Sabir (Appendix FM  -  EX.1  not
    freestanding) [2014] UKUT 63 (IAC).

17. The Judge made findings of fact at paragraphs 24-29 and at paragraph 30
    dismissed the appeal under paragraph 276ADE of the Rules and went on to
    consider the claim under Article 8 outside  the  Rules.   There  is  no
    criticism of the Judge's treatment of the claim under the  Rules  other
    than the suggestion made for the SSHD that paragraph EX.1  of  Appendix
    FM constituted a complete code.  For the reasons given in Sabir,  I  do
    not accept that submission.

18. The other grounds relying on the requirement that  the  Applicant  meet
    the   additional   requirements   of   exceptional   or   compassionate
    circumstances to engage Article 8 outside the Rules, colloquially known
    as the "Gulshan Gateway", do not disclose  an  error  of  law  for  the
    reasons already given.

19. The consequence is that I find the grounds of appeal do not disclose an
    error of law so the determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  shall
    stand.

Anonymity

20.  There was no request  for  an  anonymity  order  or  direction.  Having
    considered the papers in the Tribunal file and  of  the  error  of  law
    appeal, I find none is warranted.

DECISION

    The First-tier Tribunal's determination did not contain an error of law
    and shall stand.  The effect is:-

    The appeal of the Applicant is allowed and the appeal of  the  SSHD  is
    dismissed.

    No anonymity order or direction is made.



Signed/Official Crest  Date 15. xii. 2014

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


