
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/39856/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 20 November 2015                  |On 27 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                               KULWINDER SINGH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Hoare of H & S Legal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Foudy promulgated on 7 January 2015  which  allowed  the
    Appellant's appeal against a refusal dated 27  September  2014  of  the
    Appellant's application for  leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of  his
    marriage to Derminder Kaur Gill who is a British  citizen  present  and
    settled in the United Kingdom.

Background

 3. The Appellant was born on 6 September 1983 and is a national of India.

 4. The Appellant has been in the United Kingdom since 2011 when he arrived
    as a student. The Appellant obtained  an  extension  of  that  visa  in
    January 2013 until 6 April  2014.  Thereafter  the  Appellant  met  his
    future wife and  made  an  application  dated  31  January  2014  under
    Appendix FM for leave to remain as a spouse.

 5. On 27 September 2014 the Secretary of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons but  the  only
    one that remained in issue at the time of the hearing was the assertion
    by the Respondent that the  Appellant  had  produced  a  false  English
    Language test result in relation to his student application of  January
    2013.

The Judge's Decision

 6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Foudy ("the Judge") allowed the appeal against  the  Respondent's
    decision. The Judge made the following findings:

      a) The Appellant was a credible witness.

      b) The burden of proving that the Appellant used dishonest conduct was
         on the Respondent.

      c) The test certificate produced by the Appellant in  his  application
         of January 2013 had been accepted at the time  of  his  application
         but as a result of a Panorama expose in January  2014  the  College
         where the Appellant took the test , Eden College, was  investigated
         and it was asserted that  the  test  certificate  produced  by  the
         Appellant was false.

      d)  Educational  Testing  Services  (ETS)   used   voice   recognition
         technology to try and identify fraud at Eden College.

      e) ETS's Office of Testing Integrity had a staff of only 60  worldwide
         and virtually all were required to investigate the British problem.
         The Judge expressed concern about their ability to produce reliable
         data given their limited number and the intense pressure to provide
         results(paragraph 9)

      f) The Judge was concerned about  the  conversion  of  the  electronic
         voice files which had to  be  done  twice  before  the  recognition
         software could be applied (paragraph 10)

      g) The Judge raised a number of concerns about the human  verification
         process after the software process given the scale of the task, the
         additional staff that had to be drafted in and the requirements and
         limits of their training and the limited supervision (paragraphs 11-
         13)

      h) The only direct evidence against  the  Appellant  was  a  one  line
         computer printout that a Kulwinder Singh born 6.9.83 took a test at
         Edene College on 5 December 2012 which was invalid.  The  Appellant
         has asserted since January 2013 that he did  not  take  a  test  on
         5.12.2012 and the Judge found there was no evidence before her that
         he took such a test.

      i) The Appellant gave evidence that he took the tests  on  14  and  17
         December 2012.

      j) The Judge found that the test analysed by ETS was not  that  of  Mr
         Singh, or was of another person with the same name or  human  error
         played a part but she did not find the evidence that this Appellant
         had used fraud was reliable.

      k) The presenting officer conceded that the  Appellant  otherwise  met
         all of the requirements of Appendix FM.

 7. Grounds of appeal were lodged essentially arguing that the Judge failed
    to give adequate reasons for her finding that  he  Respondent  had  not
    discharged the burden of proving the dishonest conduct and  applied  an
    elevated standard of proof.

 8. On 31 May 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy gave permission to appeal.

 9. At the hearing I heard brief submissions from Mr Harrison on behalf  of
    the Respondent that he relied on the grounds of appeal.

10. On behalf of the Appellant Mr Hoare submitted that  he  relied  on  the
    Rule 24 response and wished to emphasis in particular that there was no
    evidence before the Judge that this Appellant had ever taken a test  on
    5 December 2012.

Legal Framework

11. The central issue in this case was whether the Judge had given adequate
    reasons for her decision that the Respondent had not met the evidential
    burden of establishing that the Appellant had used fraud to obtain  his
    language certificate and whether she had applied too high a standard of
    proof.

12. As to the standard of proof I have taken into account  Re B  (Children)
    [2008] UKHL 35 where at paragraph 13 Lord Hoffman said  "I  think  that
    the time has come to say, once and for all,  that  there  is  only  one
    civil standard of proof and that is proof that the fact in  issue  more
    probably occurred than not..." At paragraph 15 Lord Hoffman  added  "..
    There is only one rule of law, namely that the occurrence of  the  fact
    in issue must be proved to have been more  probable  than  not.  Common
    sense, not law, requires that in deciding this question, regard  should
    be had, to whatever extent appropriate, to inherent probabilities".

13. In R (N) v Mental Health Review Tribunal (Northern Region) [2005]  EWCA
    Civ 1605, [2006] QB  468  Richards  LJ  stated  at  paragraph  62  that
    "Although there is a single civil standard of proof on the  balance  of
    probabilities, it is flexible in its application.  In  particular,  the
    more serious the allegation or the more serious the consequences if the
    allegation is proved, the stronger must be the evidence before a  court
    will find the allegation proved on the balance of  probabilities.  Thus
    the flexibility of the standard lies  not  in  any  adjustment  to  the
    degree of probability required for an allegation  to  be  proved  (such
    that a more serious allegation has to be proved to a higher  degree  of
    probability), but in the strength or quality of the evidence that  will
    in practice be required for an allegation to be proved on  the  balance
    of probabilities."  At paragraph 27 of In Re D [2008] UKHL 33, [2008] 1
    WLR 1499 Lord Carswell, who gave the lead judgement  in  the  House  of
    Lords, approved that passage from R (N) v Mental Health Review Tribunal
    (Northern Region) [2005]  EWCA  Civ  1605,  [2006]  QB  468)  with  the
    additional observation at paragraph 28 that there would be cases when a
    court or tribunal "has to look at the facts  more  critically  or  more
    anxiously than in others before it can be satisfied  to  the  requisite
    standard."  Lord Carswell also added at paragraph 28 that "a  different
    standard of proof or a specially cogent standard  of  evidence  is  not
    required but merely appropriately careful consideration by the Tribunal
    before  it   is   satisfied   of   the   matter   which   has   to   be
    established."...and at paragraph 29 "...the panel had to  be  satisfied
    on the balance of probabilities...but it did not follow that especially
    cogent evidence was required...)"

Finding on Material Error

14. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law.

15. I am satisfied firstly that the Judge was clear as to  the  burden  and
    standard of proof in this case as she set it out correctly at paragraph
    3 of the decision and she concluded that what was placed before her was
    not reliable evidence that the Appellant obtained  the  certificate  by
    fraud (paragraph 14).

16. I am satisfied that the Judge carried out a  meticulous,  detailed  and
    well reasoned analysis of the evidence produced by the Respondent  both
    as to the methodology utilised by ETS and then moved on to analyse  the
    evidence as it pertained to this Appellant.

17. The Judge was entitled to consider by reference to the methodology used
    by ETS whether the evidence produced was reliable  evidence  of  fraud.
    She was entitled on the basis of the evidence before  her  to  identify
    concerns about  the  methodology  which  inevitably  reflected  on  the
    reliability of the evidence as to circumstances in which  ETS  came  to
    give their opinion: the limited number of staff they had available  for
    the work; the requirement for  conversion  of  the  voice  files  twice
    before they could be assessed with the  consequent  risk  of  error  at
    either stage of  the  conversion;  the  imperfection  of  the  analysis
    technology  requiring  human  verification;  the  concerns  as  to  the
    training and indeed attrition rate of staff brought in to carry out the
    verification process and the levels of pressure in which this work  was
    carried out.

18. The Judge  however  did  not  limit  herself  to  an  analysis  of  the
    methodology but also considered whether  the  Respondent  had  met  the
    evidential burden of establishing that the  Appellant  before  her  had
    used fraud. The case before  her  was  slightly  unusual  in  that  the
    Respondent  had  no  concerns  about  the  language  certificates   the
    Appellant had produced in respect of the most recent application  under
    Appendix FM the subject of the appeal but asserted that he had  used  a
    fraudulent certificate dated 5 December 2012 in his student application
    in 2013. There was however no evidence before the Judge either  in  the
    form of the alleged certificate dated 5 December 2012 or a copy of  the
    Appellant's student application suggesting that he  relied  on  such  a
    certificate. Given the Judges finding that the Appellant had made plain
    since January 2013 that he did not accept that he  took  a  test  on  5
    December 2012 but rather on 14 and 17 December  2012  this  matter  was
    clearly in  issue  and  documents  could  have  been  produced  by  the
    Respondent to address this point. The Judge was therefore  entitled  to
    conclude after looking at the documentary  evidence  and  hearing  oral
    evidence from the Appellant who she found to be a credible witness that
    she was not satisfied that the Appellant even took a test on 5 December
    2012.

19. I remind myself of what was said in Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set
    aside) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT  85  (IAC)  about  the  requirement  for
    sufficient reasons to be given in a decision in headnote (1): "Although
    there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of the conclusions on
    the central issue on which an appeal is determined, those reasons  need
    not be extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense, having  regard
    to the material accepted by the judge."

20. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as a
    whole set out findings that were sustainable and sufficiently  detailed
    and based on cogent reasoning and the Respondent cannot be in any doubt
    about why the appeal was allowed.

CONCLUSION

21. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

22. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed      Date 24.11.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
