

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                                Appeal Number: IA/39682/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Promulgated |
|On 3 December 2014                     |On 9 December 2014        |
|                                       |                          |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     RH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Whitwell (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr Harding (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS



       1. The appellant ('the SSHD') appeals against a  decision  of  First-
          tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese dated 18 August  2014  in  which  the
          respondent's appeal was allowed under Article 8 of the ECHR.

       2. I have made an anonymity direction because  this  decision  refers
          to confidential matters relevant to young children.



Background



       3. The background to this case can be summarised for the purposes  of
          this appeal.  The respondent  is  a  citizen  of  Afghanistan  and
          entered the UK as a minor in 2009.  He was  granted  discretionary
          leave until 16 April 2010.  He applied to extend this a  few  days
          after but this was refused.  He applied for  further  leave  after
          this but the SSHD refused this and made a decision to remove  him.
           It is this decision that he appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal,
          who in turn allowed his appeal under Article 8.

Procedural history

       4. The SSHD appealed against the Judge's finding that  the  relevant
          circumstances were such  that  to  remove  the  respondent  would
          constitute a breach of Article 8.  When granting permission on  1
          October 2014 Judge  TRP  Hollingworth  observed  that  the  Judge
          failed to consider the public interest question pursuant  to  the
          Immigration Act 2014 and also failed to  take  into  account  the
          respondent's  illegal  status  when  his  relationship  with  his
          partner commenced.

       5. The matter now comes before me  to  decide  whether  or  not  the
          determination contains an error of law.

Error of law

       6. Mr Harding accepted that the decision contains an error  of  law.
          The Judge asserts that he has taken  into  'consideration  public
          interest factors which are laid out  under  section  117  of  the
          Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002'.  Unfortunately the
          Judge  has  not  directed  himself   to   the   public   interest
          considerations applicable to all cases under section 117B.  There
          is also no indication within the determination that the Judge has
          taken into account those specific considerations.  In failing  to
          do so I agree with both representatives that the Judge has  erred
          in law.

Re-making the decision

       7. Both parties invited me to re-make the decision by  reference  to
          the unappealed findings of fact  within  the  decision.   It  was
          agreed that it was unnecessary to hear any further evidence.  The
          Tribunal made a number of positive findings  of  fact  concerning
          the respondent, his partner and their children and regarded their
          evidence as credible [12].  The Judge specifically accepted  that
          they were in a genuine and subsisting marriage and had been in  a
          relationship  since  meeting  in  February   2011.    The   Judge
          acknowledged that they were unable to live  together  because  of
          the respondent's immigration  status  but  that  they  spent  the
          majority of their time together as a family.  The Judge  regarded
          the relationship as strengthening with time  notwithstanding  the
          fact that the respondent's wife had been unfaithful.   The  Judge
          described the relationship as  'good,  firm,  solid'  [15].   The
          Judge accepted that the child  born  from  that  relationship  is
          treated by the respondent as his own child [14].  That means that
          the family comprises of the respondent and his wife together with
          two young children - one is the respondent's  natural  child  and
          the other is not his biological  child  but  they  have  a  close
          relationship akin to father-son.

Decision under the Rules

       8. I begin by acknowledging that  the  respondent  cannot  meet  the
          Immigration Rules.  This was conceded before Judge  Abebrese  and
          before me.

Consideration of Article 8 outside the Rules

       9. As the respondent cannot show that the immigration rules  can  be
          met this identifies and gives weight to the SSHD's case  that  he
          should be removed.  This part of the rules cannot be described as
          a 'complete code' as in the  case  of  deportation  and  in  such
          circumstances I consider the five step  Razgar  [2014]  UKHL  27,
          bearing in mind that  the  best  interests  of  the  respondent's
          British citizen child and step-child are a primary  consideration
          and  should  form  an  integral  part  of   the   proportionality
          assessment under Article 8 -  see  ZH  Tanzania  [2011]  UKSC  4,
          Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74 and EV (Philippines) EWCA Civ 874.

      10. I accept Mr Harding's submission that  family  life  between  the
          respondent and his partner and the respondent and  both  children
          will be interfered with if he  is  returned  to  Afghanistan.   I
          accept that it would not be reasonable to expect that family life
          to be exercised in Afghanistan for the reasons identified by  the
          Judge [15].  The children and their mother will be taken  from  a
          very close knit extended family in Sunderland to  the  much  more
          hostile environment of Afghanistan.  Mr Harding provided me  with
          a current travel advice issued by the UK government.  This  makes
          it clear that the Foreign and Commonwealth Office advises against
          all  or  all  but  essential  travel  to   different   parts   of
          Afghanistan.  I find that this  is  a  case  in  which  it  would
          overwhelmingly not be in these British children's best  interests
          to reside in Afghanistan.  They and their mother will be uprooted
          from the only close knit community they know and required to face
          the high threat of terrorism and kidnapping in Afghanistan.   The
          position of obvious Westerners such as the children's  mother  is
          particularly grave.  The children's mother  has  obvious  serious
          facial scarring and is particularly dependent upon her own family
          and  community  in  Sunderland  and  her  husband  for  emotional
          support.

      11. I must balance the interference  with  family  life  against  the
          relevant public interest considerations  specifically  those  set
          out in section 117B of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act
          2002.  The maintenance of immigration control is  in  the  public
          interest.  The respondent speaks English but is  not  financially
          independent.  He formed his relationship with his  partner  after
          his discretionary leave  expired  and  when  he  was  in  the  UK
          unlawfully.

      12. Section 117B(6) states  that  the  public  interest,  in  a  non-
          deportation case, does not require the person's removal where the
          person has a has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with
          qualifying child and it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the
          child to leave the UK.  Judge Abebrese found and I agree that the
          respondent's relationship  with  his  British  citizen  son  (and
          therefore a qualifying child) is genuine and subsisting.  For the
          reasons I have set out above it would not be reasonable to expect
          the child to leave the UK.   It follows that the public  interest
          does not require the respondent's removal.  I must still go on to
          consider whether in light of all the section 117B  considerations
          (referred to in paragraph 11)  together  with  all  the  relevant
          circumstances of the  case  the  respondent's  removal  would  be
          proportionate.

      13. The children's best interests overwhelmingly favour remaining  in
          the UK and not relocating to Afghanistan, where  they  and  their
          mother are likely to face insurmountable difficulties  in  coping
          with everyday life and just keeping safe.   The  children's  best
          interests also point very strongly  in  favour  of  their  father
          remaining  in  the  UK  with  them  and  their  mother.   I  have
          considered  with  care  the  sensitive  letters  written  by  the
          respondent's wife.  She has clearly explained  why  she  and  her
          children  are   particularly   emotionally   dependent   on   the
          respondent.

      14. However the respondent has an adverse immigration history and the
          maintenance of immigration control is in the public interest.  He
          is not financially independent and entered into his  relationship
          when he was unlawfully present.  I do not find that these  public
          interest considerations tip the balance when it is very  strongly
          in the children's best interests to remain in the UK  with  their
          father and the  respondent  meets  the  requirements  of  section
          117B(6).

Decision

      15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of  law.
           I set it aside  and  I  re-make  the  decision  by  allowing  the
          respondent's appeal.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
4 December 2014
