
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/39420/2014
                                                               IA/39423/2014
                                                               IA/39426/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower Birmingham         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th July 2016                              |On 4th August 2016            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                       HIRALBEN [P] (first appellant)
                        NIKUNJ [P] (second appellant)
                           [t p] (third appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr M Azmi, Counsel instructed by French & Co
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The details of the Appellants and their immigration history is set  out
    in my Decision promulgated on 21st April 2016.  At a  previous  hearing
    of these appeals on
    16th March 2016 I found that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    involved the making of an error on a  point  of  law  and  I  set  that
    decision aside.  The appeal was then adjourned for the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be remade and hence the matter comes  before  me
    today.  The remaining issue  in  the  appeals  is  whether  the  second
    Appellant qualifies for leave to remain  as  a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)
    Migrant, and the first and third Appellants  as  his  dependants.   The
    point in contention  is  whether  the  second  Appellant's  application
    satisfied the requirements of paragraph 41-SD(e)(iv) of Appendix  A  of
    HC 395.  Paragraph 41-SD(e)(iv) is a requirement to  produce  documents
    of a specified nature showing trading for a particular period of  time.



The Hearing

 2. At the hearing, I  heard  brief  evidence  from  the  second  Appellant
    whereby he confirmed that the contents of a short additional  statement
    were true.  He was not cross-examined.

 3. I also heard submissions from the representatives.  Mrs Aboni  referred
    to the Refusal Letter and argued that the specified  evidence  required
    by  the  Immigration  Rules  had  still   not   been   produced.    The
    Supplementary  Bundle  overlooked  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    contained some relevant documents, but they lacked the detail  required
    by the Immigration Rules.  The second Appellant's application therefore
    still failed to comply with those Rules.

 4. In response, Mr Azmi took me through the original Bundle  of  Documents
    and the Supplementary Bundle which  in  his  submission  provided  much
    evidence of  the  trading  activities  of  the  second  Appellant.   In
    particular, he  pointed  to  advertising  fliers  and  contracts  which
    contained details complying with  the  requirements  of  paragraph  41-
    SD(e)(iv)(1) and (2).  There were  also  contracts,  documents  showing
    employee details, and invoices which  established  an  active  business
    with a number of clients.

Decision and Reasons

 5. As I said earlier, the sole issue in this appeal is whether the  second
    Appellant has  produced  at  the  relevant  time  the  documents  of  a
    particular nature to satisfy the requirements of paragraph 41-SD(e)(iv)
    of Appendix A of HC  395.   I  have  carefully  perused  the  documents
    submitted by the second Appellant  including  those  contained  in  the
    Supplementary Bundle previously overlooked.  Under the guidance  of  Mr
    Azmi, I find that the second Appellant has produced such documents  and
    therefore I allow these appeals.

Notice of Decision

The appeals are allowed under the Immigration Rules.


Anonymity

There has not been an anonymity order previously in these  appeals.   I  was
not asked to make one, and indeed find no reason to do so.


Signed                              Dated 04/08/2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton






TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

In the light of my decision  to  remake  the  decision  in  the  appeals  by
allowing them, I have considered whether to make a fee award  under  Section
12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007.   I  have  had
regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note: Fee  Awards  in  Immigration
Appeals.  I make no fee award.  This is because the appeal has been  allowed
on the basis of documentary evidence not before the Secretary of State  when
the original refusal decision was made.


Signed                              Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
