
[pic]
Upper Tribunal         Appeal Number
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)        IA/39797/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard                   at                    Field                    House
                                             Determination promulgated
(via video link to Bradford)                                  On  12  August
                                  2014
On 28 May 2014
                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                               Muhammad Saleem
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                   Respondent
Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr. M. Shah of Maz Shah Legal.
For the Respondent:            Ms.  R.  Petterson,  Home  Office  Presenting
                            Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Hindson promulgated on 20 February 2014,  dismissing  the  Appellant's
      appeal against the Respondent's decision dated 13  September  2013  to
      refuse to vary leave to remain and to remove him from the UK.


Background

   2. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born on 6 September 1982.  The
      Appellant entered the UK on 4 March 2013, pursuant to a  visitor  visa
      conferring leave until 14 July 2013. During the brief  period  of  the
      Appellant's visit he met Ms Krissy Ellam and  formed  a  relationship,
      moving in with her on 11 May 2013 (determination at paragraph 11);  it
      is said that he has formed a close relationship with Ms Ellam's  three
      children (paragraph 11). Although it is said it had initially been the
      Appellant's intention to return to Pakistan after 4  weeks,  where  he
      has immediate family and his own mobile phone business (paragraphs  13
      and 14), the Appellant changed his mind and on 4 July 2013 he made  an
      application for leave to remain on the basis of his new relationship.


   3. The application was refused for reasons set  out  in  a  'reasons  for
      refusal letter' ('RFRL') dated 13 September  2013,  and  a  Notice  of
      Immigration Decision of the same date was served on 17 September 2013.


   4. The Appellant appealed to  the  IAC.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  for  reasons  set  out   in   his
      determination.


   5. The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted by  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge McDade on 25 March 2014.


   6. The Respondent has filed a  Rule  24  response  dated  25  April  2014
      resisting the appeal.


Consideration

   7. I have considered carefully the grounds of appeal submitted in support
      of the application for permission to appeal, and the oral  submissions
      of Mr Shah (which essentially sought to rely upon  and  amplify  those
      grounds), but I find that I am unable to identify any error of law  on
      the part of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.


   8. Plainly the Appellant could not succeed under the  Immigration  Rules.
      Paragraph E-LTRP.2.1.(a) prevents a visitor from applying for leave to
      remain as a partner. The Appellant otherwise did not  satisfy  any  of
      the qualifying periods under paragraph 276ADE(iii)-(v),  and  did  not
      satisfy 276ADE(vi) in circumstances  where  he  acknowledged  that  he
      retained both family and business ties with Pakistan.


   9. This was acknowledged by the  Appellant's  representative  before  the
      First-tier Tribunal, and accordingly  reliance  was  placed  on  human
      rights grounds (including reference to  section  55  of  the  Borders,
      Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009): see determination at  paragraph
      3. In my judgement it is abundantly clear  that  the  Judge  was  well
      aware of the scope of the appeal and the basis of the Appellant's case
      - both by reference to this paragraph  and  the  matters  set  out  at
      paragraphs 9-16 of the determination.


  10. The Judge accepted that the Appellant was in a genuine and  subsisting
      relationship with Ms Ellam, and that they had cohabited since May 2013
      (paragraphs 17 and 18); it was also accepted that family life  existed
      between the Appellant, his partner, and her children  (paragraph  23).
      The Judge entertained and rejected an argument advanced on  behalf  of
      the Appellant in respect of the fourth Razgar question (paragraphs 19-
      21). In the  circumstances  the  Judge  focused  on  the  question  of
      proportionality (paragraph 22).


  11. The Judge accepted a core element of the  Appellant's  case:  that  it
      would not be reasonable to expect the Appellant's partner to  relocate
      to Pakistan (paragraph 25). In this context the Judge also found  that
      it was in the best interests of the children for them to remain in the
      UK with their mother (paragraph 25).


  12. At paragraph 26 the Judge said this: "The appellant  could  return  to
      Pakistan with little difficulty. He has a home there and a  source  of
      income. It would be open to him to make a settlement application  from
      Pakistan. The couple could  continue  their  relationship  by  way  of
      visits to each other and contact by  telephone  and  other  electronic
      means.  I  accept,  however,  that  this  is  not  the  same  as   the
      relationship that they currently enjoy." In my  judgement  this  is  a
      clear finding, and recognition of, there being an interference in  the
      mutual private/family lives by reason  of  the  Respondent's  decision
      even if the Appellant were to quit the UK on a temporary basis to seek
      re-admittance as a partner.


  13. However, it is clear from paragraph 27 that the Judge determined  that
      such an interference  was  proportionate  in  all  of  the  particular
      circumstances of this case. The Judge made it plain that he was  aware
      of the principles in Chikwamba, but that he considered the Appellant's
      case did not warrant an exception being made to the usual  expectation
      of the Rules that a person present in the UK as a visitor will not  be
      granted leave to remain as a partner. The Judge expressly  found  that
      there  would  be  "little  hardship  to  the  Appellant  returning  to
      Pakistan". In this context it is also to be noted that at paragraph 27
      the Judge stated in terms that he had  "taken  the  interests  of  the
      children as a primary consideration".


  14. I am unable to detect anything wrong in law in the approach  taken  by
      the Judge, and I am unable to identify anything that is  unsustainable
      in his fact finding and reasoning.  The  proportionality  balance  was
      essentially a matter for the evaluation of the Judge, and is not to be
      interfered with in the absence of any error of law  or  perversity  in
      performing that exercise.


  15. In my judgement the challenge mounted by the Appellant is  essentially
      based on a simple disagreement with the outcome. Although the  grounds
      in support of the application for permission to appeal seek  to  argue
      that  the  Judge  failed  to  consider  proportionality  (Grounds   at
      paragraph 6), that is quite simply not the case. Further, the  grounds
      are misconceived in submitting that the Judge failed to have  due  and
      proper regard for the rights of the children (paragraph 15): the Judge
      essentially accepted the Appellant's case that it was not in the  best
      interests of the children to  relocate  to  Pakistan,  and  took  this
      forward as  a  primary  consideration  in  assessing  whether  it  was
      proportionate for the Appellant to quit the UK,  leaving  his  partner
      and her children behind.  Paragraph  16  of  the  Grounds  is  wrongly
      premised in that it posits a situation of relocation of  the  children
      to Pakistan when that was not the premise of the Judge's decision  The
      grounds otherwise seek to argue that it would be a breach of  European
      Union law to  separate  the  Appellant  from  his  partner's  children
      (paragraphs  10-14).  In  my  judgement  this   is   misconceived   in
      circumstances where the Appellant is not their  father  and  does  not
      exercise parental rights in respect of the children.


  16. The Judge essentially concluded that there was nothing exceptional  or
      compelling about the Appellant's case  such  that  his  removal  would
      result in undue hardship. The Judge was satisfied that the Appellant's
      removal in consequence of the Respondent's decision was  proportionate
      to the legitimate public end of maintaining a fair and coherent system
      of immigration control. I have little doubt that this was the  correct
      answer:  there  were  no  compelling  circumstances  not  sufficiently
      recognised under the Rules to allow the appeal  by  reference  to  the
      ECHR.


  17. In all such circumstances I find no error of law in  the  decision  of
      the First-tier Tribunal Judge. Accordingly,  the  decision  under  the
      Immigration Rules and under the ECHR is to stand.


Decision

  18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contained  no  error  of
      law and stands.


  19. The appeal is dismissed.



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     12 August 2014
