
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: Ia/40608/2014
                                                               ia/40610/2014
                                                               IA/40612/2014
                                                               IA/40614/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 14 January 2016                   |On 17 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER


                                   Between

                                     NS
                                     RS
                                     SS
                                     IS
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Arthur Blake, Counsel, instructed by AKL
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I make  an  order  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or
    publication of any matter likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
    identify the appellants. Breach of this order  can  be  punished  as  a
    contempt of court. I make the order because the appellants are a family
    unit with two minor children in full time education.

 2. The appellants appeal against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing the appellant's appeals  against  a  decision  taken  on  28
    September 2014 refusing the appellant's applications for further  leave
    to remain in the UK.

Introduction

 3. The appellants  are  a  family  unit  of  Indian  citizens.  The  first
    appellant was born in 1966. The second appellant is his wife, RS,  born
    in 1979. The  third  appellant,  SS,  is  the  son  of  the  first  two
    appellants and was born in India in 2001. The fourth appellant, IS,  is
    the daughter of the first two appellants and was  born  in  the  UK  in
    2008.

 4. The first appellant and SS last entered the UK in March 2004 with entry
    clearance as visitors until 15 July 2004. RS last entered the UK in May
    2003 with entry clearance as a visitor until January 2004. IS has never
    left the UK and has never had leave  to  remain.  The  appellants  have
    remained without valid leave since 2004. The  current  application  for
    leave to remain was made on 1 August 2012. The  appellants  claim  that
    removal would breach their protected rights under Article  8  ECHR  and
    would not be in the best interests of the children who  were  excelling
    in school. The  third  appellant  met  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules because he had live continuously
    in the UK for at least 7 years as at the date of application and it was
    not reasonable to expect him to leave the UK.

 5. The respondent accepted length  of  residence  but  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules and there were no  exceptional  circumstances
    such as to merit a grant of leave to  remain.  Best  interests  of  the
    children were considered.

The Appeal

 6. The appellants appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  adult
    appellants attended an oral hearing at Hatton Cross on 15  April  2015.
    The  judge  found  that  the  adult  appellants  would  find   suitable
    employment in India and that the child appellants  had  been  attending
    religious classes in  the  UK.  A  return  to  India  would  not  be  a
    completely new start for them. The judge found that the third appellant
    spoke some Hindi and Gujarati and  it  would  not  be  unreasonable  to
    expect him to leave the UK. His appeal  under  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)
    therefore failed.

 7. In relation to Article 8, the children had been  brought  up  and  been
    active within their Ismaili community embracing its values and ways and
    attending religious education. They  were  not  distanced  from  India,
    quite the contrary and a return would not constitute a complete  change
    of values, beliefs and way  of  life.  They  would  return  with  their
    parents as  a  unit.  There  were  no  medical,  educational  or  other
    difficulties in the child appellants adapting to life  in  India.  They
    both spoke Hindi. Schools that teach English exist in India. It was  in
    the children's best interests to return to India. Little weight  should
    be attached to the private life of  the  adult  appellants  established
    when they were in the UK without  leave.  They  had  shown  a  complete
    disregard for the immigration rules and removal was proportionate.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 8. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the basis that  the  judge
    failed to give proper regard  to  the  witness  statements  and  school
    reports, failed to take into account the exceptional  circumstances  of
    the appellant and failed to properly consider the best interests of the
    children. The judge impermissibly elided the question of whether it was
    unreasonable for the third and fourth appellants to leave the  UK  with
    the question of whether it would be unreasonable for their family as  a
    whole to leave the UK.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins on  14
    August 2015 on the basis that it was arguable that the judge failed  to
    make any express findings on best interests and the case concerned  the
    welfare of two young people who had spent most or all of their lives in
    the  UK  and  were  clearly  innocent  of  their  parent's   apparently
    irresponsible  attitude  to  immigration  control.  All  grounds   were
    arguable.

10. In a rule 24 response dated 2 September 2015, the respondent sought  to
    uphold the judge's decision on the basis that the  judge  gave  careful
    consideration to all of the documents and oral evidence and  looked  at
    the situation of the children on return in some depth  and  made  clear
    findings on the best interests of the children.

11. Thus, the appeal came before me.

Discussion

12. Mr Blake submitted that the respondent's decision makes no reference to
    the section 55 (2007 Act) guidance and consideration  of  the  guidance
    cannot  be  implied.  The  respondent  concedes  that  there  would  be
    difficulties on return. Free education stops at the age of 14 in India.
    Private education would not be within the parent's financial grasp. The
    children would need to read and write Hindi as well as  speak  it.  The
    third appellant could not go to school in India and removal from the UK
    would bring an end to his education. The judge should  have  considered
    the  third  appellant's  rights  under  paragraph  276ADE.  The   judge
    speculated about the adult appellant's  ability  to  provide  financial
    support and accommodation to their children if returned  to  India  but
    the evidence was to the contrary. The finding that the third  appellant
    had adapted to the UK at the age of three  and  therefore  could  adapt
    back to life in India  was  irrational.  The  finding  that  the  third
    appellant could speak Hindi because  the  first  appellant  required  a
    Hindi interpreter was irrational. The evidence  before  the  judge  was
    that the child appellants were wholly integrated into  UK  society  and
    education.  The factual matrix is present  and  the  appeal  should  be
    allowed outright.

13. Ms Holmes submitted that the children's best interests were  a  primary
    consideration rather than a  paramount  consideration.  The  judge  was
    fully aware of the facts and  referred  to  relevant  authorities.  The
    judge was not out on a limb  in  finding  that  the  third  and  fourth
    appellant's speak Hindi.  The  judge  considered  everything  that  she
    needed to consider. Attendance at religious classes must be a  relevant
    factor in re-integration into India.  The  judge  has  done  everything
    required and there is nothing wrong in the decision.

14. Mr Blake responded that  there  is  no  reference  to  the  section  55
    guidance in the respondent's decision or the  decision  of  the  judge.
    Even if that is wrong the reasoning at paragraph 51  is  based  upon  a
    misunderstanding of the education system in India.

15. I have considered Forman (ss117A-C considerations)  [2015]  UKUT  00412
    (IAC). The public interest in firm immigration control is  not  diluted
    by the consideration that a person pursuing a  claim  under  Article  8
    ECHR has at no time been a financial burden on the state  or  is  self-
    sufficient or  is  likely  to  remain  so  indefinitely.  The  list  of
    considerations in section 117B is not  exhaustive  and  a  tribunal  is
    entitled to take into account additional considerations  provided  that
    they are relevant in the sense that they properly bear  on  the  public
    interest question. The judge was not simply required to take account of
    the statutory provision but was also obliged to have regard to  all  of
    the considerations. That required identification and analysis  of  each
    of the provisions concerned. In cases where the provisions  of  section
    117B arise the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  must  demonstrate
    that they have been given full effect.

16. The judge referred to sections 117A-117D of the 2002 Act  at  paragraph
    52 of the decision. A significant issue in this appeal is the fact that
    the third appellant is a qualifying child, as defined in  section  117D
    and therefore falls within section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.  The  judge
    had to consider whether it was reasonable to expect him  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom. The recent case law  remains  relevant,  whilst  taking
    into account that the case law effectively pre-dates  the  commencement
    of  sections  117A  -  D  (28  July  2014).  The  judge  did   consider
    reasonableness in the context of paragraph  267ADE  of  the  Rules  but
    there are no findings in relation to section 117B(6) of  the  2002  Act
    and that is a material error of law, applying Forman.

17. The issue of proportionality involves striking a fair  balance  between
    the rights of the appellants and  the  public  interest.  In  assessing
    proportionality, the "best interests" of any children must be a primary
    consideration (see ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD (2011) UKSC 4 and section 55 of
    the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009).  Whilst  the  best
    interests of the child are not  necessarily  determinative,  a  child's
    best interests are a weighty consideration,  albeit  one  that  can  be
    outweighed by sufficient weight of public  interest  concerns  (see  ZH
    (Tanzania) per Lady Hale at [33]).

18. In  Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions  affecting  children;  onward
    appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197(IAC),  Mr  Justice  Blake  held  that  as  a
    starting point, it is in the best interests of children to be with both
    their parents and if both parents are being removed from  the  UK  then
    the starting point suggests that so should dependent children who  form
    part of their household unless there are reasons to the contrary. It is
    generally in the interests of  children  to  have  both  stability  and
    continuity of social and  educational  provision  and  the  benefit  of
    growing up in the cultural norms of the society to which  they  belong.
    Lengthy residence in a country other than the state of origin can  lead
    to development of social, cultural and educational ties that  it  would
    be inappropriate to disrupt in the absence of compelling reasons to the
    contrary. What amounts to lengthy residence is not clear cut  but  past
    and present policies have identified seven years as a relevant  period.
    Seven years from age four is likely to be more significant to  a  child
    than the first seven years of life. Very young children are focussed on
    their parents rather than their peers and are adaptable.

19. In EV (Philippines) and others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874, Lord Justice
    Clarke held that  in  determining  whether  the  need  for  immigration
    control outweighs the best interests of the children, it  is  necessary
    to determine the relative strength of the  factors  which  make  it  in
    their best interests to remain here and also to  take  account  of  any
    factors that point the other way. A decision will depend on a number of
    factors such as the children's age, the length of time  in  the  United
    Kingdom, how long  they  have  been  in  education,  what  stage  their
    education has reached, the extent to which they have  become  distanced
    from the country  to  which  it  is  proposed  that  they  return,  how
    renewable their connection may  be,  to  what  extent  they  will  have
    linguistic, medical or other difficulties in adapting to life  in  that
    country and the extent to which the course proposed will interfere with
    their family life or  their  rights  (if  they  have  any)  as  British
    citizens.

20. The judge sought to address the  best  interests  of  the  children  at
    paragraphs 49 to 52 the decision and found that they  spoke  Hindi  and
    that the third appellant spoke Gujarati as well as English.  There  was
    no finding as to whether the child  appellants  could  read  and  write
    Hindi and/or Gujarati. There is no reference to free education in India
    ceasing at the age of 14 or whether the adult appellants would be  able
    to fund private education, possibly in a school  teaching  in  English.
    Thus, the analysis of factors suggesting that leaving the UK might  not
    be in the best interests of the children was incomplete. The finding at
    paragraph 50 of the decision that there were no  educational  or  other
    difficulties in the third and fourth appellants returning to India  was
    therefore based upon an incomplete analysis of the evidence.

21. The judge found that the family were financially independent  and  that
    the child appellants spoke English. The child appellants  were  settled
    and successful in school. They could read and write in English. If  the
    child appellants remained in the UK they would be able to  access  free
    education at least up to the age of 18. I have considered paragraph  50
    of the decision and accept the submission that the judge  has  confused
    the issue of the child appellants receiving  religious  education  with
    the question of their ability to  integrate  into  secular  society  in
    India.

22. Overall, there is only very limited reference to the case  law  and  no
    adequate structured analysis of the issues set out above. The fact that
    the third appellant had reached secondary education in the UK  and  the
    uncertainty of educational provision  in  India  were  highly  relevant
    factors. The finding at paragraph 51 that it was in the best  interests
    of the children to return to India is not soundly  based  upon  a  full
    analysis of all relevant factors. I find that the judge's consideration
    of the best interests of the children  is  inadequate  and  that  is  a
    further material error of law.

23. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of errors of law  and  its  decision  cannot
    stand.

Decision

24. Mr Blake invited me to remake the decision because the  factual  matrix
    is present. Bearing in mind paragraph 7.2  of  the  Senior  President's
    Practice Statements I do not consider that  an  appropriate  course  of
    action. The  factual  matrix  is  incomplete  and  further  substantial
    findings of fact are required. A re-hearing is required.  I  find  that
    the errors of law infect the decision as a whole and therefore the  re-
    hearing will be de novo with all issues to be considered again  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

25. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    order the appeal to be heard again in the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined de novo by a judge other than the previous First-tier judge.

Signed   [pic]    Date 12 February 2016

Judge Archer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
