
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40199/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 August 2015                    |On 20 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              JEWEL CHAKRABORTY
                          (ANONYMITY Order NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr T. Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Shah, Solicitor, Taj Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I was not asked and saw no reason to make an anonymity direction.

The Respondent

 2. The respondent (hereinafter "the claimant") is a citizen of  Bangladesh
    born on 2 August 1979.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  allowed  his  appeal
    against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse him leave to remain
    as a spouse of a settled person and to remove him on the ground he  had
    used deception in seeking leave to remain in the UK.

 3. The claimant entered the UK as a student in February  2010  with  entry
    clearance valid until 30 November 2013. He married his wife in  October
    2011. On 29 October 2013 he applied for leave to remain  as  a  Tier  4
    General Student which was granted until 21 October 2014.

 4. The claimant's wife was granted indefinite leave to remain on  18  June
    2014. On 18 August 2014 the claimant applied for leave to remain as the
    spouse of a settled person. In a decision dated 15 September 2014,  the
    Secretary of State refused  the  application  on  the  basis  that  the
    claimant did not meet the suitability requirement under S-LTR2.2(a)  of
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules. S-LTR2.2(a) stipulates   that  an
    applicant will normally be  refused  leave  to  remain  on  grounds  of
    suitability if

         "...  whether  or  not  to   the   applicant's   knowledge,   false
         information, representations or documents have  been  submitted  in
         relation to the application (including false information  submitted
         to any  person  to  obtain  a  document  used  in  support  of  the
         application."

 5. The Secretary of State's decision refers to a  review  carried  out  by
    Educational Testing Service (ETS) which found that the claimant's  test
    scores from a test taken on 29 August 2012 could not  be  authenticated
    and that an anomaly with his speaking test indicated the presence of  a
    proxy test taker. The Notice of Liability to Removal  states  that  the
    claimant is "specifically considered a person who has sought  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom by deception".

The First-tier Tribunal Decision

 6. The claimant appealed and the appeal was heard by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge D.A. Pears ("the judge") on 17th April 2015.   The  Secretary  of
    State relied on three witness statements ("the Statements")  which  the
    judge described at paragraph 10 as being from "civil  servants  dealing
    with ETS and the process and procedure ETS  has  used  to  assist  [the
    Secretary of State] in response to widespread deception  by  applicants
    applying to remain in the UK".  The judge set out at paragraph 11 that:

         "I  asked  the  Secretary  of  State's  representative  to  provide
         evidence that related to the appellant  specifically.  He  was  not
         able to do so and whilst there may be such material I have not seen
         it, nor  was  it  produced  in  the  Respondent's  bundle,  nor  in
         accordance with directions nor in the material filed on the day."

 7. The judge found that the Secretary of State's evidence was insufficient
    to establish that the appellant had personally carried  out  deception.
    Although not stated explicitly, it is apparent from his  decision  that
    the judge did not think it likely the claimant would have had  need  to
    use deception. At paragraphs  5  and  6  he  describes  the  claimant's
    educational background including English language tests  he  had  taken
    and at paragraph 7 comments that the claimant gave evidence without  an
    interpreter and fluently. The  judge  then  states  that  the  claimant
    "confirmed he had not used deception and said in effect, why  would  he
    need to, as his English proficiency was clear  and  had  been  tested."
    There is nothing in the decision to suggest the judge did  not  believe
    the claimant or had any questions or concerns about his credibility.

 8. The grounds of appeal submit that the judge failed to  engage  properly
    with the Statements or the relevant material within them; or  recognise
    that they detail extensively the investigation undertaken  by  ETS  and
    the process which identified the  claimant  as  someone  who  had  used
    deception. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Page.

Submissions

 9. I heard submissions from Mr Melvin,  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
    State, and Mr Shah, on behalf of the claimant.

10. Mr Melvin relied on the grounds seeking permission to appeal and argued
    that due consideration  had  not  been  given  to  the  Statements.  In
    addition, he argued that, contrary to the judge's findings,  there  was
    in fact evidence that pertained to the claimant specifically  and  drew
    attention to Annex A  of  Mr  Sartorius's  statement,  which  shows  an
    excerpt from a spreadsheet that was provided by ETS to the Secretary of
    State. The excerpt shows a row on a spreadsheet with a  record  number,
    the wording "invalid", a certificate number  and  then  the  claimant's
    name, address and date of birth, along with his nationality,  the  date
    and centre at which he took the  test  and  his  speaking  and  written
    scores.

11. Mr Shah argued that the judge dealt adequately with  the  evidence.  He
    noted  that  the  decision  refers  to  specific  paragraphs   in   the
    Statements, indicating  that  the  judge  had  engaged  with  them.  He
    submitted that there was nothing in the Statements to show why  or  how
    the claimant, personally, had used deception and that it  would  simply
    not have made sense for  the  claimant,  with  his  advanced  level  of
    English, to have carried out the deception of which he was accused.

Consideration

12.  The  judge  appears  to  have  given  the  Statements   only   cursory
    consideration. The Statements contain a detailed explanation  of  ETS's
    methodology and how individuals, such as the claimant, were  identified
    as having used a proxy test taker. There is merit in the argument  made
    by Mr Melvin that the judge did not sufficiently engage with, and  give
    appropriate consideration to, the evidence in the  witness  statements,
    which points to the claimant being one of the people who cheated on the
    test.  However, this must be considered in the specific context of this
    particular appeal where the judge had the opportunity to hear  evidence
    from the claimant, and observe him being cross-examined. The judge  was
    therefore in a strong  position  to  form  a  view  on  the  claimant's
    credibility and the likelihood he would have cheated on the test. Given
    that that ETS's methodology, as set  out  in  the  Statements,  is  not
    infallible, these are important factors to be weighed when  determining
    whether this particular claimant cheated.

13. As stated in Gazi [2015] UKUT 00372 (IAC) at paragraph 40:

         "Each litigant will put forward  his  or  her  individual  disputed
         assertions, agreed facts, considerations and  circumstances.  These
         will be evaluated by a fact finding tribunal, to be contrasted with
         a court or tribunal of supervisory jurisdiction. This analysis  is,
         in my view, amply confirmed by the growing number of FtT  decisions
         in this sphere. Within these one finds emphasis  on  self-evidently
         important issues such as the appellant's evident  English  language
         ability, demeanour and previous life  events.  Furthermore,  it  is
         trite  that  the  assessment  of  each  appellant's  demeanour  and
         credibility will be carried out on a case by case basis."

14. It is clear from the judge's decision that he  took  into  account  the
    claimant's  English  language  ability,  demeanour  and  previous  life
    events, factors  described  in  Gazi  as  "self  evidently  important".
    Although  the  judge  did  not  make  an  explicit  finding  about  the
    claimant's credibility, it is apparent from the decision that he  found
    him to be credible, as well as able to  give  evidence  (and  be  cross
    examined)  fluently  in  English.   Having  heard  evidence  from   the
    claimant, and considered him to be  credible,  fluent  in  English  and
    unlikely to have needed to use deception, it was open to the  judge  to
    find that the Secretary of State's evidence was  insufficient  to  show
    the claimant used deception in seeking leave to remain.

NOTICE OF DECISION

15. The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  contain  a  material
    error of law and its decision  allowing  the  claimant's  appeal  shall
    stand.

17. No anonymity direction is made.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan | Dated                               |

