
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40934/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 July 2015                               |On 7 August 2015              |
|Prepared 17 July 2015                         |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 HASRAT ALI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Jaisiri, Counsel, instructed by Legal Rights
Partnership


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In this decision the Appellant is  referred  to  as  the  Secretary  of
    State and the Respondent is referred to as the Claimant.

2.   The Claimant, a national of Pakistan, date of birth  1  February  1989,
    appealed against the Secretary of State's decision dated  29  September
    2013 to refuse leave to enter under paragraph 321(A) of the Immigration
    Rules  HC 395.   That appeal came before a panel consisting  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Ievins and First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Haria  (the
    panel) who promulgated the panel's decision on  27  January  2015.   By
    that decision the panel allowed the appeal under Appendix FM  and under
    Article 8 of the ECHR outside of the Immigration Rules.

3.   The Secretary of State sought permission  to  appeal  on  or  about  10
    February 2015 and permission to appeal was given by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Levin on 1 April 2015.

4.   There was intended to be a hearing of this matter on 23 June  2015  but
    the matter did not proceed in order to enable the Secretary of State to
    bring forward amended grounds to add to those that had formed the basis
    on  which  permission  was  granted.   Those  additional  grounds  were
    provided.  At the outset of the  hearing,  having  heard  the  parties'
    submissions, it became clear that as a matter  of  law  had  the  panel
    properly taken into account the provisions under the  Rules,  then  the
    appeal could not have succeeded under Appendix FM  as they thought.  In
    those circumstances, whilst Mr Jaisiri for proper and  obvious  reasons
    wished to support that part of the panel's decision, it  being  in  the
    favour of his client, the fact of the matter was the panel could  never
    have reached such a  decision  in  law  had  they  properly  considered
    Appendix FM  and in particular Section S-EC of Appendix FM.

5.   In the circumstances I allowed the amendment but did so  on  the  basis
    that having considered the matter with the parties it became clear that
    ultimately that issue was not  going  to  affect  the  outcome  of  the
    relevant issue in the appeal, namely  whether  or  not  the  claim  was
    properly considered under Article 8 outside of the Immigration Rules.

6.   Put very shortly but succinctly, Mr Duffy argued that the  panel  being
    well aware that the Claimant had put forward  documentation  which  was
    false/misleading and therefore there was a sustainable decision against
    the Claimant under paragraph 322(1) of  the  Rules  which  should  have
    taken that matter fully into account in either applying Section 117B of
    the Immigration Act 2014 amending the NIAA 2002.  It was, he argued,  a
    matter relevant to the maintenance of  effective  immigration  controls
    and a matter in the public interest.  Mr Duffy  also went on  to  argue
    that on a fair reading of the determination  there  was  no  assessment
    made by the panel of that issue in  terms  of  its  importance  to  the
    public interest and to the overall assessment of proportionality.

7.   Mr Jaisiri's response was that quite simply this was not a  matter  put
    to the panel by the Secretary of State.  Therefore they  did  the  best
    they could on the information  put  before  them.  Having  checked  the
    Record of Proceedings I am satisfied that it was a reliable record  and
    fairly summarised the evidence and the positions argued by the  parties
    before the panel.

8.   Given the findings of the panel and the decision against the  Claimant,
    with reference to paragraph 321(A) of the  Immigration  Rules,  it  can
    hardly be said that the panel had not understood  the  significance  of
    that matter when  they  found  that  false  documents  were  submitted.
    Therefore, it was impossible to take the view that the panel must  have
    somehow forgotten that  issue  when,  as  they  went  on  to  state  in
    paragraph 62 of the decision, they were taking into account  the  issue
    of proportionality and whether the Secretary of  State's  decision  was
    proportionate to the legitimate aim of maintaining immigration control.



9.   I agree with Mr Duffy that the panel did not overly analyse  the  issue
    of  the  Claimant's  deception,  which  they  had  accepted  had   been
    established, when assessing the public interest.  However the panel did
    take into account a range  of  factors,  illustrated,  for  example  at
    paragraphs 57 to 59 of the decision, in terms of the interests  of  the
    child, the British nationality of the child, the child's mother in  the
    clear context identified by ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4 and in  Zoumbas
    [2013] UKSC 74.  In those circumstances, on a fair reading paragraph 64
    to 67, Mr Duffy has at least a sustainable basis to complain the  panel
    failed to fully address the issue of deception.  However, looked at  in
    the round it seemed to me that the panel, with the knowledge which they
    had, bearing in mind the findings they had made, the position over  the
    deception could not have been ignored.  The weight they gave  to  those
    matters when assessing the  public  interest  was  ultimately  for  the
    panel.

10.  In the circumstances, having regard to the case law of R (Iran)  [2005]
    EWCA Civ 982 it would be wrong to interfere with their decision, albeit
    it certainly could have been better expressed.  Rather it seemed to  me
    that a different panel faced with the same material would  have  almost
    inevitably have reached the  same  decision.   Thus  if  there  was   a
    material error of law it did not seem to me that it would have  led  to
    any different outcome.

11.  It is trite law that parties to a decision  are  entitled  to  adequate
    and sufficient reasons: those should be fairly summarised and stated in
    a decision.  To the extent that that is not as clearly put as it should
    have been, was a criticism that should be made of  the  panel.  However
    for the reasons given above I am satisfied that this was a  case  where
    their mistakes do not demonstrate any arguable error of law which would
    have led to any different decision.

12.  The Original Tribunal's decision stands. The appeal  of  the  Secretary
    of State is dismissed.

Anonymity Order
No anonymity direction was sought and in the circumstances it does not  seem
to me matters arising are likely to give rise to any material  prejudice  or
disadvantage to  the child of the family and accordingly no order  is  made.


NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is dismissed.

Signed                                  Date 2 August 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
