
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/40948/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 February 2016                          |On 12 April 2016              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD

                                   Between

                        IMMIGRATION OFFICER-HEATHROW
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Mrs Syeda Maria Raheel
                        (No anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No Attendance.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This matter  comes  before  me  pursuant  to  permission  having  been
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins dated  16  December  2015.  The
    reason given was concise and precise namely that, "This is an ETS case:
    see Mehmood and another [2015] EWCA Civ 744". The appeal relates  to  a
    decision by First-tier Tribunal Judge Harris sitting  at  Hatton  Cross
    whereby a Decision and Reasons was promulgated on 6 August 2015.    The
    Judge at the First-tier Tribunal had made it clear that the appeal  had
    been allowed.

2.    The Secretary  of  State  appealed  against  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's decision. For ease of reference I shall continue  to  refer  to
    the parties as they were before the First-tier  Tribunal  despite  this
    being an appeal by the Secretary of State. Two particular  matters  are
    relied upon in the grounds of appeal:

    (1)    The Judge failed to give adequate  reasons  for  findings  on  a
         particular matter; and


    (2)    The Judge should have taken account of the  standard  bundle  of
         documents provided by the Secretary of  State  which  had  included
         witness statements from  Peter  Millington  and  Rebecca  Collings.
         Thereby the test had been invalidated and for that invalidation  to
         occur the case has  to  have  gone  through  a  computer  programme
         analysing speech and two independent voice analysts.


3.    At the hearing before me, when the case was called on  at  10am  there
    was no attendance by or on behalf of the  Appellant.  I  put  the  case
    back. When all of my other cases had concluded the case was  called  on
    again. There was still no attendance by or on behalf of the  Appellant.
    There appeared to be no good  reason  for  the  non-attendance  of  the
    Appellant. Mr Kotas submitted that the hearing ought to proceed.

4.    There appeared to be no procedural or other reasons why I  should  not
    hear the appeal and therefore I did so.

5.    Mr Kotas made brief submissions. He said the  Judge's  application  of
    the decision in R (on the application of) Gazi v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department [2015] UKUT 327 (IAC) IJR was wrong.  The Judge was
    wrong  to  conclude  as  he  did  at  paragraph  15  that  there   were
    shortcomings in the evidence of the Secretary of State. He referred  to
    paragraphs 35 to 37 and particularly paragraph 36.  He  submitted  that
    Gazi was not the final word. The Judge fell into error because this was
    not the final word. It was a Judicial Review.  Then  at  paragraphs  18
    and 19 of the decision there is  reference  to  cross  examination  and
    there are no real clear and necessary findings. He either accepts it or
    he does not. Asked what he was inviting me to do, Mr Kotas said he  was
    not able to invite me to dismiss  the  appeal  outright  but  that  the
    Judge's decision ought to be set aside and remitted to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for rehearing when  further  cases  will  have  been  reported
    thereafter.


6.    I had reserved my decision.

7.    The Court of Appeal in R (on the application) of  Mehmood  and  Ali  v
    Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  744
    considered the  issues  which  arise  from  the  "Panorama"  television
    programme. The Court also considered the Upper Tribunal's  decision  in
    Gazi. At paragraphs 51 and 52 of the judgment of Beatson LJ, with  whom
    Sullivan LJ and Roth J had agreed, it was made clear  that  an  out  of
    country appeal is regarded by Parliament as sufficient, except in cases
    in which there are "special or exceptional factors". Disputes  of  fact
    are rarely going to equate to "special or exceptional factors".

8.    The real issue in this case is the assessment of the evidence  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge. Having considered the decision  as  a  whole
    and particularly paragraphs 18 to 20 in my judgment more  in  terms  of
    reasoning was required for the rejection of the  Respondent's  evidence
    if there was going to be the acceptance of  the  Appellant's  evidence.
    More so since the acceptance of the Appellant's evidence appears to  be
    lukewarm at best.  The Appellant had  lived  in  London  but  took  her
    English test some distance away in Leicester. There was an  explanation
    provided that  she  was  more  familiar  with  Leicester  having  moved
    recently to London and because she had babysitting available to her  in
    Leicester.

9     The combination of this factor relating  to  the  findings,  with  the
    failure of the parties to bring  the  Court  of  Appeal's  decision  in
    Mehmood and Ali to the Judge's attention is such that the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge  shows  a  material  error  of  law.  The
    hearing before the Judge was on 16th July 2015 and the Court of  Appeal
    had handed down its judgment on 14 July 2015.

10.   In the circumstances I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. There will be a rehearing at the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision contains an error of law.
I set it aside and therefore the Secretary of State's appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                                             Date 22 February 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood

