
IAC-AH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40506/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 January 2015                            |On 11 February 2015           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR RAMIL JAMIL
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Hyder instructed by Simon Noble Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State but nonetheless I  shall  refer  to  the  parties  as  they  were
    described before the First-tier Tribunal, that is Mr Rabil Jamil as the
    appellant and the Secretary of State as the respondent.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 20 November 1987 and  he
    entered the UK on 6 October 2009 pursuant to a Tier 4 Student visa with
    leave to remain until 28 February 2013.  It  was  recorded  he  stopped
    attending college in September 2012.  On 12 April  2013  he  lodged  an
    application for a residence card on the  basis  he  was  in  a  durable
    relationship with  an  EEA  national  exercising  treaty  rights.   His
    application was  rejected  on  16  September  2013  following  a  joint
    interview.  On 3 October 2013 it was requested the matter be  set  down
    for an oral hearing but by  letter  of  26  June  2014  his  solicitors
    advised that the appeal be "converted to paper as we believe  that  the
    issues are relatively minor".

 3. The respondent had concluded on the basis of the  interview  with  both
    parties, that is the appellant and  his  EEA  national  sponsor  on  12
    August 2013, that theirs was not a durable relationship.  There were  a
    number of discrepancies noted and reference was made to others.  Having
    concluded that the parties had failed to demonstrate  they  were  in  a
    relationship the application for a residence card failed.

 4. The appeal came before First Tier Tribunal Judge Dennis who decided the
    appeal on the papers and allowed it outright.

 5. In an application for permission to appeal it was submitted that whilst
    the couple claimed to have had a child together,  born  on  10  October
    2013, it  did  not  necessarily  demonstrate  a  durable  relationship.
    Neither the appellant nor the sponsor attended the hearing to give  up-
    to-date evidence.  It was  cited  that  Boodhoo  &  Others  (EEA  Regs:
    relevant evidence) [2013] UKUT 00346 was relevant and the judge  should
    look at the facts as at the date of the appeal hearing  and  the  judge
    should have determined whether the appellant and the EEA national  were
    in a durable relationship at the date of the hearing.

 6. The decision made a finding in relation to  the  date  of  lodging  the
    appeal on 3 October 2013, a full ten months before the hearing date and
    this was an error of law.

 7. Further circumstances had changed since the reasons for refusal  letter
    in that the sponsor had returned to Latvia on 25 June 2014 and this was
    the reason for her not being able to attend the hearing.   It  was  not
    known whether the sponsor was a qualified person for  the  purposes  of
    the EEA Regulations whilst in Latvia.  The respondent had  been  unable
    to address this previously  and  without  this  the  appeal  could  not
    succeed.

 8. Even if the judge found that the couple were in a durable  relationship
    the matter should be remitted back to the Secretary of State  to  allow
    her to exercise her discretion, FD (EEA discretion - basis  of  appeal)
    Algeria [2007] UKAIT 49.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  P  J  M
    Hollingworth, stating that at paragraph 11 the judge had referred to

    'very strong concerns to him that the relationship was not enduring and
    that the decision to determine the matter on the papers so suddenly and
    from two different solicitors and with witness statement signed  as  to
    facts which should be in the future being couched in  terms  as  having
    been in the past was an attempt to misrepresent the actual state of the
    relationship.  Prior to this the Judge had referred to  inconsistencies
    in relation to which he had accepted an explanation  as  plausible.  An
    arguable error of law has arisen in relation to the  reasoning  leading
    to the conclusion that the case had  been  proved  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities.  It is arguable that the factors taken into  account  by
    the Judge being satisfied that the standard of proof had been met  were
    not factors of sufficient weight  in  relation  to  the  other  factors
    identified by the Judge which had raised very strong concerns to him'

10. At the hearing Ms Isherwood  submitted  that  at  paragraph  8  of  the
    determination the judge accepted that the sponsor had  given  birth  to
    Mohammad Abdulla Rabil on  10  October  2013  at  Harrow  and  a  birth
    certificate for the child had been produced naming the appellant as his
    father and his sponsor as his mother with the occupation of the  father
    given as a student.  Both parties confirmed the parentage of the  child
    and the judge recorded that "there is nothing before me to  suggest  to
    the contrary".  Ms Isherwood pointed out that at  question  33  of  the
    interview conducted by the respondent the appellant was asked "was your
    partner still living with her boyfriend when she became  pregnant"  and
    he replied "yes but they had break up I am the  father  of  baby".   Ms
    Isherwood submitted that how the  judge  approached  the  evidence  was
    materially flawed.  Indeed bearing  in  mind  the  concerns  the  judge
    raised he was not in a position to deal with the matter on  the  papers
    and should have requested an oral hearing.

11. She also stated that the whole concern  of  the  relationship  was  the
    durability of that relationship and yet at paragraphs  10  and  11  the
    judge had noted that the sponsor was not able to attend the hearing and
    that this raised:

         "very strong concerns to me that the relationship is  not  enduring
         and that the decision to determine the matter  on  the  papers,  so
         suddenly  and  from  two  different  solicitors  and  with  witness
         statements signed as to facts which should be in the  future  being
         couched in terms of having been in the past that this is an attempt
         to misrepresent the actual state of the relationship."

    The judge should have adjourned for an oral hearing.

12. Mr Hyder submitted that the Secretary of State had had the  opportunity
    to consider the evidence as the bundle was served five days before  the
    hearing and if the respondent  had  concerns  those  should  have  been
    raised prior to the hearing. At paragraph 8 of the determination  Judge
    Dennis had clearly mentioned not only the birth of the child  but  also
    photographs although he accepted that the mother was  not  identifiable
    from the photograph.

13. He did accept, however, that the judge was in error  in  not  referring
    the matter to the Secretary  of  State  for  consideration  further  to
    Regulation 17.

14. In conclusion I find the judge made reference towards the close of  his
    determination to the very strong concerns he had that the  relationship
    was not enduring.  Further to Boodhoo the evidence  produced  following
    that decision may be admitted in evidence.

15. The respondent had couched her refusal on the basis that  discrepancies
    arose from the sets of questions given to the EEA national sponsor  and
    the appellant.  Nonetheless the judge reasoned that he was prepared  to
    accept the explanations for the discrepancies from  the  appellant  and
    stated, "for example he had replied that he had moved to an address  in
    October 2012, that his  partner  said  that  she  had  moved  there  in
    December of that year.  That is explained by the fact that  she  joined
    him there when they began co-habiting at the end of the year, he having
    moved in previously on his  own".   The  judge  stated  he  found  this
    consistent with their other answers.  In fact the appellants  gave  two
    entirely different accounts and that the appellant claims that he moved
    into Lynch Gate Walk at the end of 2010 until October 2012 whereupon he
    moved out and then moved back again to Lynch gate in January 2013 until
    31 March 2013.  His partner claims that she "moved in with  my  partner
    at 7 Lych (sic) Gate Walk, Hayes UB6 3NN, I  was  there  from  December
    2012 until April 2013 and we then moved into current  address".   Their
    accounts were different and not explained by  her  joining  him  there.
    Indeed he had moved out from that property  when  she  stated  she  had
    moved in.

16. In addition, the child was born on 21 October  2013.   The  appellant's
    claimed partner must have become pregnant in February 2013. At question
    33 of the interview the appellant in response  to  the  question,  "was
    your partner still living with her boyfriend when she became pregnant?"
    he responded "yes, but they had break up I am the father of baby".  The
    appellant added at Q30 that the sponsor lived with her boyfriend at  58
    Wookham Way and that he, the appellant, never went there.  Despite this
    contradiction in timelines and question in relation  to  the  parentage
    the judge stated that "both parties  confirmed  the  parentage  of  the
    child and there is nothing before me to suggest  the  contrary".  There
    was evidence suggesting to the contrary.  The judge also referred to "a
    bundle of photographs and a  number  of  medical  documents  have  been
    produced all to demonstrate the relationship.  All of these photographs
    appear to be fully plausible and consistent with  the  account  of  the
    appellant and his sponsor" [8].  The judge does not  identify  that  in
    fact the appellant's partner does not appear in the photographs.

17. Finally the judge stated that:

         "The witness statement of Ms Isakova is signed 25 June 2014.   That
         of the appellant is signed on the same date and stated that 'due to
         her mother's severe  ill-health  she  had  to  fly  to  Latvia  and
         therefore she could not attend the hearing and we need  to  make  a
         request to make a decision on the basis of the papers'.  That  same
         language appears in the witness statement  of  Ms  Isakova  stating
         "she had to fly to Latvia suddenly" and therefore "could not attend
         the hearing".

18. The judge proceeded at paragraph 11:

         "Inevitably this  raises  very  strong  concerns  to  me  that  the
         relationship is not enduring and that the decision to determine the
         matters  on  the  papers,  so  suddenly  and  from  two   different
         solicitors and with witness statements signed  as  to  facts  which
         should be in the future being couched in terms of  having  been  in
         the past that this is an attempt to misrepresent the  actual  state
         of the relationship. Nonetheless I  have  reminded  myself  of  the
         standard of proof and the presence of this indisputable evidence of
         their son, supported by a series of photographs over  a  period  of
         time has led me to conclude, if only just and somewhat reluctantly,
         that theirs is a durable relationship at least as at  the  date  of
         lodging the appeal."

19. The judge's assessment of the evidence contained  some  factual  errors
    which may have had material impact on the outcome.  In addition  should
    he have had such strong concerns, particularly as the parties were  not
    present, there was no indication he had addressed his mind  to  whether
    the matter  should  be  adjourned  for  an  oral  hearing  or  that  he
    considered the evidence as at the  date  of  the  hearing  itself.   Ms
    Isherwood confirmed that she had no bundle from the appellant.  It  was
    suggested that the bundle had been sent  to  the  Presenting  Officers'
    Unit in Feltham and a letter with a tracking reference was presented to
    me showing that a copy of the bundle had been sent  to  the  Presenting
    Officers' Unit in Feltham but nonetheless, bearing  in  mind  the  very
    significant concerns that the judge had regarding the  appeal,  I  find
    that it was an error of law not to address his mind to the  requirement
    of an oral hearing.

20. Notwithstanding the above the judge allowed the appeal outright when he
    should  have  remitted  the  matter  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for
    consideration and that is an error of law, as conceded by Mr Hyder,  FD
    (EEA discretion - basis of appeal) Algeria [2007] UKAIT 4.

Notice of Decision

21. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified.  I set aside the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement

22. Bearing in mind my findings I consider that there is an  error  of  law
    and the matter should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a full
    and oral hearing de novo.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 6 February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

