

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  IA/40556/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                       |            Decision and Reasons     |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|on 16 June 2015                        |            On 24 June 2015          |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                               ANSUMANA DANSO
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr O Mullan, Advocate, instructed by Bassi,
Solicitors, Birmingham
For the Respondent:  Mr M Matthews, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction.

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Gambia, born on 18 October 1975.  He says
    that he entered the UK as a visitor in 2010, although he  has  provided
    no evidence and the respondent has traced no record.  On 18 March  2013
    he submitted an application under Article  8  of  the  ECHR  which  was
    refused on 2 May 2013 with no right of appeal.  He married a UK citizen
    on 29 June 2013.  On 7  August  2014  he  was  served  with  notice  of
    liability to detention and removal.  On 20 August 2014 he again  sought
    consideration of his case under the ECHR.

 2. The respondent served the appellant  with  a  removal  decision  and  a
    letter explaining the reasons for refusing his application, both  dated
    24 September 2014.  He  had  claimed  that  there  were  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life continuing outside the  UK  due  to  his  wife
    suffering  from  hypothyroidism.   The  respondent   found   that   the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules Appendix FM and paragraph  276ADE
    were  not  met  and  that  there  were  no  exceptional   circumstances
    warranting consideration of a grant of leave outside  the  requirements
    of  the  Rules.   The  diagnosis  of  his  wife's  condition  specified
    medication which was available in Gambia and  blood  screening  two  to
    three times a year, which  she  could  obtain  there  or  alternatively
    return to the UK.  Although unfamiliar with the culture, she would have
    the support of the appellant.  They had both been aware from the outset
    of his precarious immigration status.  There was information about lack
    of rights for women in Gambia  but  that  referred  to  Gambian  women.
    Links with extended family  members  did  not  constitute  family  life
    beyond normal emotional ties.  The appellant  had  family  residing  in
    Gambia.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Hawden-Beal dismissed the appellant's  appeal
    for reasons explained in a decision promulgated on  13  December  2014.
    The Judge accepted that there was a genuine and subsisting relationship
    between the appellant and  his  wife.   Although  it  was  argued  that
    Section 117B of the 2002 Act did not apply  because  of  the  date  the
    decision and the appeal was made, the Judge was satisfied that  it  was
    applicable and that  accordingly  family  life  established  while  the
    appellant was here unlawfully attracted little weight.

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.   The
    proposed grounds argue in summary that:

        there were insurmountable obstacles to family  life  continuing  in
        Gambia;

        the Judge "fails to make a finding on the respondent's  proposition
        that it is for the appellant to show that she as a British  citizen
        would not be held in higher esteem than women citizens  of  Gambia.
        It is for the respondent to justify such an assertion which on  the
        face of it has no factual basis";

        the Judge erred at paragraph 7, stating that the relevant facts for
        human rights are considered at the date of hearing not the date  of
        decision;

        the respondent's decision is erroneously framed on the basis of the
        appellant and sponsor being partners not spouses; and

        Article 8 outside the Rules has "not been properly considered".




 5. On 12 March 2015,  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  granted  permission,
    observing that the Judge appeared to have misunderstood  what  evidence
    she could consider in relation to human  rights  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing and thus "arguably ... has not taken into account all  relevant
    evidence".  The grant of permission does not mention the other grounds.

 6. In a Rule 24 response the respondent argues that  the  grounds  do  not
    amount to more than disagreement with the  findings  on  insurmountable
    obstacles, which the appellant failed to demonstrate, and that "in  any
    event any errors are  not  material  because  the  appellant  does  not
    advance any good reason why he could not  obtain  entry  clearance  and
    return if his wife did not wish to live in Gambia".

 7. (The quoted observation appears to make a "Chikwamba  point",  although
    neither side appears to have suggested that the case  might  fall  into
    that category, and the appellant did not attempt  to  demonstrate  that
    his circumstances might meet the Rules  apart  from  the  formality  of
    applying from abroad.)

Submissions for the appellant.

 8. The judge erred at paragraph 7 by misunderstanding the  date  at  which
    the evidence was to be considered.  Although a Judge is not required to
    rehearse all the evidence, there was here  a  notably  compendious  and
    well presented bundle of evidence, focussed on the issues, such as  the
    medical conditions of the appellant's wife and  medical  treatment,  if
    any, available in Gambia.  Although the Judge looked at  paragraph  EX1
    of the  Rules,  the  analysis  of  insurmountable  obstacles  could  be
    described as perfunctory, for example on the medication required by the
    wife, her possible need for psychological treatment which might not  be
    available, and her potential treatment within the community in  Gambia.
    There was no detailed analysis of her rights under Article 8  of  ECHR.
    She had not known about the appellant's lack of status at the outset of
    their relationship.  The Judge's evaluation of the evidence had  to  be
    scrutinised through the prism of her error in drawing an incorrect line
    as to the point of time for its examination.

Submissions for the respondent.

 9. Paragraph 7 of the determination says "the point in  time  at  which  I
    have to consider the relevant facts  for  immigration  issues  and  for
    human rights issues is the date of decision".  That is not quite right.
     For many aspects of Appendix FM, the correct time  of  examination  is
    the date of the application.  For human rights more  generally,  it  is
    the date of the  hearing.   However,  the  question  was  whether  this
    erroneous statement made any difference.  In the immediately  preceding
    paragraph the Judge said "in non - entry clearance  cases,  i.e.  in  -
    country appeals, I can take account of evidence right up to the date of
    the hearing".  At paragraph 12 she found that the material  facts  were
    that "at the date of the hearing the appellant was a married  man  aged
    39 who had applied to stay in the UK ... ".  The decision  letter  went
    wrong by treating this as a partner case rather than a  marriage  case,
    but that error was corrected by the Judge and in either event the  case
    arrived at the correct test of insurmountable obstacles.   The  grounds
    said that there was no consideration of the spouse's position but  that
    was built into the structure of Appendix FM.   It  is  now  trite  that
    Article 8 considerations outside the Rules arise only if the  Rules  do
    not cater for the circumstances of the case.  This was not  an  unusual
    set of facts but one contemplated by and catered for by the Rules.   It
    did not require a separate  proportionality  analysis.   Paragraph  EX2
    required the appellant to show very significant  difficulties  or  very
    serious hardship.  There  was  some  evidence  of  his  wife's  medical
    conditions and some evidence of depression, but not that  she  required
    any serious treatment.  The determination in particular at paragraph 25
    showed that the Judge did consider the appellant's  medical  conditions
    in the plural, i.e. not just her hypothyroidism.  As to  the  situation
    of women in Gambia, the refusal letter might not be  elegantly  phrased
    but it was correct to say that evidence  of  disadvantages  related  to
    Gambian national women not to expatriate wives.   Problems  arose  from
    the general attitudes of society about violence towards  women.   There
    was no reason to think that would affect the appellant's wife, or  that
    he would treat her badly in Gambia but not in the  UK.   There  was  no
    reason to think that she fell into the category of women in Gambia  who
    were particularly prone to abuse.  The case raised little  if  anything
    to require consideration outside the Rules.  In any  event,  the  Judge
    had rightly taken account of Section 117B which was a major obstacle to
    the appellant's case, he having plainly been in the UK unlawfully.

Response for appellant.

10. Although it might often be assumed that  a  Judge  considered  all  the
    evidence even if a decision was not  fully  detailed,  that  assumption
    should not be made when there was an evident error about the date as at
    which the evidence was to be viewed and  the  determination  should  be
    read through that prism.  What followed after that error must have been
    tainted by it and gave rise to  considerable  doubt  over  whether  the
    evidence had been fully considered.

Discussion and conclusions.

11. The appellant has made as much as could reasonably  be  argued  on  the
    basis of the slip at paragraph 7 about the  date  for  considering  the
    relevant facts.  The appellant's bundle of evidence was full  and  well
    organised.  However, broadly I have come to prefer the submissions  for
    the respondent for the reasons given, as summarised above.  The judge's
    slip has to be read in context (a) of the  preceding  paragraph,  where
    she says that evidence has to be taken into account up to the  date  of
    the hearing, (b) of paragraph 12, which finds material facts as at  the
    date of the hearing, and (c) the determination as a whole  which  draws
    no line between evidence  arising  before  or  after  the  respondent's
    decision.  The slip is  unfortunate  but  not  such  as  to  leave  the
    reasonable reader in any doubt about  the  full  evidence  having  been
    taken into account.

12. The Judge's conclusions on insurmountable obstacles were open  to  her.
    The reasons given have not been shown to be less than  adequate.   Such
    error of law as there was had no bearing on the outcome.  While  it  is
    not necessary to go further than that for further  purposes,  it  might
    have been difficult for any Judge to find  that  the  circumstances  of
    this case reached the level required by paragraph EX.

13. Outside the Rules, given the appellant's lack of immigration status  in
    the UK and the provisions of  section  117B,  there  was  no  realistic
    prospect of an outcome in his favour.

14. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.



            [pic]


            19 June 2015
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




