
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number IA/40413/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 25th September 2015               |On 20th October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                        ADEKANMI OLUWASEUN ADEBOWALE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Babarinde (Legal Representative, Hatten Wyatt
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria,  having  entered  illegally  in
    2003 he made a number of applications to remain lastly on the  31st  of
    May 2011 outside the rules which was refused and on reconsideration the
    decision was maintained, that was on the 30th of  September  2014.  The
    Appellant's appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was heard  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Brown on  the  26th  of  January  2015  and  the  appeal
    dismissed in a decision promulgated on the 9th of February 2015.

 2. The Judge found that the Appellant could not meet the Immigration Rules
    which had been conceded. In considering article 8 outside the rules the
    Judge found that the removal of  the  Appellant  to  Nigeria  would  be
    proportionate in the circumstances.

 3. The Appellant sought permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    grounds of the 20th of February 2015. It was argued that the Judge  had
    made a number of errors, he had described one brother as a  sister  and
    that mistake affected the Judge's reasoning. With regard to  article  8
    the Judge had not considered that the Appellant and his wife  had  been
    married since 2008 and relied  on  Chikwamba  to  suggest  it  was  not
    reasonable to expect him to return to Nigeria  to  re-apply.  His  wife
    could not relocate as her health would place her in jeopardy. The First-
    tier Tribunal rejected the application.

 4. The Appellant submitted further grounds to the Upper  Tribunal  on  the
    5th of May 2015. The Sponsor made a number of  statements  about  their
    circumstances that he would struggle if he  returned  to  Nigeria,  her
    health was deteriorating and that she was bordering on the suicidal.

 5. Permission was granted as it appeared that it was not conceded that the
    rules could not be met and that the  case  was  argued  under  EX.1  of
    Appendix FM. It was arguable that the  Sponsor's  deteriorating  health
    could amount to insurmountable obstacles to relocation.

 6. In submissions the Appellant's representative  relied  on  the  grounds
    that had been put forward, the Appellant would now meet the  provisions
    of Appendix FM including  the  financial  requirements.  For  the  Home
    Office reliance was placed on the Refusal Letter and that it  had  been
    conceded that the Appellant could  not  meet  the  requirement  of  the
    rules. The evidence would not have been sufficient  to  show  that  the
    Appellant met the rules. Ekinci and Dela did not assist the  Appellant,
    his presence was unlawful and not simply precarious. All  the  evidence
    had been considered.

 7. In reply it was argued that EX.1 could  be  considered.  The  Appellant
    just missed the 10 year family route. Medical evidence had been ignored
    and that went beyond psychiatric evidence, it would affect his wife and
    she would not be able to get treatment.

 8. Having entered the UK illegally and remaining without leave  the  Judge
    was wrong to characterise his presence as  precarious,  it  has  always
    been illegal and under section 117  in  relation  to  article  8  would
    attract little weight. On that point it appears that the Judge was more
    generous to the  Appellant  than  the  facts  or  the  legal  framework
    required.

 9. The reliance placed on the report of Dr Pena by the Appellant does  not
    address the limitations of the report. Dated the 15th of June  2012  it
    was out of date by the time of the hearing by  well  over  a  year  and
    there was no support for  the  more  serious  concerns  raised  by  the
    Sponsor about her declining health. It did not support  the  assertions
    made about the ability of the Sponsor  to  obtain  the  medication  she
    receives. She remained able to work and was earning a sum  which  would
    meet the financial requirements of appendix FM.

10. The Judge clearly referred to insurmountable obstacles, this  had  been
    raised  in  the  skeleton  argument.  It  was  unfortunate   that   the
    Appellant's representative did not refer the Judge to the case of  Chen
    (Appendix FM - Chikwamba - temporary separation - proportionality)  IJR
    [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC). As that case makes clear, although appendix FM
    does not cover the situation of a person returning  to  make  an  entry
    clearance application in all cases it is for the Appellant  to  provide
    evidence that temporary separation would  interfere  disproportionately
    with  article  8  rights  and  simply  relying  on  Chikwamba  is   not
    sufficient.

11. It is clear that the Judge did consider the Appellant's history in  the
    UK, albeit more generously to the Appellant than required  in  that  he
    referred to his being in the UK precariously rather than illegally  and
    accorded  his  position  greater  weight.  The  error,  being  to   his
    advantage, is not material.

12. In paragraphs 31 to 35 the Judge clearly considered the  practicalities
    of the Appellant returning to Nigeria whether to  make  an  application
    for entry clearance or to be joined by the Sponsor. The Judge  set  out
    the relevant factors in that section of the decision and noted that the
    Appellant had not been honest with his wife to begin with and they  had
    created the situation that they found themselves  in.  The  alternative
    position of the Appellant being unable to apply for entry clearance was
    canvassed.

13. The Judge could have referred to the case  of  Ekinci  in  which  Simon
    Brown LJ observed that it would be bizarre if the less a  person  could
    meet the requirements of an out of country application their in country
    article 8 rights would improve.

14. The important point in a decision is not that a Judge sets out all  the
    law but whether the relevant evidence and legal  principles  have  been
    considered and applied. The decision shows that  the  Judge  did  that,
    including approaching the case in a manner consistent  with  Chen  even
    when that case had not been cited. The  decision  read  properly  shows
    that the decision was open to the Judge and for the reasons given.  The
    Appellant's case amounts to a disagreement with findings properly  made
    on the evidence presented and the facts disclosed.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.





Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  and  I  make  no
order.


Fee Award

In dismissing the appeal I make no fee award.


Signed:
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 19th October 2015
