
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Ia/40489/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 March 2016                      |On 30 March 2016                     |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                    [S R]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. S. Khan, Counsel instructed by Parker Rhodes
                    Hickmotts Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss. C. Johnstone, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Natayan, promulgated  on  7  April  2015,  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse to vary leave to remain, and  to  remove  him  from  the  United
    Kingdom.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:

         "This  application  complains  that  the  judge  has  not  provided
         adequate reasoning to explain  why  it  has  been  found  that  the
         Appellant  did  not  intend  to  have  a  genuine  and   subsisting
         relationship with his wife.  The judge  at  paragraph  44  accepted
         that the Appellant's wife intended to have a  genuine  relationship
         with the Appellant.  It is arguable that the judge has not provided
         adequate reasoning to explain why the evidence of  the  Appellant's
         wife was accepted but the Appellant's evidence was not.  There is a
         paucity of reasoning in this decision, a decision I have not  found
         easy to follow.  The grounds of appeal merit further  consideration
         so permission to appeal is granted."

 3. The Appellant attended the hearing.  I heard oral submissions from both
    representatives, following which I reserved my decision.

Submissions

 4. Ms Khan relied on the  grounds  of  appeal.   She  submitted  that  the
    judge's reasoning was not clear as to why he had been willing  to  find
    for the Appellant's wife, but not for the Appellant.  The decision  did
    not make sense.  The Appellant's wife was pregnant at  the  time.   The
    judge  accepts  that  the  Appellant  is  the  father.   There  was  no
    consistency  in  the  reasoning  of  the  judge.   The  assessment   of
    credibility was flawed.

 5. In relation  to  the  second  ground  of  appeal,  the  judge  had  not
    considered the evidence of  the  Appellant's  sister-in-law.   She  had
    attended the hearing and was a material witness.   I  was  referred  to
    paragraphs [30] and [31].  The evidence had not been assessed.  Further
    there was evidence from others who had attended  the  wedding.   I  was
    referred to paragraph [44].   The  judge  had  not  explained  why  the
    statements and  photographs  were  not  sufficient  to  show  that  the
    relationship was genuine and subsisting.  The evidence should have been
    assessed in the round.  I was referred to the letters of  support  from
    friends and relatives who had  been  at  the  wedding  (from  page  158
    onwards) and to the photographs (page 180 onwards).  The photographs of
    the wedding showed a number of people were present.  The Appellant  had
    gone to a lot  of  trouble,  especially  in  relation  to  the  Islamic
    wedding.  This was not just passing cursory evidence.

 6. In relation to the third ground, and the assessment  of  insurmountable
    obstacles, this was tainted by the adverse credibility findings.  There
    had been evidence of insurmountable obstacles before the judge.

 7. In response Miss. Johnstone submitted that paragraph [38] was  separate
    from paragraph [41].  The credibility finding in paragraph [38] related
    to the specific concerns  of  the  Respondent  relating  to  dates  and
    events.  This was further set out in paragraphs  [39]  and  [40].   The
    judge had listened to the cross examination of the  Appellant  and  his
    wife.  His findings were not  perverse.   To  find  perversity  was  an
    extremely high  threshold.   His  finding  that  the  Appellant's  wife
    intended to have a genuine and subsisting relationship was open to him.
     It was not perverse to find that the Appellant did not intend to  have
    a genuine and subsisting relationship.

 8. In relation to the second ground, the sister-in-law's evidence was  not
    objective.  The judge had considered the other evidence with  care.   I
    was referred to paragraph [44].  The fact that the Appellant had  spent
    a lot of money on the wedding  did  not  mean  that  the  marriage  was
    genuine and subsisting.

 9. Cogent reasons had been given in relation to insurmountable  obstacles.
    The judge found that there was no risk to the Appellant's wife from her
    ex-husband's family.  They could live  in  Pakistan.   The  Appellant's
    wife had visited Pakistan quite recently.   The  judge  had  considered
    section 117B in detail in paragraph [51].  The Respondent's  submission
    in the alternative was that the  Appellant  and  his  wife  could  live
    together in Pakistan.

10. In response, Ms Khan submitted that ground one was not an irrationality
    challenge,  but  challenged  the  reasoning  as  being   confused   and
    inconsistent.  However, she submitted that  it  met  the  irrationality
    threshold.   There  were  no  clear  findings  made  in   relation   to
    insurmountable obstacles.  The appeal should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal for rehearing.

Error of law

11. In paragraph [38] the judge states:

         "I have found that both the Appellant and his wife S Bibi have  not
         been credible witnesses and their evidence has been inconsistent on
         material matters which are in issue in this appeal."

12. The judge makes this general credibility finding at the  start  of  his
    findings.  It was submitted by Miss. Johnstone that this finding was in
    relation to specific dates  and  events.   However,  I  find  that  the
    wording of this  paragraph  does  not  bear  this  out.   There  is  no
    indication that this finding is limited to any particular parts of  the
    evidence.  It is a finding that neither the Appellant nor his wife were
    credible witnesses in  relation  to  "material  matters  which  are  in
    issue".  I find that this finding applies to all of the evidence of the
    Appellant and his wife.

13. In paragraph [44] the judge states:

         "I accept the evidence of S Bibi that she is pregnant and that  the
         Appellant is the father of the child who is expected to be born  in
         August 2014.  I however find that although S Bibi's intention is to
         have a genuine and subsisting relationship with the Appellant  that
         the Appellant has not proved on a balance of probabilities that  he
         intends a genuine and subsisting relationship with his wife."

14. I find that this  is  in  direct  contradiction  with  the  finding  in
    paragraph [38] that the Appellant's wife was not  a  credible  witness.
    Having found that they were both lacking in credibility, the judge then
    decides that one of them is telling the truth about her intentions, but
    that the other is not.  No reasons are  given  for  finding  that  this
    aspect of the Appellant's wife evidence can be relied on  and  believed
    whereas the rest of her evidence cannot.

15. Paragraph [44] starts  with  a  finding  that  the  judge  accepts  the
    Appellant's wife's evidence that she is pregnant.  I find that there is
    either evidence of a pregnancy or there is not - it does not go to  the
    Appellant's wife's credibility.  The judge links his acceptance of  the
    Appellant's wife's evidence that she is pregnant and that the father of
    the unborn child is the Appellant, to the finding that she  intends  to
    have a genuine and subsisting relationship with the Appellant.  He does
    not give reasons for this finding, and it cannot be said  automatically
    to flow from the fact that she is pregnant with the Appellant's  child.
    I find that it makes no difference to the Appellant's wife's intentions
    that she is pregnant.  It is equally possible for a pregnant  woman  to
    have no intention to have a relationship with the father of her  unborn
    child as it is for the father of that unborn child to have no intention
    to have a relationship with the mother.

16. The judge does not accept the Appellant's evidence that  he  intends  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with his wife, which is  consistent
    with his finding that the Appellant was  not  credible,  and  that  his
    evidence should not be accepted.  However, his approach to  credibility
    is not consistent overall, given the way in which he  has  treated  the
    evidence of the Appellant's wife.  I find that the judge has failed  to
    explain why he  has  accepted  this  part  of  the  Appellant's  wife's
    evidence, having previously found her to be lacking in credibility.   I
    find that it contradicts the finding in paragraph  [38].   The  judge's
    credibility findings are confused and inconsistent,  and  I  find  that
    this amounts to an error of law.  As the  Appellant's  credibility  and
    that of his wife goes to the core of their claim to be in a genuine and
    subsisting relationship, I find that this error is material.

17. In relation to the other evidence, in particular that of the sister-in-
    law, the judge sets out in paragraph [44] that he  has  considered  the
    other evidence.  However,  while  he  does  not  need  to  set  it  out
    verbatim, there are no reasons given for why he has rejected this other
    evidence, which he must have done as he finds that  the  Appellant  and
    his wife are not in a genuine and subsisting relationship.  He gives no
    reasons for not attaching weight  to  the  Appellant's  sister-in-law's
    evidence.

18. In relation to insurmountable obstacles, this is directly  affected  by
    the judge's credibility findings, given that the  evidence  comes  from
    the Appellant and his wife.  I find that his confused and  inconsistent
    credibility  findings  have  tainted  his  approach  to  insurmountable
    obstacles.

19. Paragraph  7.2  of  the  Practice  Statement  dated  10  February  2010
    contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
    where the effect of the error has been to deprive a  party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing  or  other  opportunity  for  the
    party's case to be put to and considered by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Given the nature and extent of the  fact-finding  necessary  to  enable
    this appeal to be remade, having regard to the overriding objective,  I
    find that it is appropriate  to  remit  this  case  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision involves the making of a material error  of  law.   I  set  the
decision aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.


Signed   Date 14 March 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
