
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/40715/2013
                                                               IA/40722/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 29th April 2015                   |On 21st May 2015                     |
|Extempore judgment                   |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                     t y
                                     a t
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr P Richards of Counsel instructed by Nasim & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules
       2008 (SI 2008/269) I  make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
       Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings
       or any form of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
       identify the original appellants. This direction applies to,  amongst
       others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this direction  could
       give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

  2. The appellants in this case were granted permission to appeal  by  the
       First-tier in  June  2014.   Permission  was  granted  on  Article  8
       grounds.

  3. The grounds of application refer to the first appellant having serious
       medical conditions which were only diagnosed after having been in the
       UK for some years.  The  medical  conditions  include  HIV  positive,
       Hepatitis B and D and Chronic Venous  Insufficiency.   These  require
       extensive medical treatment and it is medical treatment that requires
       a combination of treatments to ensure that each of the  illnesses  is
       kept under control to as great a degree  as  possible.   The  grounds
       assert that there has  been  inadequate  evaluation  of  the  medical
       condition of the first appellant; that there has been  a  failure  to
       properly evaluate the interference with the appellants' private lives
       because of the health consequences  of  removal;  that  the  case  of
       Akhalu [2013] UKUT 00400 has been misinterpreted  by  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge; that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to consider
       the effect of removal on their private lives in Pakistan;  failed  to
       take into account that they had been lawfully resident in the UK  and
       failed to take into account that the medical treatment that they  had
       been receiving  had  been  treatment  that  they  had  been  lawfully
       entitled to receive.

  4. The grounds also referred to a potential Article 3  challenge  because
       permission had been granted in a case which was subsequently heard by
       the Court of Appeal and reported  as  GS  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  40.   Mr
       Richards did not pursue Article 3 in the light of that judgment.

  5. The background to this case is that the  first  appellant  arrived  in
       2007 and the second appellant, his wife, arrived in September 2010 as
       his dependant.  Initially here as a student, the first appellant  was
       subsequently granted leave  to  remain  as  a  Post-Study  Work  visa
       holder.  He has remained in the UK lawfully since the decision  which
       is the subject of this appeal was made.   The  application  was  made
       outside of the Rules relying on Article 3  and  Article  8.   It  was
       refused by the Secretary of  State  on  the  basis  that  it  was  an
       application made outside the Rules purely and  simply  on  the  basis
       that it was an application that was not covered by the Rules and that
       Article 3 had been considered and rejected.  Article 8 was considered
       by the Secretary of State under paragraph 276ADE of  the  Immigration
       Rules alone and there was no consideration by the Secretary of  State
       on the wider issues of Article 8.  That was in effect  recognised  by
       the First-tier Tribunal who considered the appeal in terms of Article
       8 in its widest sense.  The judge went  through  the  so-called  five
       step test laid down in the case of Razgar.

  6. The judge in the First-tier Tribunal set out  in  considerable  detail
       the evidence before  him.   He  set  out  the  documentary  and  oral
       evidence including reference to letters from medical professionals in
       Pakistan which in one letter say that the infrastructure required  to
       carry out the sensitive viral assays  for  the  first  appellant  are
       lacking in Pakistan and that the availability of some of  the  latest
       antiviral drugs are not freely  available.   Another  medical  report
       says  that  the  treatment  and  diagnostic  facilities  in  Pakistan
       required to cater for the needs of this patient are not available  to
       the extent required; that report goes on to  recommend  that  medical
       treatment is continued in the UK.

  7. A report from the doctors treating the first appellant here in the  UK
       refer to the complex medical problems that he has and make the  point
       that success rates for treatment of Hepatitis  D  are  low  and  that
       although  it  is  possible  to  control  two  out  of  three  of  the
       appellant's blood borne virus infections, there is no  strategy  that
       has any serious likelihood of preventing the progression of his liver
       disease.   There  is  reference  to  the  possibility  of   a   liver
       transplant.  The physician goes on  to  say  that  according  to  his
       understanding, there is no  specific  service  in  Pakistan  for  the
       management of these co-infections and he therefore  predicts  that  a
       return to Pakistan would accelerate  further  the  first  appellant's
       liver disease.

  8. The judge refers to this information.  Although Mr Richards  complains
       that there were no findings about that it is  inconceivable  that  in
       reaching his conclusions the judge did not bear that in mind.   There
       is no indication whatsoever in the First-tier Tribunal judgment  that
       any of the evidence that was put forward on behalf of the  appellants
       and by the appellants was not accepted by the First-tier Tribunal.

  9. There is reference to the letters from Pakistan.  There  is  reference
       to the letters from the GP and letters  from  the  first  appellant's
       employers and his educational achievements.  All of this is  set  out
       immediately before the finding of the judge that the appeal  relating
       to Article 3 must be dismissed.  Immediately  after  that  the  judge
       goes on to look at Article 8.  It cannot conceivably be said that the
       judge did not have all of those matters in mind when he  reached  his
       conclusions regarding Article 8.

  10.    He summarises the evidence in very brief terms in paragraph 29  of
       his decision.  He accepts the dates that the couple  arrived  in  the
       UK; that they are in a relationship  and  they  are  married.  He  is
       satisfied that  the  first  appellant  faces  particularly  difficult
       medical issues and that the second appellant  has  medical  problems.
       He accepts that there are no previous convictions and that they  have
       been  employed,  earning  money  and  paying  tax.   He  accepts  the
       educational certificates.  Although the judge does  not  specifically
       state that he  has  taken  into  account  the  fact  that  the  first
       appellant  would  have  difficulty  accessing  medical  treatment  in
       Pakistan, I say again that it is inconceivable that he was not  aware
       of that given the references  to  the  medical  reports  that  appear
       earlier in the determination.

  11.    At paragraph 30 the First-tier Tribunal judge says, "I  take  into
       account that the consequence of removal for their health in not being
       able to access equivalent healthcare in Pakistan as is available here
       in the UK is plainly relevant to the  question  of  proportionality".
       Mr Richards submitted that the judge had applied the wrong test  here
       to the extent that  he  was  analysing  whether  the  healthcare  was
       equivalent rather than accessible but even  if  that  were  the  case
       which I am not satisfied is the case  given  the  way  in  which  the
       medical facilities available have been referred  to  earlier  in  the
       determination, that does  have  to  be  weighed  against  the  public
       interest in ensuring that the limited resources of  the  UK's  health
       service are used for the benefit of those who are intended to  be  in
       the UK.  Later in the determination the judge in any event says  that
       he has borne in mind that the medical facilities of Pakistan are  not
       the same as in the UK and that he has also borne in mind the evidence
       before him of discrimination and the  attitude  of  their  respective
       families.

  12.    The couple will be returning  to  Pakistan  together.   The  first
       appellant has been away from Pakistan for some seven years  or  more.
       They have both been in the UK on visas that do not lead inevitably to
       settlement.  They have no expectation that  they  would  be  able  to
       claim settlement and the only additional issue in this case  is  that
       this  couple  have,  and  particularly  the  first  appellant,   very
       unfortunately been afflicted by very serious illness.  Akhalu was  an
       appellant, whose appeal on Article 8 grounds was successful, was very
       different factually.  The decision in her  case  had  been  that  her
       condition had arisen whilst in the UK and was going to be treated  by
       the NHS by  providing  a  transplanted  kidney  which  would  require
       continued access to treatment of a different kind than she had needed
       before that and she would not be able to live in a manner that  could
       be achieved to enable that access to treatment should she be returned
       to Nigeria.  It was a very specific factual basis  and  although  the
       other factors that spoke in favour of  the  claimant  in  Akhalu  are
       similar to those in this case, in particular lawfully present in  the
       UK when he fell ill, provided with medical  treatment  which  he  was
       entitled to receive, continues to work and has established a level of
       private life whilst here for the last few years and that  the  result
       of return to Pakistan may well  result  in  extremely  difficult  and
       unpleasant medical consequences.  Those are factors that do not in my
       view amount to factors that have not been taken into account  by  the
       First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The judge was clearly sympathetic to  the
       appellants as indeed am I.  These cases are extremely  difficult  and
       upsetting but on the basis of the jurisprudence as it stands  at  the
       moment I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal Judge took account
       of all the factors that  were  raised  before  him  in  reaching  his
       decision that the decision of the Secretary of State  to  refuse  the
       application and remove the appellants  was  proportionate  and  so  I
       dismiss this appeal and find that there is no error of law.

Conclusion

There is no error of  law  such  as  to  merit  the  setting  aside  of  the
determination of the First-tier Tribunal.

The appeal is dismissed.

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal stands.



[pic]
         Date 20th May 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
