
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/40167/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On the 11th December 2015            |On the 5th January 2016               |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before:

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY


                                  Between:

                     MS MUKTHERUN NESA KHATHUN CHOUDHURY
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant      Mr N.Ahmed (Solicitor)
For the Respondent     Mr Norton (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is the Appellant's appeal against  the  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Ian Howard promulgated on the 29th June 2015, in which
       he dismissed the Appellant's Human Rights appeal under Article 3  and
       Article 8.

    2. Permission to appeal has been granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Nicholson on the 29th September 2015 on the  ground  that  the  Judge
       appeared to have accepted at paragraph 26 that the Appellant  had  an
       Article 8 family life with her son, her daughter and  their  families
       and that the decision to remove the  Appellant  would  "substantially
       change the way in which that family life is  currently  enjoyed"  and
       would amount to an interference with that family life, but had  found
       that it was not an interference of such gravity as to engage  Article
       8 on the basis that it would "merely serve to restore it to  what  it
       was before march 2012". Judge Nicholson considered that there was  an
       arguable material error of law in that having found that family  life
       would be substantially changed, the Judge ought to  have  found  that
       Article 8 was engaged, and  gone  on  to  consider  the  question  of
       proportionality.

    3. At the start of the appeal, Mr Norton on  behalf  of  the  Respondent
       indicated that he wished to withdraw the Rule 24  response  that  had
       been submitted. He told me that  he  conceded  that  that  there  was
       material error of law and the case should be  remitted  back  to  the
       First-tier Tribunal for reconsideration.

    4. In light of the concession quite properly made by Mr Norton on behalf
       of the Respondent, I do find that First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Howard
       did materially err in his consideration of Article 8 at [26]  of  the
       decision. Having found  that  "to  remove  her  to  Bangladesh  would
       substantially change the way in which that family life  is  currently
       enjoyed", to then go on to find that  "given  my  findings  above  it
       would be to return it to the way it was before she came to the UK  in
       March 2012" and that this would not amount to an interference of such
       gravity as to engage Article 8 is a clear material error of law.  The
       threshold that has to be crossed as to whether or not  Article  8  is
       engaged is not a specially or indeed exceptionally high, as was  made
       clear by Lord Justice Sedley in  the  case  of  AG  (Eritrea)  v  The
       Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ  801.  The
       question as to whether or not an interference would simply return the
       position back to the way it was prior to the Appellant coming to  the
       UK in March 2012 was a question for the final  stage  of  the  Razgar
       test, the question of proportionality, rather than as to  whether  or
       not Article 8 was actually engaged.  If  there  was  going  to  be  a
       substantial change in the way that family life as currently  enjoyed,
       even if reverting it back to the way it  was  previously,  Article  8
       would have be engaged, and the Judge should therefore have gone on to
       consider proportionality. The First-tier Judge has set  the  bar  for
       the engagement of Article 8 too high.  I  therefore  agree  with  the
       concession made by Mr Norton on behalf of  the  Respondent  that  the
       Judge's decision does contain a material error of law.  The  decision
       of First-tier Tribunal Judge Ian Howard does contain a material error
       of law in respect of the way that he dealt  with  Article  8  and  is
       therefore set aside. The case is to remitted back to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal for rehearing de nova, to be heard by any Judge  other  than
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Ian Howard.

Notice of Decision

The decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ian  Howard  does  contain  a
material error of law and is set aside;

The case is to be remitted back to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  rehearing,
to be heard by any Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Ian Howard.


Signed      Dated 14th December 2015

[pic]
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal McGinty
