
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40584/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 4 July 2014                                  |On 08 August 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                          Mr Sukhvinder Singh Sidhu
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding
For the Respondent:    Mr A Pipe


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals against the determination of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Trevaskis promulgated on  10  April  2014  in  which  he
    allowed the appeal of Mr Sidhu under the  Immigration  Rules  and  also
    under Article 8.  For the purposes of continuity I shall  refer  to  Mr
    Sidhu as the appellant as he was in the Tribunal below.

 2. It is unimportant to deal with the facts of  this  case  in  any  great
    detail.  Suffice it to say that the findings of fact  that  are  to  be
    found in paragraphs 29 to 31 of the determination are not challenged in
    the grounds of appeal settled by the Secretary of State.  The  nub  and
    difficulty in the appeal is found in paragraph 32 of the determination.

 3. The background to this case is that there had been previous  grants  of
    discretionary leave  provided  to  the  appellant  as  a  result  of  a
    relationship that he had.  The marriage, however, broke  down  and  the
    husband and wife separated.  The  decree  absolute  was  granted  on  4
    September 2012.  However, the appellant formed a new  relationship  and
    it is that new relationship which is the  subject  of  the  application
    made by the appellant that he should  be  entitled  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.  He has been living in the United Kingdom since 1995.

 4. In paragraph 32 the judge said:

         "The appellant was granted discretionary leave in  2012;  according
         to  the  IDI  transitional  arrangements  (page   25B   appellant's
         supplemental bundle) his case will normally continue  to  be  dealt
         with under the 'old' policy, leading to settlement.   I  find  that
         there is no reason why this appellant's case should be  dealt  with
         in any other way."

 5. Pausing there, there are grave difficulties in  the  judge's  approach.
    We do not know what specific arrangements he was referring to  save  by
    reference to page 25B in the appellant's  supplemental  bundle  but  it
    does appear that the document to which he was referring was  one  which
    was either not current  or  did  not  accurately  set  out  what  those
    transitional arrangements were.

 6. Secondly, whilst the judge referred to such case normally  being  dealt
    with under the old policy it is quite apparent  that  an  issue  as  to
    whether something is normally dealt with under a policy would  indicate
    that there should be defined in the policy exceptional cases which  may
    fall outside it.  In this case we simply do not know what the judge had
    in mind when he said that he sees no reasons why it should not be dealt
    with in the way cases normally are.

 7. It seems to me that the most significant error  in  this  part  of  the
    determination is that he must have treated the transition  arrangements
    as providing the appellant  with  a  positive  right  and  that  was  a
    positive right that should result in his being granted leave to  remain
    and the parties are agreed that there is no positive right as a  result
    of these transition arrangements.  They do not provide rights but  they
    provide the process by which remedies or  by  which  periods  of  leave
    should be provided to an individual.

 8. As a result of that the judge went on to find that the application  had
    to be considered according to Article 8 outside the Immigration  Rules.
    That thereafter led to the Immigration Judge going  on  what  has  been
    described as a free-ranging Article 8 application without any reference
    to applicable Rules or the applicable datum level which is provided  by
    the reference in the current Rules to the  public  interest.   Although
    there  is  a  reference  to  Section  276ADE  in  paragraph  4  of  the
    determination the judge shies away from dealing with it by reference to
    Appendix FM or  paragraph  276ADE  because  of  his  thinking.   It  is
    accepted that that was wrong.

 9. The judge goes on to say that the  respondent's  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law but does  not  therefore  remake  the  decision
    under the Rules as he should do if there had been an  obligation  under
    the Rules as he had apparently found that there was.

10. Consequently there are a series of errors in  the  determination  which
    entirely deprived the appellant of the correct approach to which he was
    entitled.  It is true that his appeal was allowed under Article  8  but
    only in circumstances that  were  not  permissible  under  the  present
    regime.  His application for leave to remain postdated the introduction
    of changes into the Immigration Rules and those  therefore  applied  in
    his case and there will then have to be an examination  of  his  rights
    under the Immigration Rules as they now stand in relation to Article 8.
     Thereafter there  will  then  inevitably  follow  a  consideration  of
    whether in the circumstances of the appellant's case there should be  a
    departure from the Immigration Rules by  reason  of  the  circumstances
    that he is able to put forward in his case.

11. Where there has been such a  substantial  departure  from  the  correct
    approach to be adopted in this case it is my firm view  that  both  the
    appellant and the respondent have been deprived of what they  each  are
    entitled to receive from the Tribunal, and it is in those circumstances
    that the decision that I make is not only that there has been an  error
    of law but that the error of law can only be remedied by the case being
    heard once again by the First-tier Tribunal and suitably guided  as  to
    what the course of action should be.  The  judge  who  hears  the  case
    afresh will be able to approach the case in the correct way.

12. When I say that the case should be heard  afresh,  as  I  have  already
    indicated, that does not mean that there should be further findings  of
    fact necessary because those have been adequately made by the judge  in
    paragraphs 29 to 31.






Signed                          Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan

