
[pic]
S-T

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40963/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 14 October 2015                   |On 21 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

                              USMAN SHAUKAT ALI
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born  on  3  January  1986.  His
    application for  a  residence  card  as  confirmation  of  a  right  of
    residence as the family member of an  EEA  national  exercising  Treaty
    rights was refused on 30 September 2014.  The  respondent  alleged  the
    appellant had entered into a  marriage  of  convenience  with  Ms  Vera
    Ferreira Coelho, a  Portuguese  national.  The  appellant  submitted  a
    notice of appeal  maintaining  he  was  living  with  his  partner  and
    requesting an oral hearing.

 2. The appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Zahed  on  24
    April 2015. There was no appearance by the appellant  or  his  partner.
    The judge noted that no  evidence  had  been  filed  by  the  appellant
    despite the indication in the grounds of appeal that a bundle would  be
    provided. He also noted that  the  appellant's  former  solicitors  had
    written to say they were no longer instructed. They  had  not  received
    any instructions from the appellant. The judge checked with  his  clerk
    at  12.00  that  the  appellant  had  not  left  any  message.   Having
    ascertained that nothing had been heard from the appellant, he  decided
    to proceed in his absence.

 3. The judge dismissed the appeal, finding a marriage of  convenience.  He
    relied on the detailed immigration report stating  that  the  appellant
    shared a room at 14 [ - ], London E17 with  a  male  and  not  his  EEA
    partner to find that the evidential burden on the respondent  had  been
    discharged. The appellant had filed no evidence to discharge the burden
    on him to show his was not a marriage of convenience.

 4. The  grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal  were  submitted  by  the
    appellant in person. They argue there was procedural unfairness in that
    he had faxed a letter to the  Tribunal  the  day  before  the  hearing,
    stating he was "seriously ill" and requesting an adjournment for a  few
    weeks. A copy of the fax was attached to the grounds  together  with  a
    transmission report. The grounds also stated  the  appellant  had  been
    living at 14 [ - ] for about three years and his partner had joined him
    at this address. Permission to appeal was  granted  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on the procedural unfairness point.

 5. The appellant did not attend  the  hearing  and  was  unrepresented.  I
    checked that the notice of hearing had been sent to the correct address
    in good time and had not been returned. There was nothing in  the  file
    to indicate the appellant had notified the  Tribunal  of  a  change  of
    address. I considered that the appellant had been served with notice of
    the hearing and I should proceed in his absence.

 6. In informed Mr Tarlow that the fax which the appellant said he had sent
    on the day before the hearing in the First-tier  Tribunal  was  on  the
    file and was date-stamped 23 April 2015. There was no doubt it had been
    received and attached to the file when Judge Zahed  heard  the  appeal.
    The fax stated as follows:

         "I write to inform the Tribunal I am seriously ill and therefore in
         these circumstances I request the Tribunal to  adjourn  my  hearing
         which is listed tomorrow i.e. 24th April 2015 for few weeks.

         Please note that as soon as I recover a  bit  I  will  forward  the
         medical evidence to the Tribunal.

         Kindly consider the above matter."

 7. In those circumstances, Mr Tarlow accepted that the decision  of  Judge
    Zahed should be set aside because of the procedural  unfairness  caused
    by his failing to consider the adjournment request. The  appellant  had
    not been given a hearing even though he had asked for his appeal to  be
    adjourned so that he could attend. He as deprived of that opportunity.

 8. I therefore set aside  the  decision  of  Judge  Zahed  dismissing  the
    appeal. In accordance with Practice Statement 7.2(a), this  is  a  case
    which must be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  re-hearing  at
    Hatton Cross by any judge other than Judge Zahed.

 9. The following Directions are made to assist with the  disposal  of  the
    appeal:

         (1)  The Respondent must file and  serve  no  later  than  14  days
         before the hearing all relevant evidence supporting the  assertions
         made in the reasons for refusal letter, including (but not  limited
         to) evidence regarding the visit  by  immigration  officers  to  14
         Rodney Place, London E17 on 13 August 2014,  otherwise  the  First-
         tier Tribunal might  consider  the  evidential  burden  of  showing
         reasonable grounds for  suspicion  has  not  been  discharged  (see
         Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage  of  convenience)  Greece  [2012]
         UKUT 00038 (IAC));

         (2)  The Appellant must file and serve evidence up to the  date  of
         hearing showing the subsistence of his marriage  with  Ms  Ferreira
         Coelho, to include (but not limited to) witness statements to stand
         as evidence-in-chief, evidence of cohabitation and evidence  of  Ms
         Ferreira Coelho's employment;

         (3)  The Appellant must file and serve medical evidence showing why
         he was unable to attend the hearing in the First-tier  Tribunal  on
         24 April 2015 and he should explain why neither he nor Ms  Ferreira
         Coelho attended the hearing in the Upper  Tribunal  on  14  October
         2015; and

         (4)  The Appellant must be prepared to explain why the  grounds  of
         appeal to the First-tier Tribunal asserted that a  fully  paginated
         bundle would be sent but no evidence was  filed  and  also  why  he
         stated that he and his partner had moved address (so were not  home
         when the immigration officers visited) but he continued to give his
         address as 14 [ - ], London E17.  The  Tribunal  may  draw  adverse
         inferences from a failure to address any of these matters.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The First-tier Tribunal's decision contains a material error of law  is
    set aside. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  re-
    hearing (not by Judge Zahed).




                               Signed   Date 15 October 2015


                               Judge Froom,
                               sitting as a Deputy Judge of the Upper
                               Tribunal
