
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40898/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31 March 2015                     |On 15 June 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     YH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No representative


                               ANONYMITY ORDER

    I make an anonymity order under  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended)  to  protect  the
    privacy of the appellant and sponsor given the nature of  some  matters
    raised in the evidence  of  this  appeal.   This  order  prohibits  the
    disclosure directly or indirectly (including by  the  parties)  of  the
    identity of the appellant.  Any disclosure in breach of this order  may
    amount to a contempt of court.  This order shall remain in force unless
    revoked or varied by a Tribunal or Court.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Britton) allowing  the  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision on 18 July 2013  refusing  to  vary  YH's
    leave as the partner of a British citizen ("SB") under the  Immigration
    Rules (HC 395 as amended).

 2. For convenience, I will refer to the parties as  they  appeared  before
    the First- tier Tribunal.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of China who was born on 20 June 1980.  On 9
    December 2014 she was granted limited  leave  to  enter  the  UK  as  a
    visitor valid until June 2013.   On  10  December  2014  the  appellant
    arrived in the UK.  On 3 June 2013, the appellant applied for leave  to
    remain on the basis of her relationship with a British citizen, SB.

 4. That application was refused on 18 July 2013 under  Appendix  FM,  para
    276ADE and Art 8 of the ECHR.

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    dated 18 April 2014, Judge Trevaskis  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules.  That decision was  successfully  appealed
    by the Secretary of State.  In a determination promulgated on 22 August
    2014, the Upper Tribunal (UTJ Hanson) set aside  the  decision  on  the
    basis that Judge Trevaskis had wrongly applied  the  Immigration  Rules
    under  which  the  appellant  could  not  succeed.   However,  as   the
    appellant's claim  under  Art  8  had  not  been  determined  by  Judge
    Trevaskis, the Upper Tribunal remitted the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to make a decision in respect of Art 8.

 6. That remitted appeal was heard by Judge Britton on 17 October 2014.  In
    a determination promulgated on 5 November 2014, Judge  Britton  allowed
    the appellant's appeal  under  Art  8.   The  respondent  again  sought
    permission to appeal.  On 16 December 2014, the First-tier Tribunal (DJ
    I Murray) granted the Secretary of State permission to appeal.

 7. Thus, the appeal came before me.

The Judge's Decision

 8. Judge Britton heard oral evidence from both the appellant and  SB.   He
    found both to be credible witnesses and accepted their  evidence.   The
    appellant and SB had lived together in Abu Dhabi for  over  two  years.
    Their relationship had begun in March 2009.  They had both  worked  for
    Etihad Airlines.  Following a medical check-up in March  2012,  SB  was
    diagnosed as HIV positive.  SB  lost  his  job  and  was  arrested  and
    detained before being deported to the UK on 1 April 2012.  Since coming
    to the UK, the appellant and SB have had  a  son  who  was  born  on  8
    September 2013.  The appellant is tested for HIV every six months  but,
    like her son, she is not infected with the virus.

 9. The evidence of SB and the appellant was that  he  could  not  live  in
    China  because  he  was  HIV  positive.   The  appellant  relied   upon
    documentary evidence (referred to by  the  judge  at  para  15  of  his
    determination) that for  stays  of  over  six  months  HIV  tests  were
    required and also that even those travelling on a tourist visa or short-
    term business trip (in other words  not  for  employment  or  study  or
    otherwise for over six months) could be denied entry if they truthfully
    declared their status (see "China  -  Regulations  on  Entry  Stay  and
    Residence for PLHIV" (undated but printed on 1/8/2013)).

10. Having set out the evidence, which he clearly accepted, the  judge  set
    out Art 8 and the five-stage test in Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL  27  and
    then at paras 19-23 set out his conclusion that removal  would  not  be
    proportionate under Art 8 as follows:

         "19. I find that the appellant  and  [SB]  are  in  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a child [E]  born  on  8
             September 2013.  [E] was born in the United Kingdom.  [SB] and
             [E] are British citizens.  I find the appellant would not be a
             burden on the British  taxpayer  and  has  had  no  difficulty
             integrating into society.   Under  paragraph  117B(6)  of  the
             Immigration Act 2014 it states 'In the case of a person who is
             not liable to deportation, public interest  does  not  require
             the person's removal where - (a) the person has a genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom.

         20.  Under Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration
             Act 2009 (2009 Act) [E]'s best interest is  to  be  raised  by
             both parents, unless there are good reasons to  the  contrary.
             The Immigration Act 2014 at section 71 under the heading  Duty
             regarding  the  Welfare  of  Children,  it  states,  for   the
             avoidance of doubt, this Act does not limit any  duty  imposed
             on the Secretary of State or any other person by section 55 of
             the 2009 Act.  If [E] went to live in China it would  normally
             be in his best interest to live with them in China.  It is not
             automatically in a child's best interest to  live  in  the  UK
             rather than in another country, even if the child is British.

         21.  However, I  find  that  [SB]  will  have  a  very  significant
             obstacle to integrating in China because of  his  HIV  medical
             condition.  It would not be reasonable to split the family and
             for [E] to have to live in China without his father or [E]  to
             live in this country without his mother.  Further it would not
             be reasonable to expect the appellant to return  to  China  to
             make an application to settle in this country.

         22.  I find, taking into consideration all the evidence before  me,
             the  appellant  has  established  there  would   be   a   very
             significant obstacle to [SB] living in China.  I consider this
             appeal is exceptional and is  to  be  considered  outside  the
             Immigration Rules.

         23.  I find it is proportionate for the appellant to be allowed  to
             remain in this country with [SB] and their child."

This Appeal

11. On behalf of the Secretary  of  State,  Mr  Richards  relied  upon  the
    grounds of appeal upon which he expanded in his oral submissions.

12. First, he submitted that the judge had failed  properly  to  apply  the
    civil  standard  of  balance  of  probabilities  in  finding   in   the
    appellant's favour, first in relation to SB's HIV status in the absence
    of a doctor's letter corroborating  that  diagnosis,  and  secondly  in
    relation to the difficulties that SB would face in securing a visa  and
    living in China as a result  of  his  HIV  status  in  the  absence  of
    "independent, corroboratory evidence".

13. Secondly, Mr Richards submitted that the judge's decision under  Art  8
    was inadequately reasoned.  Mr Richards submitted that  the  judge  had
    failed properly  to  have  regard  to  s.117B(1)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as inserted by s.19 of the Immigration
    Act 2014) that the maintenance of effective immigration control was  in
    the public interest.

14. Thirdly, based on the grounds, it was submitted that the judge had also
    failed to give any reasons for concluding that the appellant could  not
    return to China and apply for entry clearance.

Discussion

15. Dealing first with Mr Richards' first Ground, SB gave evidence  to  the
    judge, which is set out at para  12  of  his  determination,  that  his
    doctor was unwilling to write a letter concerning his medical condition
    although he could be contacted by telephone.  The judge expressed  some
    astonishment that a doctor would not write a  letter  to  support  SB's
    medical condition.  SB told me that, in fact, he now had a letter  from
    a nurse (which he showed  me)  confirming  his  diagnosis.   That  was,
    however, not before the judge.

16. Whilst it might be common to have supporting  medical  evidence,  as  a
    matter of law such evidence is not essential.  A judge has to apply the
    civil  standard  of  proof  and  determine  whether  on  a  balance  of
    probabilities an appellant has established his or her claim,  including
    any necessary facts to that end.  Here, the judge heard  evidence  from
    both SB and the appellant and he found them to  be  credible  witnesses
    and accepted their evidence.  The evidence of both of them was that  SB
    was HIV positive; he had been dismissed from his job in Abu  Dhabi  and
    arrested and deported as a result of his  HIV  status.   The  appellant
    gave evidence concerning her own status and that of her  son  and  that
    she was being tested.  In addition, SB  gave  evidence  of  medication,
    Atripal 500mg, which he was prescribed for his  HIV  condition.   There
    was no evidence before the judge, and none was suggested to  me  by  Mr
    Richards, that ran counter to the evidence given by the  appellant  and
    SB.  The assessment of their evidence was quintessentially a matter for
    the judge having heard them give evidence.  In the absence of any basis
    for doubting the veracity of their  evidence,  the  judge  was,  in  my
    judgment, entitled to accept what he was being told, namely that SB was
    HIV positive even in the absence of supporting medical evidence  -  for
    which, of course, SB gave an explanation.

17. The judge was, therefore, entitled to find that SB was HIV positive.

18. In relation to the difficulties which SB would face  in  travelling  to
    and remaining in China, he gave evidence that he had looked into living
    in China and that he would be unable to obtain a visa given his medical
    condition (see para 11 of the determination).  But  that  was  not  the
    only evidence before the judge concerning the difficulties faced by  an
    HIV positive individual in travelling to  and  living  in  China.   The
    judge referred to the evidence at  para  15  of  his  determination  as
    follows:

         "15. ... I have taken into consideration the  written  evidence  of
             the  appellant's  friends  and  family.   I  also  take   into
             consideration that it would not be easy for the  appellant  to
             remain in china and receive adequate medical attention for his
             HIV.  The respondent's document China from  Gov.UK  refers  to
             staying longer than 6 months.  It states 'If you are  entering
             China for employment, study or private  purposes  for  a  stay
             over six months, you must produce a health certificate,  which
             includes a blood  test  for  HIV,  legalised  by  the  Chinese
             Embassy'.  A document entitled 'UK Coalition' produced, states
             although  the  Chinese  government  issued  a  press   release
             claiming  they  would  no  longer  discriminate  against   HIV
             positive individuals the practice of issuing  visas  to  folks
             with HIV is something entirely different.  Unfortunately there
             is no date on the document.  The printout is dated April 2014.
              Others documents produced clearly show that  [SB]  will  have
             difficulty working and living in China permanently."

19. At the hearing I was not taken to the background evidence relied  upon.
    Although, SB informed me that the guidance was, so far as he  was  able
    to tell, the same today.  There are a number of documents in the bundle
    which were before the First-tier Tribunal and which clearly demonstrate
    difficulties for individuals travelling to and, in  particular,  living
    in China when they are HIV positive.

20. The document to  which  I  have  already  referred  states  that:   "No
    restriction for people with HIV/Aids for stays of up  to  six  months".
    But then goes on to say:  "HIV test required for work  and  study  visa
    applications for more than six months."

21. The document goes on to state that:

         "China no longer restricts tourists living with HIV  from  visiting
         the country, but  will  not  issue  them  with  residence  permits.
         Please verify the restrictions with the  Embassy  of  the  People's
         Republic of China before you travel.

         According to the website of the Chinese Embassy in Switzerland,  an
         HIV test is required when applying for a work  or  study  visa  for
         more than six months.  We are receiving reports from  people  being
         rejected work visa due to their HIV status."

22. Although those provisions appear to differentiate between those wishing
    to work and stay for more than six months and others, the document also
    provides support for the view that admission itself may be problematic.
     So, the document states:

         "The website of the Chinese Embassy  in  the  United  States  still
         lists  HIV  infection  as  a  ground   for   non-admission.    This
         information is outdated.

         We are receiving many enquiries from China visitor applicants.   In
         many cases, people seem to be confronted with outdated  visa  forms
         still asking for HIV status.  If confronted with such a visa  form,
         it is important that applicants do not admit their status."

23. That warning appears to be based on the fact that  a  person  admitting
    their HIV status may have difficulties with  admission.   The  document
    continues:

         "If travelling to China on a tourist visa  or  short-term  business
         trip:  do not declare your status on  the  visa  application  form.
         Historically, people declaring their status  truthfully  have  been
         denied entry."

24. In his submissions, Mr Richards did not take  me  to  any  evidence  to
    suggest that SB's HIV status would be irrelevant or ignored, even on  a
    short visit to China.  But, the evidence  clearly  supported  the  view
    that SB's HIV status would prevent  him  settling  in  China  with  the
    appellant and (if he travelled with her) their son.

25. It was, in my judgment, open to the judge on this evidence to  conclude
    in paragraph 21 that there would be "very significant obstacles" to  SB
    integrating into China because of  his  HIV  status.   Nothing  in  the
    evidence contradicts that and, taken together with SB's  own  evidence,
    it was entirely open to the judge to make that factual finding.

26. Consequently, I reject Ground 1.

27. Turning now to Ground 2, although the judge's reasoning  is  relatively
    brief it was, in my judgment, adequate and sufficient  to  justify  his
    finding that the appellant's removal would be disproportionate.

28. The judge was clearly alive to s.117B of the 2002 Act.  In para  19  of
    his determination, which is set out above, he  specifically  refers  to
    the fact that the appellant would  not  be  a  burden  on  the  British
    taxpayer and would have no difficulty in integrating into society which
    must be a reference to s.117B(2).  At para 18, the judge sets  out  the
    five-stage test in Razgar including the legitimate  aims  at  stage  4.
    Whilst the judge could, perhaps, have more explicitly referred  to  the
    requirement in s.117B(1) that the "maintenance of effective immigration
    control is in the public interest", reading the  judge's  determination
    as a whole, I am unable to say that this experienced  judge  failed  to
    have regard to that obvious aspect of the public  interest  engaged  in
    this appeal.

29. The Judge's assessment of proportionality  was  not,  in  my  judgment,
    inadequate and flawed and I reject Ground 2.

30. I turn now to Ground 3.

31. Having considered the best interests  of  the  appellant's  child,  the
    judge was entitled,  in  my  view,  to  conclude  at  para  21  of  his
    determination, that it would not be reasonable to "split the family" so
    that the appellant lived in China and SB  in  the  UK  with  their  son
    living with one or other of them.  The grounds  do  not,  in  my  view,
    specifically challenge that finding which in  any  event  was  properly
    open to the judge on the evidence.  Instead, it is said that the  judge
    failed to give any reason for stating that:

         "It would not be reasonable to expect the appellant  to  return  to
         China to make an application to settle in this country."

32. It is not clear to what extent the Secretary of State relied upon  this
    point before  the  judge.   There  was,  however,  as  I  have  already
    indicated, evidence showing  potential  difficulty  for  the  appellant
    being accompanied by SB even for a visit including one in order for her
    to obtain entry clearance.   The  judge  was  clearly  aware  that  the
    appellant could not succeed under the Immigration Rules because she was
    in the UK with leave only as a visitor.   In  criticising  the  judge's
    finding that the appellant could not reasonably be expected  to  return
    to China to obtain entry clearance, the grounds do not assert any "good
    reason" apart, implicitly,  from  the  fact  that  entry  clearance  is
    generally  required  in  situations  such  as  the  appellant's.    The
    appellant was, of course, lawfully in the UK.  Apart,  therefore,  from
    merely requiring procedural  compliance,  I  fail  to  see  what  "good
    reason" would justify a conclusion that it was proportionate to  expect
    the appellant to seek entry clearance given the other positive findings
    concerning the appellant's relationship and her circumstances including
    her young child and immigration status.  In  the  absence  of  a  "good
    reason", requiring an individual merely to comply with  the  procedural
    requirement of seeking entry clearance is not  justified  (see  SSHD  v
    Treebhowan and SSHD v Hayat [2013] EWCA Civ  1054  at  [30(b)]  and  MA
    (Pakistan) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 953 at [9]).

33. Consequently, I do not accept Ground 3: despite the brief reasoning  of
    the Judge, his conclusion was inevitable.

Decision

34. For these reasons, I am  satisfied  that  it  was  open  to  the  judge
    properly to conclude that the appellant's removal (whether  permanently
    or temporarily in order to obtain entry clearance) was disproportionate
    and to find that the Secretary of State's decision breached  Art  8  of
    the ECHR.

35. Thus, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the  appellant's
    appeal under Art 8 did not involve the making of a  material  error  of
    law.  The decision stands.

36. Accordingly, the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.

37. No anonymity order was sought.

                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The judge made a fee order in the sum of �140 which, in  the  circumstances,
I consider to be the appropriate fee order also.

                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal



This determination has been amended on 12 June 2015 under  rule  42  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended)  to
include an anonymity order and, as necessary, to anonymise the text  of  the
determination.

                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
