
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40587/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 February 2015                           |On 9 March 2015               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Mr Mohammed Jahangir Alam
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No Appearance

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Greasley promulgated  on  21  November
    2014.  The appellant is a male Bangladeshi born on 7 January 1980.   He
    came to the UK for the first time on 7 June 2011 with leave to enter as
    a Tier 4 (General) Student from 15 May 2011  to  12  April  2013.   The
    present application, the decision in relation to which  stimulated  the
    present set of appeal proceedings, was an application for further leave
    to remain made on 12 April 2013 under the points-based scheme, again as
    a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.  This resulted in a refusal by  the
    Secretary of State on 20 September 2013 when she pointed out  that  the
    appellant failed to qualify under the points-based  scheme  because  he
    did not achieve the necessary number  of  points  for  certain  of  the
    required attributes.

2.   The appellant subsequently appealed that decision and the  matter  came
    before Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Greasley.   Judge  Greasley
    allowed the appeal solely under Article 8 of the European Convention on
    Human Rights.

Consideration of the merits

3.   It seems that the Immigration Judge heard argument at  the  hearing  as
    to the need to bear in mind the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules
    before reaching his decision. However, he does not appear to have  gone
    on and considered those requirements in the context of the case  before
    him.  His decision gives the impression that he had free discretion  to
    allow the appeal on the basis of Article 8 of the  European  Convention
    without regard to the appellant's failure to meet the  requirements  of
    those rules.  The  correct  approach,  as  has  been  explained  by  Ms
    Isherwood during the course of the hearing before me, is  contained  in
    recent case law. In particular, I was referred to  the  case  of  Patel
    [2012] UKSC 0207 and the case of Oludoyi [2014] UKUT 539, a decision of
    this tribunal in a judicial review  application.  In  the  latter  case
    Judge Gill pointed out, at paragraph 20, that the  case  law  in  cases
    such as Nagre or Gulshan does not lay down  an  additional  test  which
    must be surmounted before Article 8 may be relied upon but he  suggests
    that in every case where an applicant is trying to remain in the UK  on
    a basis not covered by the Rules the onus is on him  to  show  why  the
    Immigration Rules are not met and why there was a need to go beyond the
    Rules and examine the matter under Article 8 of the European Convention
    on Human Rights.  Judge Gill went on to explain that if there were some
    feature which was adequately considered under  the  Immigration  Rules,
    but which could not on any view lead to an Article 8 claim  succeeding,
    there is no need to go any further. But that does not mean  that  there
    is an additional threshold which must be surmounted.   The  authorities
    say no more than each case has to be considered in its context but that
    the context requires considering the requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

4.   The present appeal was listed for hearing on 27 January  2015.   It  is
    the respondent's appeal against that decision to allow the appeal under
    Article 8.  The grounds of appeal are extensive and they make a  number
    of points that have already been summarised.  They came before Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal Osborne on 21 January when he found the grounds
    to be at least arguable.  He pointed out in his  decision  in  granting
    permission to appeal that the correct approach is contained  in  recent
    case law.  He also referred to the case of  MM  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  985,
    where the court rejected the notion that foreign  nationals  coming  to
    the UK to settle could avoid the minimum income threshold  requirements
    of the in-country sponsor. First -tier Tribunal Judge Osborne made  the
    further  valid  point  that  the  new  Part  5A  of  the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 also required the Immigration Judge  to
    consider certain statutory requirements including the  public  interest
    in avoiding  unlimited  immigration  into  the  UK  and  balancing  the
    economic well-being of the UK against an individual's right to enjoy  a
    private or family life.

5.   On 10 January 2015 the appellant's solicitors indicated that  they  did
    not intend to attend the hearing before  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  the
    appellant would not be represented therefore.  The Secretary of State's
    cogent grounds of  appeal,  which  have  been  properly  argued  by  Ms
    Isherwood, clearly demonstrate a material error of law in the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal in the approach to  Article  8  for  reasons
    that will be clear from the discussion above.  I have therefore decided
    to allow the Secretary of State's appeal against the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and to remake the  decision.   Since  there  is  no
    application before me to adduce any fresh evidence I will do so on  the
    existing evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.  There  is  no  cross
    appeal against the refusal of the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  allow  the
    appeal under the Immigration Rules. Having regard to  the  requirements
    of those Rules and bearing in mind that the appellant has only been  in
    the UK since June 2011 there is no proper basis upon  which  this  case
    can succeed solely under Article 8 outside the Immigration  Rules.  The
    Immigration Judge found that the appellant had formed  a  private  life
    "in relation to (the appellant's) studies" but provided  no  detail  to
    support this conclusion.  The  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  baldly  asserted  that  the  appellant's  removal  would   be
    incompatible with his human rights but in  truth  the  appellant  could
    continue his private life in Bangladesh where he has spent most of  his
    life. Accordingly, I substitute the decision of this Tribunal which  is
    to dismiss the appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary
    of State to refuse further leave to remain.

Notice of Decision

I find that there was a material error of law in the decision of the  First-
tier Tribunal. The appeal by the Secretary of State is  allowed.  The  Upper
Tribunal will re-make that decision, which is  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State  to  refuse  further
leave to remain.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury
