
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40094/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 December 2015                  |On 5 January 2016                    |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                            HAMID MANZOOR ABBASI
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr A. Gondal, instructed by Berkshire Law Chamber
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal arises from a decision by  the  respondent  to  refuse  the
    appellant's application for indefinite leave to remain on the basis  of
    length of  residence.  The  ensuing  appeal  was  heard  by  First-tier
    Tribunal ("FtT") Judge Hembrough who, in a decision promulgated  on  21
    April 2015, dismissed the appeal under both the Immigration  Rules  and
    Article 8 ECHR.

 2. The factual background, as accepted by the FtT, is that the  appellant,
    who is a citizen of Pakistan born on 9 July 1949, came  to  the  UK  in
    1974 as a visitor and thereafter used a false name to obtain a national
    insurance  number.  He  worked  unlawfully  for  several  years  before
    returning to Pakistan. He then visited the  UK  on  several  occasions,
    using his real name. On 11 August 1989 he entered the UK as  a  visitor
    using his real name and began working again under the  false  name  and
    national insurance number he had used previously. He  has  remained  in
    the UK continuously since then. Between 1989 and  1993  he  worked  but
    since 1993 has not done so and has been claiming benefits. He has  had,
    since 1993, disabilities that prevent him working,  most  significantly
    vision problems, having lost one eye and suffered deterioration in  the
    other.

 3. The respondent did not accept the appellant and his alias were the same
    person and rejected the application on the basis that the appellant was
    unable to demonstrate continuous residence for the requisite period.

Decision of FtT

 4. The FtT considered the appellant to be a credible witness and  accepted
    his evidence that he and the alias were the same person  such  that  he
    had been in the UK for several years in the 1970s and then continuously
    since 1989.  The  FtT  found  that  the  appellant  could  not  satisfy
    paragraph 276B of  the  Immigration  Rules  because  he  had  not  been
    lawfully resident in the UK for ten years. The  judge  then  turned  to
    Paragraph 276ADE.

 5. Paragraph 276ADE states in relevant part:

         276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
         remain on the grounds of private life in the UK  are  that  at  the
         date of application, the applicant:

             (i)  does not fall for refusal under any  of  the  grounds  in
             Section S-LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. in Appendix FM;
             and

             (ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain  on  the
             grounds of private life in the UK; and

             (iii)    has lived continuously in the  UK  for  at  least  20
             years (discounting any period of imprisonment);

    The relevant paragraphs under Section S-LTR in Appendix FM stipulate:

         S-LTR.1.1. The applicant will be refused limited leave to remain on
         grounds of suitability if any  of  paragraphs  S-LTR.1.2.  to  1.7.
         apply.

         ...

         S-LTR.1.6. The presence of the applicant in the UK is not conducive
         to the public good because  their  conduct  (including  convictions
         which do not fall within paragraphs S-LTR.1.3. to 1.5.), character,
         associations, or other reasons, make it undesirable to  allow  them
         to remain in the UK.

 6. The FtT found that the appellant met the 20 years continuous  residence
    requirement under Paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) but that he fell for refusal
    under S-LTR 1.6. The  FtT's  reason  for  this  finding  was  that  the
    appellant had, for over twenty years, been in receipt of  public  funds
    in the form of Disability Living Allowance, Housing Benefit and Council
    Tax Benefit to which he was not  entitled  and  which  he  obtained  by
    deception. The FtT also commented that the appellant's bank  statements
    showed he had been using some of the  public  funds  for  gambling.  In
    reaching its decision  the  FtT  referred  to,  and  distinguished,  ZH
    (Bangladesh) v SSHD [2009] EWCA] Civ 9 where the Court of Appeal  found
    that working illegally and evading detection (including through the use
    of a false identity)  should  not  be  a  factor  counting  against  an
    appellant who was seeking leave under the 14 year continuous  residence
    test then in force. The FtT stated, at paragraph [37], that it did  not
    consider working illegally can be equated to defrauding  the  DWP  (and
    the British taxpayer) out of thousands of pounds in public funds.

 7. The FtT briefly considered the  appeal  under  Article  8  outside  the
    Rules. It accepted that the appellant had established  a  private  life
    but found that despite his age, poor health and  length  of  residence,
    having regard to Section 117A-D of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act  2002  ("the  2002  Act"),  removal  to  Pakistan  would  be
    proportionate.

Grounds of appeal

 8. The grounds of appeal are divided into two parts. The opening paragraph
    of the grounds states: "Grounds B-I are written by counsel in  response
    to the FtT's decision to refuse permission. Grounds J-O are written  by
    the appellant"

 9. Grounds J-O, which are said to be written by the appellant rather  than
    Counsel (although which are written in the same style as grounds  B-I),
    raise the issue of whether the appellant received  a  fair  trial.  The
    appellant submits that he was essentially prevented from taking part in
    the hearing because the judge had made up his mind before  hearing  any
    evidence. The grounds state that when the judge entered the  court  the
    first thing he said was "Good morning. Do you know that you  have  been
    claiming benefits illegally and you could be prosecuted for  this"  and
    that he said to the Home  Office  representative  "I'm  sure  you  will
    notify the relevant authorities." The grounds also state that the judge
    told the appellant he sat on the Benefits Tribunal.

10. Grounds B-I argue, in sum, that:

         a.   the FtT failed to take into consideration that  the  appellant
         would be destitute if returned to Pakistan as he would be unable to
         work and would not have accommodation or support, and would face an
         early death.

         b.   the FtT failed to recognise  the  extent  of  the  appellant's
         private life in the UK and that he had spent a total of 30 years in
         the UK

         c.   the FtT erred in its consideration of S-LTR  1.6,  by  finding
         the appellant opted to claim benefits and could  have  returned  to
         Pakistan when his medical condition was such that he had no  choice
         and remained in the UK out of necessity to survive.

11. Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal on the following
    basis:

         "Given that the point concerning the appellant's  conduct  was  not
         raised or relied upon by the Secretary of  State  in  the  decision
         letter, it is arguable that it may have given rise to unfairness to
         amount to an error of law."

Consideration

12. The appellant alleges that at the commencement of the hearing FtT Judge
    Hembrough told him  that  he  was  liable  to  be  prosecuted  and  the
    respondent should notify the authorities. A  comment  of  this  nature,
    stated in way described by the appellant, and made at the outset of the
    hearing before any evidence had been heard, may well have resulted in a
    fair minded observer concluding there was a  real  possibility  of  the
    tribunal being biased such  that  an  issue  of  procedural  unfairness
    affecting the appellant's right to a fair  hearing  could  be  said  to
    arise.

13.  However,  no  evidence  has  been  put  forward  to  substantiate  the
    allegation. The appellant was represented in the FtT  (but  not  before
    me) by Mr Rahman.  Mr  Rahman  also  drafted  the  grounds  of  appeal.
    However, Mr Rahman did not prepare a witness statement attesting to the
    purported statement by the  judge.  On  the  contrary,  in  an  unusual
    approach to drafting grounds of appeal, he seems to have  disassociated
    himself from the allegations by explicitly stating in the grounds  that
    those pertaining to the allegations of impropriety were not drafted  by
    him.

14. I was unable to glean any help from a review of the judge's  record  of
    proceedings or otherwise from the file. I asked Mr Melvin if there were
    any notes or records on his file relating to the conduct of  the  judge
    and he told me there were none.

15. It is apparent from the decision that the judge  raised  the  issue  of
    benefits and questioned the appellant about this (at paragraph [19] the
    judge stated that the appellant said he had been in receipt of benefits
    to which he was not entitled  "in  response  to  my  question  in  that
    regard"). It also appears that the  judge  may  have  raised  with  the
    appellant that he was liable to prosecution  and  with  the  respondent
    that the appellant should be reported  (at  paragraph  [34]  the  judge
    stated "he accepted  that  his  conduct  might  render  him  liable  to
    prosecution and I trust that the  respondent  will  make  the  relevant
    authorities aware of the circumstances  of  this  case  in  order  that
    appropriate consideration can be given to such a course").

16. Reading the decision and appellant's grounds of appeal as a whole,  and
    considering the matter in the round, it is apparent that the  appellant
    was  upset  and  concerned  by  the  issue  of  his  claiming  benefits
    unlawfully being considered by the Tribunal and that he felt the  judge
    was biased against him because he  focused  on,  and  clearly  attached
    significant weight to, this issue. However, there was nothing  improper
    about the judge raising the matter or its implications, as described in
    paragraphs [19] and [34] of the decision. Whilst I  would  consider  it
    improper for a judge to tell an appellant he was liable for prosecution
    and should be notified to the authorities before hearing any  evidence,
    I am not satisfied, based on the evidence before me, that this is  what
    occurred and I find that the  challenge  based  on  apparent  bias  and
    unfairness is unable to succeed.

17. A further issue of fairness, that was raised in the grant of permission
    to appeal and expanded on by Mr Gondal before me, was  that  the  FtT's
    decision was based on an issue that was not raised by  the  respondent.
    The respondent refused the appellant's application for leave to  remain
    on the basis he did not satisfy Paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) without making
    any reference to  the  requirements  under  S-LTR.  The  FtT,  however,
    dismissed the appeal under S-LTR 1.6.

18. Mr Melvin argued that it cannot realistically be argued that  it  would
    come as a surprise to the appellant that his  conduct  with  regard  to
    benefits would be at issue before the FtT. Nor can it  be  regarded  as
    unfair for a judge to apply the relevant Immigration Rules.

19. I agree with Mr Melvin. The appellant's case before the FtT was that he
    satisfied the requirements for  leave  to  remain  on  the  grounds  of
    private life under  Paragraph  276ADE(1).  For  him  to  succeed  under
    276ADE(1) he needed to satisfy  both  276ADE(1)(i)  (requiring  certain
    suitability conditions to be met including that specified in S-LTR 1.6)
    and 276ADE(1)(iii) (requiring him to have lived continuously in the  UK
    for 20 years).

20. The respondent found the  appellant  did  not  satisfy  276ADE(1)(iii).
    Having  so  found,  it  was  not  necessary  to  go  on   to   consider
    276ADE(1)(i). However, the FtT found that  the  appellant  did  satisfy
    276ADE(1)(iii). This meant that it was required to go  on  to  consider
    276ADE(1)(i). There is no error of law in the judge proceeding to do so
    (on the contrary, to not consider 276ADE(1)(i) would have been an error
    of law). Nor was there unfairness to the appellant whose representative
    should have appreciated that if the appellant succeeded in his argument
    about 276ADE(1)(iii) the judge would need to consider 276ADE(1)(i)  and
    that such consideration would take into account the unlawful receipt of
    benefits by the appellant.

21. I now turn to the appellant's argument  that  S-LTR1.6  was  misapplied
    because the FtT failed to recognise that the appellant stopped  working
    and claimed benefits because of medical necessity and not by choice.

22. The issue for the FtT was whether, under S-LTR1.6, the presence of  the
    appellant in the UK is not conducive to the public good  such  that  it
    would be undesirable to allow him to remain in the UK given he has been
    in receipt of benefits unlawfully, through use of an alias,  for  about
    20 years.

23. Mr Gondal sought to rely on ZH (Bangladesh) to  argue  that  the  judge
    took too strict an approach to S-LTR 1.6 which effectively defeated the
    purpose of 276ADE. In ZH (Bangladesh), the appellant entered the UK  on
    a visitor's visa and thereafter worked unlawfully (without  a  National
    Insurance Number and not paying tax or National Insurance). He also, on
    one occasion, used an alias. The Court of Appeal found that the use  of
    a false identity and working illegally (including not paying  tax)  was
    not a sufficient basis to deny  the  appellant's  application  as  that
    would defeat the purpose of the rule, which was to give someone who has
    met the  length  of  residence  requirement,  even  whilst  in  the  UK
    unlawfully, a right to remain so long as it was not undesirable in  the
    public interest for them to do so.

24. The present case is distinguishable from ZH Bangladesh. In contrast  to
    that case, where the appellant worked whilst in  the  UK  and  used  an
    alias to avoid detection by the immigration authorities, the  appellant
    in this case has for 20 years used an alias to access benefits to which
    he is not entitled. That is not the same conduct as was at issue in  ZH
    Bangladesh.

25. It may be, as Mr Gondall argues, that the  appellant  genuinely  needed
    the benefits  because  he  was  incapable  of  working  and  took  them
    reluctantly and only as a matter of necessity. But that does not change
    the fact that he was not entitled to the benefits,  used  deception  to
    obtain them, and that his conduct has been at the expense  of  the  tax
    payer. Even if the appellant's account as to why he was in  receipt  of
    benefits is accepted in full the FtT was  entitled  to  find  that  his
    conduct constituted a  sufficient  basis  to  refuse  leave  under  the
    suitability requirement specified in S-LTR 1.6. The FtT  did  not  err,
    therefore, in finding that the appellant did not satisfy 276ADE.

26. Nor has the FtT erred in its approach to, and finding  in  respect  of,
    Article  8  of  the  ECHR  outside  the  Rules.    In   assessing   the
    proportionality  of  his  removal,  the  FtT  took  into  account   the
    appellant's length of residence in the UK, state of health and age  but
    found that these were not sufficient, when weighed against  the  public
    interest, given in particular his unlawful receipt of public  benefits,
    to tip the scales in his favour.

27. The appellant argues that the FtT failed to take into account  that  he
    would be destitute in Pakistan, but it is apparent  from  the  decision
    that the FtT  has  had  regard  to  the  appellant's  circumstances  in
    Pakistan. The FtT made the findings at paragraph [43] that there was no
    evidence before the tribunal that the  appellant  would  be  unable  to
    access medical treatment in Pakistan  and  that  he  has  a  sister  in
    Pakistan.  It  is  clear,  in  any  event,  that  the  FtT's  view   on
    proportionality is that the appellant's removal from the UK  would  not
    be disproportionate notwithstanding the difficulties  he  may  face  in
    Pakistan because of the strength of the public interest  considerations
    favouring removal.

28. Although not referred to explicitly in the decision, it is apparent the
    FtT had in mind, when considering the public interest,  paragraphs (1),
    (3) and (5) of Section 117B of the2002 Act. Taking these into  account,
    the FtT was entitled to conclude when weighing the  proportionality  of
    the appellant's removal  that  the  facts  and  considerations  on  the
    appellant's  side  of  the  scales,  although  significant,  were   not
    sufficient to outweigh the public interest and accordingly I find  that
    the FtT has not made an error of law.

Decision

 a. The appeal is dismissed.

 b. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
    material error of law and shall stand.

 c. No anonymity order is made.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 30 December 2015              |

