
IAC-AH-pc-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40250/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30th April 2015                   |On 04th  June 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                             Miss Purnima Gurung
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M. Puar, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P. Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Nepal born  on  6th  January  1985.   She
    appealed against a decision of  the  Respondent  dated  30th  September
    2014.  That decision was to  refuse  her  indefinite  leave  to  remain
    outside of the Immigration Rules.  The  application  was  made  on  the
    basis that refusal of the  application  would  place  this  country  in
    breach of its obligations under Article 8 (right to respect for private
    and family life) of  the  Human  Rights  Convention.   Her  appeal  was
    allowed at first instance by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Kirvan
    sitting at Birmingham on 17th December 2014.   The  Respondent  appeals
    with leave against that decision and the matter therefore comes  before
    me as an appeal by  the  Respondent.   Nevertheless  for  the  sake  of
    convenience I shall continue to refer to the parties as they were known
    at first instance.

2.   The Appellant entered the United Kingdom  on  24th  October  2009  with
    leave as a Tier  4  (General)  Student  valid  until  31st  July  2011.
    Shortly before that leave was due to expire the Appellant submitted  an
    application for leave to remain outside of the Rules but  was  refused.
    Her appeal against that decision was  heard  on  26th  April  2012  but
    dismissed by Immigration Judge Steer on 14th May 2012.  On 7th February
    2013 the Appellant's representatives wrote to the Respondent asking for
    the Appellant's case to be reviewed in the light of the case of  Gurung
    & Others [2013] EWCA Civ 8.

3.   The Appellant's father Mr Kharka Bahadur Gurung  was  a  former  Gurkha
    soldier who served in the British Army  for  sixteen  years  from  1965
    until November 1981 when he retired  with  exemplary  service  to  Hong
    Kong.  In 1981 the Appellant's father was not permitted  to  settle  in
    the United Kingdom because at that time Gurkhas who had served  in  the
    British Army were not given  the  same  rights  as  other  foreign  and
    Commonwealth nationals serving  with  the  British  forces.   When  her
    father came to leave the British Army he was told that he would have to
    return to Nepal.  Upon return he could not find work and went to Brunei
    to work as a  member  of  the  Gurkha  Reserve  for  nine  years  until
    retirement.

4.   The Appellant's father died in 2003 but the  Appellant's  mother  as  a
    result of receiving his British Army  pension  funded  the  Appellant's
    education.  The Appellant studied in Nepal becoming a staff  nurse  and
    applied for and obtained a student visa to further study in the  United
    Kingdom.  Whilst she was in the United Kingdom the  Appellant's  mother
    applied for and obtained settlement as the  widow  of  a  Gurkha.   The
    Appellant's mother arrived in this country on 4th November 2010 and the
    two have been supporting each other since.

The Refusal

5.   When the appeal was heard by Judge Steer in 2012 the Judge found  there
    was family life between the Appellant and her mother but  this  related
    solely to financial dependency.  She was not satisfied of the  mother's
    claimed dependency on the  Appellant  nor  was  she  satisfied  of  the
    Appellant's claimed dependency on her  mother  beyond  finance.   Judge
    Steer found that when the Appellant came to the United Kingdom she  did
    not intend to return to Nepal and live with her mother,  the  intention
    was to obtain the necessary qualifications and work as a nurse in  this
    country.  The Appellant was registered as a nurse in Nepal and had  two
    other siblings there. The Appellant's presence in  the  United  Kingdom
    was on a limited basis as a student. Judge Steer found that it would be
    proportionate for the Appellant to return to  Nepal  even  taking  into
    consideration the issue of the historical wrong.

6.   The Respondent refused the Appellant's application dated  7th  February
    2013 relying on the decision of Judge Steer.  Unlike  in  the  case  of
    Ghising [2013] UKUT 567 the Appellant could not show  that  her  father
    wished to settled in the United Kingdom.  The  Appellant's  mother  had
    stated that her  late  husband  wanted  to  stay  in  Hong  Kong.   The
    Appellant could not show emotional dependency on her mother beyond that
    of normal emotional ties.  The Appellant could not bring herself within
    Appendix FM, she neither had a partner nor a  child  in  this  country.
    She could not bring herself within paragraph 276ADE of the  Immigration
    Rules as she had not been resident here  for  at  least  twenty  years.
    There were no serious obstacles to the Appellant's  reintegration  into
    Nepal.  She could speak the language and still had family  there.   She
    had not severed all ties.  The Appellant had spent her formative  years
    in Nepal and had only come to the United  Kingdom  with  the  knowledge
    that  she  had  leave  to  remain  on  a  temporary  basis.   That  the
    Appellant's mother had been granted settlement as the widow of a former
    Gurkha was not considered a sufficient reason to justify further leave.

The Hearing at First Instance

7.   The Appellant argued that she  had  been  the  victim  of  an  historic
    injustice since if her father had been allowed to stay in Hong Kong  or
    the United Kingdom on his retirement he would  have  done  so  and  the
    Appellant would have been born with rights to settle in one or other or
    both territories.  Her mother's poor health and  her  father's  illness
    and death had brought the mother and daughter closer.

8.   In closing submissions to Judge Kirvan the  Presenting  Officer  stated
    that  since  Ghising  had  been  decided  Article  8   had   moved   on
    significantly.  Not only had Appendix FM been  introduced  but  so  had
    amendments to the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  by  the
    Immigration Act 2014.  The Appellant was  not  financially  independent
    and in assessing the proportionality exercise the provisions of Section
    117B counted against the Appellant.

9.   In her determination Judge Kirvan made clear that she  was  aware  that
    she had to  take  into  account  Section  117B  of  the  2002  Act,  in
    particular that it was in the public  interest  to  maintain  effective
    immigration control.  Little weight could be given to  the  Appellant's
    private life established whilst she had  no  leave  or  her  leave  was
    precarious.  The Judge did not allow the appeal under Article 8 on  the
    basis of the Appellant's private life.  Instead she allowed the  appeal
    on the basis of the family life between the Appellant  and  her  mother
    taking into account the case of Ghising.

10.  In Ghising it was held that the effect of the historic  wrong  was  not
    to reverse or otherwise alter the  burden  of  proof  that  applied  in
    Article 8 proportionality assessments.  When  an  Appellant  has  shown
    that there is a family/private  life  and  the  decision  made  by  the
    Respondent amounts to an interference with it the burden lies with  the
    Respondent to show that the decision to remove is proportionate.   What
    concerned the Court of Appeal in Gurung was not the burden of proof but
    rather the issue  of  weight  in  a  proportionality  assessment.   The
    historic  wrong  suffered  by  Gurkha  ex-servicemen  should  be  given
    substantial weight.  Where it is found that Article 8  is  engaged  and
    but for the historic wrong the Appellant would have been settled in the
    United Kingdom a long time  ago  this  will  ordinarily  determine  the
    outcome of the Article 8 proportionality assessment in  an  Appellant's
    favour where the  matters  relied  on  consist  solely  of  the  public
    interest in  maintaining  a  firm  immigration  policy.   Judge  Kirvan
    distinguished the decision of Judge Steer on the basis that at the time
    that Judge Steer heard the Appellant's appeal the weight given  to  the
    historic wrong was not as significant as other categories of Appellants
    e.g. of British Overseas Citizens.

11.  Although Judge Steer had given some weight to  the  historic  wrong  it
    was clear from Ghising that the weight that had to be given to  it  was
    substantial and it would ordinarily determine the outcome of an Article
    8 proportionality assessment in an Appellant's favour.  Judge Steer had
    found that family life was engaged and accepted  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant's mother that her husband the Appellant's father  would  have
    settled in the United Kingdom at the end of his Gurkha service  at  the
    end of 1981 had he been allowed to do so in which  case  the  Appellant
    would have been born in the  United  Kingdom.   There  was  a  lack  of
    medical evidence to support other aspects of the family life but  Judge
    Kirvan directed herself that she had to weigh in the balance the family
    life of the Appellant and her mother which they shared  in  the  United
    Kingdom against the public interest in effective  immigration  control.
    The decision of the Respondent rested primarily on the need to  enforce
    immigration policy.  Given the weight to be ascribed  to  the  historic
    wrong and given that there were no other factors which  might  tip  the
    scales against the Appellant  the  interference  with  the  Appellant's
    family life was disproportionate and the appeal was allowed.

The Onward Appeal

12.  The Respondent appealed against that decision arguing  that  the  Judge
    had failed to give adequate reasons for finding that  the  Respondent's
    decision was disproportionate.  Judge Steer had found that family  life
    was engaged on the basis of financial dependency only.   Since  Ghising
    primary legislation had been enacted by 117A and 117B of the  2002  Act
    not in force when Ghising was decided.  There was  no  evidence  before
    the Tribunal that the Appellant could speak English.  The Tribunal  had
    found that the Appellant's father would  have  settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom at the end of his Gurkha service in 1981 if he had been allowed
    to at that time when in fact the Appellant's own witness statement said
    that he had wanted to stay in Hong Kong.

13.  The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    Designated Judge Coates.  In granting permission to appeal he found the
    Respondent's grounds arguable.  The matter therefore came before me  to
    determine whether there was a material error  of  law  in  the  Judge's
    decision such that it fell to be set aside.  If there was then I  would
    have to proceed to rehear the appeal.  If there was not the decision at
    first instance would stand.

The Hearing Before Me

14.  For the Respondent it was argued that there had been a failure  by  the
    Judge to consider the public  interest  in  immigration  control  which
    Tribunals were directed to consider by the statute.   For the Appellant
    Counsel argued that there was evidence that the Appellant  could  speak
    English as she had given her evidence at first instance without use  of
    an interpreter.  The  Judge  had  had  regard  to  the  proportionality
    exercise  under  Section  117B,  explicitly  referring  to  it  in  the
    determination.  The Appellant had not said that her  father  wished  to
    live in Hong Kong, what she had said was  he  wished  to  live  in  the
    United Kingdom or Hong Kong.  It was the Appellant's mother's  evidence
    that he wished to live in the United  Kingdom.   As  the  wife  of  the
    deceased the Appellant's mother was in a much better position  to  know
    what her husband thought than the Appellant was.  It was reasonable for
    the Judge to prefer the evidence of the Appellant's mother.

15.  It made no material difference where the Appellant's father could  have
    settled down (if he had been allowed to) since if he had  been  allowed
    to settle in the United Kingdom the  Appellant  would  have  been  born
    there and  as  the  Appellant  was  born  in  1982  a  year  after  the
    Nationality Act 1981 came into force, if she had been born in Hong Kong
    she would have been a British Territories citizen. Once Hong  Kong  had
    passed under Chinese rule then by virtue of the Hong Kong Act 1997  she
    could apply for British  citizenship.   There  were  no  countervailing
    factors pursuant to the  case  of  Ghising  that  would  undermine  the
    historic injustice argument.  The provisions  of  Section  117A  and  B
    codified existing case law and highlighted what Judges had to take into
    account when carrying out the  proportionality  exercise  but  did  not
    affect the decision in this case. The Presenting Officer  indicated  he
    had nothing further to say in  reply.  At  the  end  of  submissions  I
    indicated that I would dismiss the  Respondent's  appeal  and  give  my
    reasons in writing which I do so now.

Findings

16.  The Appellant and her mother have a family life in  this  country.   If
    the Appellant is required to return to Nepal that family life  will  be
    interfered with.  The Respondent's argument is that the interference is
    pursuant to the legitimate aim of immigration  control  and  relies  on
    Section 117B(1).  The question is whether  the  interference  with  the
    Appellant  and  her  mother's  family  life  is  proportionate  to  the
    legitimate aim being pursued.  Section 117A and B set out  a  statutory
    framework  which  must  be  followed   by   Tribunals   assessing   the
    proportionality of interference with protected rights.  It  is  in  the
    public interest that persons who seek to remain in the  United  Kingdom
    are able to speak English which this Appellant can do.  It is  also  in
    the interests of the economic wellbeing  of  the  United  Kingdom  that
    persons seeking to  remain  should  be  financially  independent.   The
    Appellant has work experience as a nurse in Nepal and the  Judge  noted
    the  Appellant's  strong  desire  to  work   (paragraph   40   of   the
    determination).  Although therefore there was a financial dependency by
    the Appellant on her mother sufficient to enable there to be said to be
    family life over and above normal emotional  ties,  the  Appellant  did
    have an ability to work if permitted to do so and would  not  therefore
    be a burden on the tax payers.

17.  In short there were no particular statutory factors in this case  which
    weighed  heavily   against   the   Appellant   when   considering   the
    proportionality of interference outside the Immigration Rules. What was
    important to consider was the weight to be afforded to  the  fact  that
    the Appellant could not meet the Immigration Rules when weighed against
    the historic injustice argument that the Appellant was putting forward.
     As the higher courts have reminded the Tribunal significant weight has
    to be attached to the interests of immigration  control  and  that  has
    been clarified by the Court of Appeal in  the  recent  decision  of  SS
    (Congo).  Were it not for the argument  as  to  historic  injustice  it
    would be difficult to say that there was anything  on  the  Appellant's
    side which  outweighed  the  public  interest  in  the  enforcement  of
    immigration control given that the  Appellant  could  not  satisfy  the
    Immigration Rules.

18.  However the case did  not  stop  there  and  the  trial  Judge  had  to
    consider the issue of historic injustice.  Had  it  not  been  for  the
    policy in 1981 when the Appellant's father  retired  from  the  British
    Army that Gurkhas were not allowed to settle in the United Kingdom, the
    Appellant would have been born in this country and the situation  would
    now be very different in terms of her entitlement to  citizenship.   If
    the historic  wrong  argument  applied  in  this  case  it  would  have
    considerable weight and could as the Judge found outweigh the  argument
    that the Appellant was seeking leave to remain outside the Rules.

19.  The question was did the historic injustice argument apply?  For it  to
    apply the Appellant had to show on the balance of probabilities that it
    was more likely than not that her father would have chosen to remain in
    the United Kingdom.  The Judge heard evidence from both  the  Appellant
    and her mother and accepted the evidence of the Appellant's mother that
    the Appellant's late father had indicated that he did wish to remain in
    the United Kingdom if he could have done so.  It was a  matter  at  the
    end of the day for the Judge to  decide  what  evidence  she  chose  to
    accept.  Another Judge might have come to a  different  view  but  that
    does not mean that this Judge was wrong in law.  It  was  open  to  the
    Judge to prefer the evidence  of  the  Appellant's  mother  over  other
    matters and to accept that this  was  a  case  to  which  the  historic
    injustice argument would apply following the case  of  Ghising.   Given
    the indication in Ghising of the weight to be ascribed to the  historic
    injustice  argument  in  the  balancing  act  and  given  the  lack  of
    countervailing  factors,  (this  Appellant  does  not   have   a   poor
    immigration history and she has not been involved in  criminality),  it
    was open to the Judge to find as she did that the Respondent's decision
    was disproportionate in this case.  That being so there can be no error
    of law in the Judge's decision or in the assessment of proportionality.
     I therefore dismiss the Respondent's appeal.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold the  decision  to  allow  the  Appellant's  appeal
against the Respondent's decision to refuse leave.

Respondent's appeal dismissed.

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.



Signed this 2nd day of June 2015

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The Judge declined to make a fee award in this case due to the  lateness  of
important evidence which led the Judge to  the  decision  he  made.   I  see
nothing wrong in principle with the Judge's decision thereon and  I  do  not
disturb it.



Signed this 2nd day of June 2015

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft

