
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/40925/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 August 2015                    |On 27 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACOBS


                                   Between

                               mr ikhlaq awaiS
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Puar, Counsel instructed by N.C. Brothers & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal brought against the decision of Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Cheales who, in a determination promulgated on 23 January
    2015,  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the   respondent's
    decision of 22 August 2014 refusing to grant him leave to remain in the
    United Kingdom on the basis of his family life relationships.

Background

2.   The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, date of  birth  18  August  1986,
    arrived in the United Kingdom on  08  October  2011  as  the  dependent
    spouse of Ms  Bimish,  she  being  a  Tier  4  (General)  Student.  The
    appellant's leave to remain was curtailed so that it expired on 27 June
    212 after the college his spouse was attending lost  its  licence.  The
    appellant subsequently overstayed. In November 2012 the appellant  left
    Ms Bimish and their children and moved in with Ms  Munir  and  her  two
    children. On 19 December 2012 the appellant was arrested in relation to
    allegations of sexual offences and assault directed to his former wife.
    On 22 April 2013 the appellant received a 12 month suspended  sentence,
    a fine and a restraining order in relation  to  his  former  wife.  The
    appellant and his former wife were divorced in May 2014.

3.   The respondent made a decision to remove the  appellant  under  section
    10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999, his human rights claim being
    refused. Due to a lack of evidence the respondent was not satisfied the
    appellant and Ms Munir had been living together in a relationship  akin
    to marriage for a two year period prior to the date of his application.
    The respondent also rejected the appellant's claim to have  established
    a private life within the terms of paragraph 276ADE of the  immigration
    rules. The respondent gave brief consideration to factors  outside  the
    immigration rules but  was  not  satisfied  his  removal  would  breach
    Article 8.

Appeal before the First-tier Tribunal

4.   The appellant and Ms  Munir  gave  evidence,  both  written  and  oral,
    before the  First-tier  Tribunal.  A  number  of  documents  were  also
    produced relating to a property on Wesley Road, Reading,  including  an
    IS.96 Temporary Admission letter, a restraining  order  issued  against
    the appellant by the Berkshire  Magistrates  Court,  and  a  number  of
    utility bills.

5.   The Judge did not accept the appellant and Ms Munir were in  a  genuine
    relationship. The Judge noted several inconsistencies in  the  evidence
    between the appellant and Ms Munir. This included  discrepant  evidence
    relating to whether Ms Munir's children had any contact  with  her  ex-
    husband (the biological father of the children) and  the  distance  the
    families lived from each other in Pakistan, an  inconsistency  relating
    to whether they appellant had a  strong  circle  of  friends,  and  the
    omission of any mention in any of the statements  of  a  fear  of  ill-
    treatment from Ms Bimish's family in Pakistan, a point  that  had  been
    mentioned for the first time in oral evidence. The Judge also relied on
    the failure of any friends to attend the hearing and the absence of any
    evidence from Ms Munir's two children, who were ten  and  twelve  years
    old.

6.   The  Judge  indicated  that  he  took  account  of  the  correspondence
    addressed to both parties at the same address  but,  in  light  of  the
    inconsistencies identified, was not  satisfied  the  appellant  and  Ms
    Munir were in a genuine relationship.



The Grounds of Appeal

7.   The Grounds contended  that  the  Judge  failed  to  make  findings  on
    material matters, in particular the type of relationship the  appellant
    had with Ms Munir, failed to give adequate reasons  for  his  findings,
    and gave weight to immaterial  matters.  It  was  claimed  the  various
    inconsistencies relied on by the Judge did not directly go to the  core
    of the claimed relationship,  and  that  the  Judge  gave  insufficient
    consideration to the documentary evidence  said  to  be  indicative  of
    cohabitation and therefore a genuine relationship.

8.   In granting permission  to  appeal  the  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Chapman found it arguable that the Judge failed to provide reasons why,
    despite making  reference  to  correspondence  addressed  to  both  the
    appellant and Ms Munir at the  same  address,  she  did  not  find  the
    relationship genuine and subsisting.

Error of law

9.   At the commencement of Mr Tufans's submissions in reply to those of  Mr
    Puar, he indicated that he had  located  in  the  Home  Office  file  a
    'Criminal Visit History' document relating to visits by Ms Munir to the
    appellant when he was detained at  Colnbrook  IRC.  This  document  had
    never previously been disclosed to either the appellant or  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

10.  Having risen to consider  the  'Criminal  Visit  History'  document  we
    indicated to the parties on our  return  that  we  were  satisfied  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal was, by reasons of the previous non-
    disclose of this document, vitiated by material error of law.

11.  We are very grateful to Mr Tufan for  bringing  this  document  to  our
    attention.  He did so as part of his duty of candour to  the  Tribunal.
    We are satisfied that this document, which is prima facie reliable, was
    relevant to the assessment  of  the  genuineness  of  the  relationship
    between the appellant and Mrs Munir. The letter suggests that Ms  Munir
    regularly visited the appellant, and for relatively lengthy periods  on
    each occasion, when he was detained. The dates of attendance match  the
    dates in the various bus tickets provided by Mrs Munir  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. Although reference is made to Mrs Munir as  a  'friend',
    and we are mindful of the possibility that she may have visited in that
    capacity only, we are satisfied that a judge,  having  regard  to  this
    document and properly directing him or herself, may have been  entitled
    to conclude that the relationship was more intimate.

12.  We consequently find that there has been a  material  procedural  error
    of law. The Home Office Presenting Officer representing the  Respondent
    before the First-tier Tribunal failed in his or her duty of candour  or
    duty to co-operate with the Tribunal under  the  overriding  objective.
    This may have been inadvertent, but fairness requires that the relevant
    evidence of the visits should have been disclosed to the  appellant  at
    the hearing and brought to the Judge's attention.  Had  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had regard to this letter, we cannot safely say that  he
    would inevitably have still concluded that  the  relationship  was  not
    genuine.

13.  We are therefore minded to allow the appeal on  the  basis  that  there
    has been a material error and  to  remit  it  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to enable full consideration to be given to this evidence  and
    any other evidence that may be provided.  It is clear however that  the
    inconsistencies that occurred in the  First-tier  hearing  are  matters
    that  any  future  judge  is  going  to  take  into  consideration   in
    determining the appeal.  We therefore remit the appeal to a judge other
    than Judge Cheales.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of law.

The  appeal  is  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal   for   fresh
consideration in front of a Judge other than Judge Cheales.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed   Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

