
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40527/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Sheldon Court Birmingham               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 22nd September 2014                          |On 6th October 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                               sarfaraz nawaz
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss E Rutherford of Counsel instructed by Wornham &
Co
     Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a determination of Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Broe promulgated on 20th March 2014.

 2. The Appellant is a male citizen of Pakistan born 1st January  1985  who
    arrived in the United Kingdom as a student in February 2009.  His leave
    to remain expired on 20th June 2012 and he  overstayed  and  married  a
    British citizen.

 3. In June 2013 the Appellant applied for leave to  remain,  relying  upon
    Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention on  Human  Rights  (the  1950
    Convention) on the basis that he had  established  family  and  private
    life in the United Kingdom.  This application was refused on 9th August
    2013 with no right of appeal, as the Appellant did not have  any  leave
    to remain when he made  the  application.   The  Respondent  thereafter
    issued a decision to remove the Appellant from the United Kingdom dated
    16th September 2013, which carried a right of appeal, and the Appellant
    duly exercised that right of appeal.

 4. The appeal was heard by Judge Broe (the judge) on 24th  February  2014.
    The judge accepted that the Appellant was married to a British citizen,
    and that  the  relationship  is  genuine  and  subsisting.   The  judge
    dismissed the appeal with reference to EX.1.(b) of  Appendix   FM,  and
    went on to consider Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules,  and  also
    dismissed the appeal on that basis.

 5. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,
    and permission to  appeal  was  refused  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Levin on 1st May 2014.  The  application  for  permission  was
    renewed, relying on three grounds.  In summary it was firstly contended
    that the judge had failed to consider material matters, by  failing  to
    have proper regard to the rights of the Appellant's spouse as a British
    citizen.  Reliance was placed upon MM  [2013]  EWHC  1900  (Admin)  and
    Mansoor [2011] EWHC 832 (Admin).  It was contended that the  judge  had
    failed to pay proper regard to the rights of  the  Appellant's  spouse,
    who is British, in employment, and has close family in this country.

 6.  Secondly  it  was  contended  that  the  judge  had  made  a  material
    misdirection of law and/or failed to consider material matters.  It was
    submitted that the judge had failed to consider the principles set  out
    in Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40.

 7. Thirdly it was contended that the judge had  failed  to  make  adequate
    findings under Article 8 on a freestanding  basis.   It  was  contended
    that the judge had not  carried  out  a  comprehensive  proportionality
    consideration and had failed to conduct a proper balancing exercise.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds  in  the
    following terms;

      1) It is arguable that in the judge's assessment of EX.1  of  Appendix
         FM and Article 8 outside the Rules the judge failed to consider the
         nationality of  the  Appellant's  wife  as  a  British  citizen  in
         accordance with the decision of Sanade & Others (British children -
         Zambrano - Dereci) [2012] UKUT 00048 (IAC) or to consider  EX.1  in
         the light  of  the  principles  of  the  decision  of  Chikwamba  v
         Secretary of State [2008] UKHL 40.
      2) The grounds are arguable and I grant permission.

 9. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 contending that  the  grounds  amounted  to  a  disagreement  with
    findings made by the judge, and there was no error of law.

10. Directions were then issued making provision for there to be a  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal to decide  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    determination should be set aside.

The Appellant's Submissions

11. Miss Rutherford relied and expanded upon the grounds  contained  within
    the application for permission to appeal.  It was accepted  that  since
    the grounds had been prepared, the decision in MM had been the  subject
    of a successful appeal to the Court of Appeal,  but  nevertheless  Miss
    Rutherford argued that the judge had erred by not properly taking  into
    account the fact that the Appellant's spouse is a British citizen,  and
    Sanade indicated that it  was  not  appropriate  to  expect  a  British
    citizen to relocate outside the United Kingdom.

12. In relation to the Chikwamba principle, Miss Rutherford  accepted  that
    this may not lead to a  successful  appeal  without  more,  as  it  was
    accepted that were factors to be considered  such  as  the  Appellant's
    adverse immigration history, but the judge should have  considered  the
    principles.

13. In relation to the third ground, Miss  Rutherford  submitted  that  the
    judge had failed to make adequate findings and had not  carried  out  a
    proper proportionality assessment.

The Respondent's Submissions

14. Mr Smart relied upon the rule 24 response and submitted that the  judge
    had properly considered  the  status  of  the  Appellant's  spouse  and
    referred to her being settled in this country in paragraphs 18  and  33
    and which is why the judge had considered EX.1.(b).   I  was  asked  to
    note that Sanade had been decided prior to the  introduction  into  the
    Immigration Rules on 9th  July  2012,  of  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph
    276ADE.  Mr Smart submitted that the  decision  in  Sanade  followed  a
    concession made by a representative of the Secretary of State which was
    misunderstood, and the position of the  Secretary  of  State  was  more
    accurately set out in Izuazu [2013] UKUT 00045 (IAC).

15. Mr Smart submitted that, in relation to the  Chikwamba  principle,  the
    judge had found good reasons why the Appellant should leave the  United
    Kingdom and make an application for entry clearance from abroad, and  I
    was referred to paragraphs 30, 49, and 50 of Secretary of State for the
    Home Department v Hayat [2012] EWCA Civ 10.  In that case it was  found
    that a First-tier Judge had properly focused  on  three  matters  which
    went to the substantive merits of an Article 8 claim,  and  which  were
    also relevant to the question of whether it was in the event legitimate
    to require an applicant  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  and  make  an
    application from Pakistan.  In that case  relevant  matters  were  that
    both the applicant and his wife were temporarily in the United  Kingdom
    and had no legitimate expectation of a right  to  remain,  family  life
    could continue in Pakistan even though the applicant's wife  would  not
    wish to return, and that any period of separation would be short if the
    Appellant's wife were studying in the United Kingdom, and the period of
    study was due to end in a relatively short period of time.

16. Mr Smart submitted that it was open, in this case, to the judge to find
    it reasonable for the Appellant's spouse to live with him in  Pakistan,
    as although a British citizen, she originated  from  Pakistan  and  had
    been in the United Kingdom since 2003, or alternatively, to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom while the Appellant made a  proper  application  for
    entry clearance from abroad, in order to satisfy  the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules.

The Appellant's Response

17. Miss Rutherford reiterated that the proportionality assessment  carried
    out under Article  8  outside  the  rules  had  not  been  carried  out
    properly, and pointed that in paragraph  30(c)  of  Hayat  one  of  the
    factors to be considered was  the  prospective  length  and  degree  of
    disruption of family life and whether other members of the  family  are
    settled in the United Kingdom, and it was not clear that the judge  had
    this in mind when making his decision.

18. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

19. I do not find that the judge failed to pay proper regard to the  rights
    of the Appellant's spouse as a British citizen.  It is clear  that  the
    judge was aware of the spouse's British citizenship, as  this  is  made
    clear in the documents considered by the  judge,  and  he  specifically
    refers to this in  paragraph  24  of  the  determination.   Sanade  was
    decided before the changes in the Immigration Rules in July 2012  which
    introduced Appendix FM, and was decided prior  to  Izuazu  which  is  a
    decision referred to by the judge.  I set out below paragraph 5 of  the
    head note to Izuazu;

    5.   The UKBA continues to  accept  that  EU  law  prevents  the  State
         requiring an EU  law  citizen  from  leaving  the  United  Kingdom,
         although  contends  with  good  reason,  that   this   is   to   be
         distinguished from a case where an  independent  adult  can  choose
         between continued residence in  the  United  Kingdom  or  continued
         cohabitation abroad.

20. In my view the judge had this principle in mind when  considering  both
    EX.1 and Article 8.

21. My reading of the determination is that the judge's view was  that  the
    fact that the Appellant's spouse is a British  citizen  does  not  mean
    without more, that the Appellant must  be  allowed  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom for that reason alone.

22. The judge took into account all the evidence before him, some of  which
    assisted the Appellant, such as the judge's finding that  he  is  in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship, and the judge found  in  paragraph
    27, that the Appellant's spouse was credible  and  persuasive  on  that
    issue.  The judge accepted that family life had been  established,  and
    the couple were expecting a child.

23. The judge took into account in assessing  the  appeal  under  EX.1  and
    Article 8 outside the rules, that  the  Appellant  entered  the  United
    Kingdom as a student, and in paragraph  26  found  that  there  was  no
    satisfactory evidence of progression with studies after 5th July  2011,
    and that the Appellant had a poor immigration history, and that he  had
    submitted a fraudulent application to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    having fraudulently applied for a residence card.  The judge also found
    in that paragraph, that the Appellant had overstayed in breach  of  the
    Immigration Rules, and had given some discrepant evidence.

24. In paragraph 28 the judge found that family life had  been  established
    when the couple were  "acutely  aware  of  the  Appellant's  precarious
    position in this country".  That is relevant because  the  judge  noted
    that they did not meet until December 2012 and  the  Appellant's  leave
    had expired in June 2012.  His fraudulent EEA application was submitted
    in April 2012 and refused in May 2012.  The  judge  accepted  that  the
    couple had married, but was aware  that  they  had  done  so  when  the
    Appellant had no leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

25. In relation to the Chikwamba  principle  the  judge  made  findings  in
    paragraph 29, that the appeal could not succeed under  the  Immigration
    Rules for a number of reasons.  One  of  those  reasons  was  that  the
    financial requirements of the rules cannot be met.  This  is  therefore
    not a case where it is suggested that the Appellant  should  leave  the
    United Kingdom simply because it is policy to make an  application  for
    entry clearance from abroad.  The judge has found there are reasons why
    the appeal could not succeed under the Immigration Rules, and  did  not
    err in finding that the Appellant should leave the United Kingdom,  and
    make an application for entry clearance and submit  evidence  that  the
    Immigration Rules can be satisfied.

26. In relation to the proportionality assessment outside  the  Immigration
    Rules, the findings made by the judge are contained in paragraphs 36-40
    and may be described as somewhat brief.  However the  judge  has  taken
    into account all relevant factors, and has not omitted any factor  that
    is relevant, and has not taken into account  irrelevant  factors.   The
    matters taken into account by the judge perhaps should  have  been  set
    out fully in  paragraphs  36-40,  but  are  in  fact  to  be  found  in
    paragraphs 25-40.  I have referred to those factors above.

27. In my view, the findings made by the judge were  open  to  him  on  the
    evidence, and adequate and sustainable reasons  were  given  for  those
    findings.  The judge did not misdirect himself in law and was aware and
    took into account that the Appellant's spouse is a British citizen, but
    also was aware that there were other factors which did not  assist  the
    Appellant, to be taken into account.

28. The judge did not err in concluding  that  the  appeal  should  not  be
    allowed under EX.1, nor did he err in finding the Respondent's decision
    to be proportionate when Article 8 was considered  outside  the  rules,
    that it was open to the Appellant's spouse to continue family life with
    the Appellant in Pakistan  if  she  wished,  or  alternatively  it  was
    proportionate for the Appellant to leave and make  an  application  for
    entry clearance  through  the  proper  channels,  and  to  provide  the
    specified evidence that the Immigration Rules could be satisfied.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.  The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

No order for anonymity was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There has  been
no  request  for  anonymity  and  the  Upper  Tribunal  makes  no  anonymity
direction.






Signed                              Date: 24th September 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.






Signed                              Date: 24th September 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

