
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40677/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 16TH December 2015                |On 28TH January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                                  G A BLACK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MR MAROOF CHOWDHURY
                           NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Kandola (Home office presenting officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr M.K. Mustafa (solicitor)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in the decision and reasons the  First
    Tier Tribunal (Judge Mayall) promulgated on 26th June 2015 in which the
    claimant's appeal was dismissed on the rules  under  321A  but  allowed
    under Article 8.



Background

2.   The Claimant is  a  citizen  of  Bangladesh.   He  appealed  against  a
    decision made by the Secretary of State to curtail his leave to  remain
    in the UK because of  misrepresentations  made  in  connection  with  a
    previous application  for  the  purposes  of  obtaining  a  visa.   The
    claimant relied  on  a  false  language  certificate  for  his  Tier  4
    application.  It was contended that the test had been  done  by  proxy.
    This amounted to a change in circumstances and his leave as the  spouse
    of a British citizen was cancelled.

Grounds of application for permission to appeal

3.   The Secretary of  State  argued  that  the  FTT  erred  by  failing  to
    consider whether or not Article 8 could be contemplated outside of  the
    Rules, and further that the FTT failed to give adequate weight  to  the
    public interest in light of the false representations, and  by  failing
    to properly  assess  the  question  of  whether  or  not  it  would  be
    unreasonable for the British child of the family to live in Bangladesh.

Permission to appeal

4.   Permission was granted on the grounds that there  was  little  evidence
    before the FTT supporting the claim that it would be  unreasonable  for
    the child and mother to relocate to Bangladesh. No reasons  were  given
    as to why a freestanding Article 8 assessment was made. It was arguable
    that insufficient weight was placed on the issue of deception.

Submisssions

5.   Mr Kandola expanded on the grounds in support of the  application.   He
    submitted that although the FTT had made reference to SS (Congo) [2015]
    EWCA Civ 387, it had not in fact applied it.  In particular  he  relied
    on paragraph 82 of SS Congo in which it had been emphasised that  there
    needed to be compelling circumstances for any consideration of  Article
    8 outside of the rules.  This was not  a  case  of  a  near  miss.  The
    Claimant failed to meet the Rules under appendix FM on the  grounds  of
    Suitability.  Further the FTT [at 92] had treated section  117(6)  2002
    Act as determinative which was wrong in law as the factors therein were
    not exhaustive.  The FTT made no findings  to  support  the  conclusion
    that it would be unreasonable for the child to relocate to  Bangladesh.
    The Claimant had no status in the  UK,  there  was  family  support  in
    Bangladesh and there was no evidence of any  insurmountable  obstacles.
    There was no "Zambrano effect" to be considered in  this  appeal.   The
    matter clearly fell within the scope of the Immigration rules  Appendix
    FM.

6.   Mr Mustafa submitted that the  FTT  had  considered  if  the  Claimants
    family rights had adequately been considered in the  framework  of  the
    rules.  There were compelling circumstances identified by  the  FTT  at
    [82 & 83].  Adequate weight was placed on the issue  of  deception  and
    the  factors  in  the  public  interest.   The   FTT   considered   the
    reasonableness of relocation at 85-91 and  relied  on  section  117B(6)
    which was clear in its meaning.

Discussion and conclusion

7.   At the end of the hearing I was satisfied that the Secretary  of  State
    had made out all of her grounds and I found that  there  were  material
    errors in law in the decision of the FTT.  The FTT properly  considered
    the main issue under paragraph 321 of the  Rules  and  found  that  the
    Claimant had used deception in his previous application for leave under
    the PBS. The FTT went on to conclude that it was not conducive  to  the
    public good  fro  the  Claimant  to  remain  in  the  UK  [80].   As  a
    consequence he was unable to satisfy the requirements as to Suitability
    under Appendix FM in his application as a partner.  The FTT went on  to
    consider Article 8 outside of the rules in  circumstances  where  there
    were no compelling reasons  given  for  the  same.   I  find  that  the
    Claimant's circumstances were covered by the rules and  EX  1  was  not
    applicable.

8.   Significantly the FTT [92] failed to give any reasons for finding  that
    it would be unreasonable to return to Bangladesh,  which  was  material
    and central to the decision made and failed to follow the  guidance  in
    SS (Congo).  This final  paragraph  in  a  very  detailed  and  lengthy
    decision, in which there is an absence of findings of fact,  failed  to
    provide any reasons at all to support the conclusions reached.

9.   Accordingly I set aside the decision and reasons. I  allow  the  appeal
    of the Secretary of State.  I now remake the decision having regard  to
    the findings of fact and evidence that was before the FTT.  It  is  not
    necessary for a further hearing before this Tribunal.

Remaking

10.  I dismiss  the  Claimant's  appeal  on  immigration  and  human  rights
    grounds.  There has been no argument as to the decision dismissing  the
    appeal on immigration grounds [66 & 81]. Firstly, I am  satisfied  that
    there were no compelling grounds which justified consideration  outside
    of the rules under Article 8. The only issue raised was the care of the
    Claimant's mother in law who suffered from mental ill health. There was
    evidence before the FTT that there were other close family members  who
    could care for her [31]. There were no insurmountable obstacles to  the
    family living in Bangladesh. The Claimant  failed  to  meet  the  rules
    because of past deception and was not "suitable".  There is no evidence
    of circumstances which showed that the family's Article  8  rights  had
    not been fully addressed and covered by the Rules. The Claimant's child
    born in July 2015, is a British citizen and very young (under one  year
    of age).  His wife is also  a  British  citizen.   They  established  a
    family life in the UK having married in 2013.   However,  the  Claimant
    has no lawful immigration  status  in  the  UK  and  he  has  practised
    deception in a previous application, which is a factor to be considered
    and which carries weight in a public interest assessment.  There  would
    be no interference with the family life as the family can  relocate  to
    Bangladesh where they have other family  for  emotional  and  financial
    support, from where the Claimant's wife originates and  has  ties,  and
    recently visited, and their child is of an age where his  interest  are
    intrinsically bound up with those of his parents and he would be easily
    able to adapt to life in Bangladesh. I find  no  evidential  basis  for
    concluding either that Article 8 applies outside of the rules  or  that
    there would be any disproportionate interference with family life. Even
    having regard to section 117B(6) there is no evidence that it would  be
    unreasonable for the child (or his mother) to relocate to Bangladesh.

Decision

11.  There are material errors of law in the decision  which  shall  be  set
    aside.

    The decision is remade and a decision substituted that  the  claimant's
    appeal is dismissed on immigration and on human rights grounds.




                               Signed   Date 27.1.2016


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal







                               No anonymity order

                               No fee award.




                               Signed   Date 27.1.2016


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


