
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/40205/2014
                                                               IA/40220/2014
                                                               IA/40229/2014
                                                               IA/40240/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 August 2017                             |On  19 September 2017         |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                         Laval [A] (First Appellant)
                       Vanessa [A] (Second Appellant)
                           [M A] (Third Appellant)
                          [S A] (Fourth Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr M S Jaufurally, Counsel instructed by Callistes
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellants

 1. The first appellant, Laval [A] is a citizen of Mauritius whose date  of
    birth is [ ] 1975.  The second appellant is the first appellant's  wife
    and her applications  for  leave  to  remain  have  been  made  as  his
    dependant. She is a citizen of Mauritius. Her date  of  birth  is  [  ]
    1979. The third appellant is [MA]. She is the eldest  daughter  of  the
    first and second appellants. She is a citizen of Mauritius and her date
    of birth is [ ] 2003. She was born in Mauritius. The  fourth  appellant
    is [SA], the first and second appellant's daughter. She is a citizen of
    Mauritius and her date of birth is [ ] 2007. She was born in the UK.

The Immigration history

 2. The first appellant entered the United Kingdom on 7 October 2004  as  a
    visitor for six months.  He applied for leave to remain as a student on
    19  October  2004,  this  was  refused  on  2  December  2004.  He  was
    subsequently granted leave to remain as a  student  on  2  March  2005,
    valid until 31  June  2006  with  his  wife  and  first  child  as  his
    dependants.  The second appellant claims that she  entered  the  United
    Kingdom in July 2005 with the third appellant.  He was further  granted
    leave to remain as a student on 25 January 2006 valid until 28 February
    2007 with his wife and child as his dependants.  He was  granted  leave
    to remain as a student on 9 February 2007 valid until 31 January  2010.
    He was served with notice of liability to removal on  7  December  2010
    with his wife and  children.   The  appellants  have  been  in  the  UK
    unlawfully since their leave  expired  in  2010.  The  first  appellant
    applied for leave to remain in the UK under family and private life  on
    10 July 2012, with his wife  and  children  as  his  dependants.   This
    application was refused on 4 November 2013 by the  respondent  with  no
    right of appeal.  The first appellant applied again for leave to remain
    in the United Kingdom under family and private life on 21 January  2014
    with his wife and children as his dependants.  This was refused  on  22
    March 2014.  The appellants  applied  for  judicial  review  and  by  a
    consent order of 14 July 2014 the respondent agreed to reconsider their
    application. The respondent refused their application in a decision  of
    23 September 2014.

The history of the appeal

 3. The first appellant appealed against that decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The case  was  first  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Emerton on 6 January 2016.  He remitted the matter to the Secretary  of
    State to conduct a proper analysis, especially on the interests of  the
    children, allowing the appeal on the limited basis  that  the  decision
    was not in accordance with the law.  The Secretary  of  State  appealed
    against the First-tier Tribunal's decision to the Upper Tribunal.  In a
    decision promulgated on 22 July 2016 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
    found that there was an error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision and he set aside the decision of Judge Emerton.  Judge  Pickup
    considered that the First-tier Tribunal ought not to have remitted  the
    case to the Secretary of State.  He found that the First-tier  Tribunal
    ought to have  made  its  own  Section  55  best  interests  assessment
    provided there was sufficient evidence to do so.   He  considered  that
    there was sufficient evidence  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  have
    undertaken that assessment.  The case was remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be remade afresh in  accordance  with  directions  with  no
    findings preserved.

 4. The case was then  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Moore  on  1
    December 2016.  In a decision promulgated on 16 December 2016 the First-
    tier Tribunal dismissed the appellants' appeals.  The judge found  that
    it would not be unreasonable to expect the children to leave the United
    Kingdom and that removal would not be disproportionate.

 5. The appellants applied for permission to appeal against the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.  On 23 June 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge  Saffer
    granted the appellants' permission to appeal.   Thus  the  appeal  came
    before me.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal.

 6. The grounds set out that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  failing  to
    address whether the decision under appeal was in  accordance  with  the
    law.  It is submitted that the judge erred in failing to make  findings
    on the submissions that the third appellant ought to have been  granted
    leave to remain under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration  Rules
    which were in operation at the time  that  the  application  was  made,
    namely 10 July 2012.  The Rules which were in operation  at  that  time
    did not require and had no provision for a reasonableness test.  It  is
    submitted that the delay in making a decision until November  2013  has
    prejudiced the third appellant.  Reference is made to  the  explanatory
    memorandum dealing with changes to the  Immigration  Rules  which  were
    made on 13 December 2012 which states that an applicant must be given a
    reasonable opportunity  to  demonstrate  whether  they  meet  that  new
    requirement. The  third  appellant  was  prejudiced  by  the  delay  in
    processing her application, as,  if  it  had  been  decided  before  13
    December 2012, she would have had an iron-cast successful  application.
    At that time she had been in the United Kingdom for a continuous period
    of seven years.  The judge erred in law by failing to address the above
    submissions at all in his determination.

 7. It was submitted to the judge  at  the  hearing  that  had  the  eldest
    daughter been born in the United Kingdom and having lived in the United
    Kingdom for over ten  years,  she  should  have  been  entitled  to  be
    registered as a British citizen  under  Section  1(4)  of  the  British
    Nationality Act 1981.  It was further submitted  that  in  six  months'
    time (from the date of the hearing) the  fourth  appellant  would  have
    been living in the United  Kingdom  for  ten  years  and  therefore  be
    entitled to be registered as a British citizen.  It is  submitted  that
    the respondent is of the view that it will be reasonable for the fourth
    appellant to leave the United Kingdom because  she  is  not  a  British
    citizen.  It is asserted that it is simply absurd to suggest that it is
    reasonable to remove the fourth appellant now, but  yet  in  about  six
    months she will be entitled to be registered as a British citizen.  The
    judge erred by failing to take the above submissions into consideration
    when determining  whether  the  third  and  fourth  appellants  satisfy
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules in his  determination.



 8. The judge erred by failing to make specific findings as to whether  the
    third and fourth appellants satisfied paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  The judge made reference  to  paragraph  276ADE  at
    paragraph 33 but no specific findings as to whether or  not  the  third
    and fourth appellants satisfy that paragraph was made.  It  is  further
    asserted that the judge failed to take into consideration the prejudice
    caused by the delay in the proportionality assessment.

 9. It is submitted that at paragraph 38 of the decision the judge erred by
    coming to the conclusion that the third  and  fourth  appellants  would
    have some understanding of Creole which would assist them in Mauritius,
    whereas he had accepted at paragraph 31 that the use  of  the  language
    was limited.  His  conclusion  at  paragraph  38  was  pivotal  in  his
    proportionality assessment,  but  he  failed  to  address  the  tension
    between paragraph 38 and 31.

10. Mr Jaufurally relied on the grounds of appeal.  He submitted  that  the
    judge has failed to make a finding and rule on whether  the  third  and
    fourth appellants meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE.   The
    Tribunal erred in law by  not  specifically  making  a  finding  as  to
    whether or not the Secretary of State's decision was in accordance with
    the law.  He submitted this amounts to a material error of law.

11. The prejudice suffered by the fourth appellant because of the delay  in
    making a decision was not considered  by  the  judge.   If  the  fourth
    appellant's application had been decided before December 2012 she would
    have been granted leave  to  remain.   Because  the  Rules  changed  in
    December 2012 and the decision was not made  until  November  2013  the
    fourth appellant has been prejudiced by that delay.  He submitted  that
    the fourth appellant must be given a reasonable opportunity to  see  if
    she can meet the requirements of reasonableness.

12. The judge has  failed  to  take  into  consideration  that  the  fourth
    appellant was eight months away from applying for registration as a The
    judge had not taken into consideration the  length  of  time  that  the
    appellants had actually been in the United Kingdom.  This  affects  the
    level of  integration  into  the  UK.   He  submitted  that  the  judge
    considers the family as a whole and considers the  immigration  history
    of the parents but does not look  at  the  children's  applications  in
    their  own  right  under  paragraph  276ADE.   The   consideration   of
    reasonableness differs between paragraph 276ADE  and  117B.   Paragraph
    276ADE does not require any consideration of the wider public  interest
    issues.

13. Mr Tufan submitted that it is trite law that if the Secretary of  State
    has not considered Section 55 then the  court  can  consider  the  best
    interests of the children itself.   He  referred  to  the  case  of  AJ
    (India) [2011] EWCA Civ 1191.  There is nothing of any  materiality  in
    the ground that the judge has failed to use the  words  'in  accordance
    with the law' when deciding the matter.  He referred to representations
    made to the Secretary of State and the reply of 12 March 2015.  As  set
    out in that letter decisions made after December 2012 required that the
    new Rules were to be applied.  He submitted that the delay in making  a
    decision on the third appellant's appeal was  not  sufficient  to  give
    rise to issues such as set out in EB (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 41.

14. With regard to  the  future  speculative  registration  application  he
    submitted that the judge had to consider the circumstances at the  date
    of the hearing.  The judge could not be faltered  for  considering  the
    facts that were before him.  He referred to the case of  Treebhawon  at
    paragraphs 27, 35 and 50.  The best interests of the children  are  the
    maintenance of  a  family  unit.   With  regard  to  MA  (Pakistan)  at
    paragraph 102 he submitted that even if  the  judge  had  speculatively
    treated the child as a British citizen  the  same  reasonableness  test
    would apply.  He  submitted  that  there  had  been  serious  offending
    committed by the first and second appellants, they had forged documents
    and  provided  them  to  authorities.  That  had  to  be   taken   into
    consideration.  With regard to paragraph 276ADE he submitted that it is
    clear that the same reasonableness test applies under that paragraph as
    under 117B(6). He referred to paragraphs 47 and 54 of MA (Pakistan).

15. Mr  Jaufurally  in  reply  submitted  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    submissions were misconceived.  He submitted that it  was  accepted  by
    the Secretary of State that if a child is a British citizen it  is  not
    reasonable for them to be expected to leave  the  United  Kingdom.   He
    submitted  the  judge   has   confused   the   issue   with   regarding
    reasonableness and has not addressed 276ADE in isolation.

Discussion

16. It is argued that by failing to  address  whether  the  decision  under
    appeal was in accordance with the law the First-tier Tribunal has  made
    a material error of law. At the time of the hearing before Judge  Moore
    section 86(3) which had contained such a provision had been removed. In
    any event the point is immaterial as it is clear from the decision that
    the judge must have considered that the respondent's  decision  was  in
    accordance with the law from the findings made and conclusions reached.

17. The appellant asserts that the judge erred in failing to make  findings
    on the submissions that the third appellant ought to have been  granted
    leave to remain under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration  Rules
    that were in operation at the  time  that  the  application  was  made,
    namely 10 July 2012.  The Rules which were in operation  at  that  time
    did not require and had no provision for  a  reasonableness  test.  The
    delay in making a decision has led to unfairness.

18. Judge Moore has not made a specific finding on these issues. To fail to
    deal with an issue that has been raised amounts to  an  error  of  law.
    However, I do not consider  this  to  be  material  for  the  following
    reasons.

19. The appeal on these points was bound  to  fail.  Although  the  hearing
    before Judge  Moore  was  a  de-novo  hearing  these  issues  had  been
    considered in detail by Judge Pickup at the appeal hearing  before  the
    Upper Tribunal. After hearing submissions  on  these  issues  he  found
    that:

         "17 I am not satisfied that there is  any  practical  merit  in  Mr
         Jaufurally's  submissions  on  this  point.   First,   the   change
         introducing the reasonableness test took place only  a  few  months
         after the application was made on 19.7.12. Had  the  decision  been
         made on 13.12.12 the outcome would have been  the  same  and  there
         could have been no meritorious delay argument. Whilst there was  in
         fact a delay until November  23013,  almost  16  months  after  the
         making of the application, it cannot be said that  beyond  December
         2012 such delay was material to the outcome of the issue.

         18 Second, I effect the third claimant and indeed all the claimants
         have had ample opportunity in the intervening period to demonstrate
         that it was not reasonable to expect him to leave the UK.  That  is
         because the decision of 4.11.13 was not  the  last  word  on  their
         applications for leave to remain and they were not removed from the
         UK. There was no right of appeal against the  refusal  decision  of
         4.11.13, but the claimants simply made fresh applications for leave
         to remain on grounds of private and family life outside the  Rules.
         They have had the opportunity both in  their  applications  and  in
         their appeal pleadings and hearings to address  the  reasonableness
         test.  This  point  was  made  by  Judge  Emerton  at  �34  of  the
         decision...

         19 In the circumstances, I can see  no  prejudice  to  any  of  the
         claimants. Incidentally, the regrettable and continuing  elapse  of
         time whilst the outcome of the applications has remained unresolved
         has necessarily increased the length of time the third claimant and
         indeed all the claimants have now been in the UK, which is a factor
         they can rely on accruing to their advantage.

         ...

         21 It follows that Mr Jaufurally's submissions to me and  to  Judge
         Emerton that the decision of 23.9.14 was unlawful,  either  because
         the third claimant has been prejudiced, or because  the  old  Rules
         should have been considered and/or applied, or  because  there  has
         been prejudice by the delay  in  making  the  decision  of  4.11.13
         cannot succeed.

20. The First-tier Tribunal was bound to arrive  at  the  same  conclusion.
    There was therefore no material error of  law  in  failing  to  make  a
    specific finding on these issues.

21. It was argued that the judge failed to take into account the fact  that
    the fourth appellant could apply to register as a British Citizen  some
    eight months  after  the  date  of  the  hearing  and  that  the  third
    appellant, had she been born in the UK, could have applied as  she  had
    been in the UK for over 10 years. It is  asserted  that  it  is  simply
    absurd to suggest that it is reasonable to remove the fourth  appellant
    now, but yet in about six months she will be entitled to be  registered
    as a British citizen. The real issue in this case is whether or not  it
    is reasonable for the third and fourth appellants  to  be  expected  to
    leave the UK. The reasonableness test does not differ whether  a  child
    is a British Citizen or is a foreign National who has been  in  the  UK
    for 7 years or more. The  assertion  that  it  is  absurd  to  find  it
    reasonable for a child to be removed now but in six months she will  be
    entitled to be registered as a British Citizen is misconceived.  It  is
    premised upon an inaccurate assumption that it can never be  reasonable
    to expect a British Citizen to leave the  UK.  As  set  out  below  the
    reasonableness test in 117B(6) applies equally  to  a  British  Citizen
    child and a foreign national child with 7 years residence. There is  no
    merit in this ground of appeal.



22. Linked to the above ground of appeal is the submission that  the  judge
    erred by failing to make specific findings as to whether the third  and
    fourth appellants satisfied paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the  Immigration
    Rules. They  argue  consideration  of  reasonableness  differs  between
    paragraph 276ADE and  s117B(6)  and  that  paragraph  276ADE  does  not
    require any consideration of the wider public interest issues.


23. The judge did not make a specific finding in relation to paragraph
    276ADE in respect of the third and fourth appellants. The judge set
    out:

         33. In addressing Paragraph 276ADE of the Rules it  is  plain  that
         Paragraphs  (v)  and  (vi)  of  that  Rule  do  not   warrant   any
         consideration  of  the  wider  public  interests  than  have   been
         specifically identified in Paragraph (1).  However,  the  Court  of
         Appeal in MA (paragraph 40) made it clear that 'it would be  absurd
         to consider the child's position entirely independently of, and  in
         isolation from, the position of the parents given that the  child's
         best interests will usually require that he or she lives as part of
         the family unit'.  It is  also  apparent  from  the  same  decision
         (paragraph 45) '... that the only significance of  Section  117B(6)
         is that where the 7 year rule is satisfied, it is a factor of  some
         weight leaning in favour of leave to remain  being  granted'.   The
         court continued that the fact that the child had been in the UK for
         7  years  'would  need  to  be  given  significant  weight  in  the
         proportionality  exercise  ...  because   of   its   relevance   to
         determining the nature and strength of the child's  best  interests
         ... and because it establishes  as  a  starting  point  that  leave
         should  be  granted  unless  there  are  powerful  reasons  to  the
         contrary'.  (Paragraph 49).

         34.  I am also aware of the duty on the Respondent with  regard  to
         Section 55.  In reaching a decision I am reminded of the  Court  of
         Appeal decision in EV (Philippines).  In that  decision  the  court
         reminded itself of the remarks of Sedley LJ in  VW  Uganda  v  SSHD
         (2009)  EWCA  Civ  5  (Paragraph  24)  that   in   addressing   the
         proportionality issue 'what must be  shown  is  more  than  a  mere
         hardship or  a  mere  difficulty  or  mere  obstacle.   This  is  a
         seriousness test which requires the obstacles or difficulties to go
         beyond matters of choice or inconvenience'.

         The court reminded itself of  the  Supreme  Court  decision  in  ZH
         (Tanzania) and the remarks of Lady Hale regarding best interests of
         the child.  This would 'involve asking whether it is reasonable  to
         expect the child to live in another country.  Relevant to this will
         be the level of the child's integration in  this  country  and  the
         length of absence from the other country: where and with  whom  the
         child is to live and the arrangements for looking after  the  child
         in the other country: and the strength of the child's relationships
         with parents or other family members which will be severed  if  the
         child has to move away'.  (Paragraph 28).



24. The judge was correct to take into account the family as a  whole  when
    assessing reasonableness. The ability of the children's parents to  re-
    integrate and to thereby assist  their  children  is  relevant  to  the
    assessment  of  reasonableness.  The  failure  to  make  a  finding  on
    paragraph 276ADE in respect  of  the  children  is  not  material.  The
    essential issue in this case as I set out above is whether or not it is
    reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK. At paragraph  22  of
    MA (Pakistan) the court held that the test was the  same  in  paragraph
    276ADE as it is under s117B(6).
      The application of the reasonableness concept
         22. The critical issue in these cases, therefore, is how the court
         should approach the question of reasonableness. What factors is a
         court or tribunal entitled to take into account when applying the
         reasonableness test? As I have said, the answer to that question
         must be the same for paragraph 276ADE.

25. In MA (Pakistan) the court of appeal  considered  how  a  court  should
    approach the reasonableness test. The court held:
         45. However, the approach I favour is inconsistent  with  the  very
         recent decision of the Court of Appeal in MM  (Uganda) where  the
         court came down firmly in favour of the approach urged upon  us  by
         Ms Giovannetti, and I do not think that we ought to depart from it.
         In my judgment, if the court should have regard to the  conduct  of
         the applicant and any other matters relevant to the public interest
         when applying the "unduly harsh" concept under section 117C(5),  so
         should it when considering the  question  of  reasonableness  under
         section 117B(6). I recognise that the provisions  in  section  117C
         are directed towards the particular considerations which have to be
         borne in mind in the case of foreign criminals, and it is true that
         the court placed some weight on section 117C(2) which  states  that
         the more serious the  offence,  the  greater  is  the  interest  in
         deportation of the prisoner. But the critical point is that section
         117C(5) is in substance a free-standing provision in the  same  way
         as section 117B(6), and even so the court in MM (Uganda) held that
         wider public interest considerations must  be  taken  into  account
         when applying the "unduly harsh" criterion. It seems to me that  it
         must be equally so with respect to the reasonableness criterion  in
         section 117B(6). It would not be appropriate  to  distinguish  that
         decision simply because I have reservations whether it is  correct.
         Accordingly, in line with the approach in that case, I will analyse
         the appeals on the basis that the Secretary of  State's  submission
         on this point is correct and that the only significance of  section
         117B(6) is that where the seven year rule is  satisfied,  it  is  a
         factor of some weight leaning in favour of leave  to  remain  being
         granted. [Emphasis added]
26. The First-tier Tribunal undertook a careful and  detailed  analysis  of
    the evidence and of the circumstances of the children and  weighed  the
    length of their residence when assessing reasonableness. As held in  MA
    (Pakistan) the wider public interest and other factors such as  a  poor
    immigration history are relevant  when  assessing  reasonableness.  The
    judge set out:

         "26. I am satisfied that Mr and Mrs Arthee have a poor  immigration
             history.  I find the evidence that they gave at  this  hearing
             in relation to paying monies to  obtain  indefinite  leave  to
             remain in the UK to lack credibility and  to  be  inconsistent
             and implausible.  I find that their conduct at that  time  was
             fraudulent as evidenced by the fact  that  they  both  pleaded
             guilty to fraud charges committed on or  about  26th  February
             2010 ...

         27.  ... However, due to existing conditions neither of  them  have
             worked in the UK for the past three years.  It  would  appear,
             and I have no evidence to the contrary, that  the  family  are
             almost totally reliant on friends in the UK in  the  provision
             of rent free accommodation and  for  financial  assistance  in
             order to maintain themselves and continue living in the UK.  I
             am also satisfied that on occasions relatives in  France  send
             monies over to Mr and Mrs Arthee to assist them in maintaining
             the family whilst they are in the UK.

         28.  Returning then to the two child appellant (sic).   The  eldest
             child [MA] is thirteen years of age.  The younger  child  [SA]
             is nine years of age.  The younger child was born  in  the  UK
             and as far as I am aware has  resided  in  this  country  ever
             since.  She attends school and is educated in the UK.

             The elder child came to the UK with her  mother  on  2nd  July
             2005 and has continuously lived in the UK since that time.

         29.  In reaching a decision in these appeals I have paid due regard
             clearly to the  Immigration  Rules,  and  Section  55  of  the
             Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 with  regard  to
             the best interests of  a  child.   I  have  been  assisted  in
             reaching my decision to decisions referred to earlier in  this
             determination - namely -

             MA (Pakistan)

             Osawemwenze

             EV (Philippines).

         30.  As a matter of fact I am satisfied that  the  elder  child  is
             doing well at school and that her hand written letter  clearly
             expresses the view that she enjoys  school,  and  has  made  a
             number of friends, and would clearly love to remain in the  UK
             to continue her education and  to  be  with  friends  and  her
             family.  Both the girls attend the Coloma Convent Girls School
             in Croydon and the letters from December 2015 and January 2015
             respectively indicate that both girls have  attended  100%  at
             school and are punctual, and that  in  respect  of  the  elder
             child her latest progress in nearly every single  subject  for
             class, homework and behaviour was outstanding.

         31.  I accept that the language spoken by both children at  school,
             and normally at home, would be the English  language.   Indeed
             no interpreter was required at this hearing in respect  of  Mr
             and Mrs Arthee so their understanding of the English  language
             would in my view be sufficient enough to converse  with  their
             children at  home  in  that  language.   However,  I  am  also
             satisfied that the two children  have  some  understanding  of
             Creole  which  would  have  been  used  and  spoken  by  their
             respective parents at home.  I accept that their understanding
             would in the circumstances be limited, and that their  ability
             to speak that language even more limited.

         32.  I find the  claim  of  Mr  and  Mrs  Arthee  that  educational
             progress for their  two  children  would  necessitate  private
             tuition to lack merit.  I do not find that  the  usual  school
             programme in Mauritius  would  undermine  the  educational  or
             academic progress of either of their children by reference  to
             the Education in Mauritius internet extract and  the  'English
             Usage in Mauritius' document by  Eugene  Chiba  (page  183-187
             appellant's (sic) bundle).  The latter mentioned  document  in
             detailing the history of English usage stated that  whilst  it
             had never become a widely spoken language, it was nevertheless
             restricted  to  the  two  places  where  its  usage  could  be
             enforced.  Namely, 'government  administration  and  schools'.
             The report continued that all Mauritian people were exposed to
             English in schools, either as a subject  or  as  the  mode  of
             instruction and that most (73.23%) considered themselves to be
             functional in English.  Mauritians were more  likely  to  read
             and write in English on a regular  basis  (45-55%)  than  they
             were to speak in it (25%).

             Regarding 'English in schools'  English  technical  terms  and
             text books were employed in schools from the  start  and  from
             the  fourth  grade  English  was  taught  as  a  subject,  but
             moreover,  'it  is  officially  designated  as  the  mode   of
             instruction'.  Secondary school final examinations are written
             in  English.   The  report  continued,  'English's   continued
             presence here is also aided by  its  prestige:  virtually  all
             parents approve of their children studying in English'.

             ...

         35.  It is therefore apparent from case law that the  consideration
             of the best interests of the child involves a weighing  up  of
             various  factors.   Furthermore,  this  overall  balancing  of
             factors 'must be kept  in  mind  when  turning  to  the  wider
             proportionality assessment  of  whether  or  not  the  factors
             relating to the importance of maintaining immigration  control
             etc. cumulatively reinforce or outweigh the best interests  of
             the  child,  depending  on  what  they  have  found   to   be.
             (Paragraph 38).

         36.  Clearly it is in the best interests of both of  the  children,
             who are now aged 13 years and 11 years of age respectively  to
             continue to live with both their parents,  wherever  that  may
             be.

         37.  I am satisfied that in this proportionality assessment I ought
             to be taking into account the poor immigration history,  as  I
             have found it to be, of the parents of the two children.  I am
             satisfied that  in  2010  the  parents  acted  dishonestly  in
             attempting to remain in the UK.   Even  at  this  hearing  the
             parents gave an inconsistent account as to who was paid  money
             to obtain documentation to remain in the UK.

             In looking at Section 117(6) I accept that both parents have a
             genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying
             child.  However,  I  do  not  accept  that  it  would  not  be
             reasonable to expect the child(ren) to leave the UK.

             The elder child came to the UK with her mother in  July  2005,
             and therefore has lived in the UK continuously for  11  years.
             The younger child was born in the UK in 2007 and therefore has
             lived in the UK all her life which would amount to 9 years.  I
             am satisfied that both children have been educated in  the  UK
             and are doing well at school.  However, the elder child is now
             13 years of age and I am satisfied that  she  could  join  her
             parents in Mauritius and enter the education  system  in  that
             country and by doing so her  education  and  career  prospects
             would not be prejudiced.  It  is  clear  form  the  background
             information that this would be so.  Making such a  finding  in
             respect of the elder child, it would inevitably follow that  I
             would be equally satisfied in respect of the younger child.

         38.  I do  not  accept  that  language  is  an  issue  which  would
             undermine my decision and  findings  in  these  appeals.   All
             members of  the  family,  including  the  two  children  speak
             English.  Since the parents often speak Creole to  each  other
             at home, I am satisfied that both the child  appellants  would
             have some understanding of that language, which  would  assist
             them when going to live in Mauritius.   This  would  not  only
             assist them  whilst  at  school  but  also  in  the  community
             generally and in making friends and being comfortable.

         39.  There is no reason to accept that the two  parents  have  lost
             all social, cultural and family ties to Mauritius.  Both those
             parents have got numerous family members living in  Mauritius.
             One parent has both parents who live in that  country,  whilst
             the other parent has one parent  living  there.   In  addition
             there are numerous  siblings  of  both  parents,  as  well  as
             aunties and uncle and other relatives who continue  living  in
             Mauritius.  I am satisfied that these relatives could not only
             provide accommodation for  the  appellants  for  a  reasonable
             period of time, but  could  also  provide  general  and  other
             financial assistance, as could relatives who do so  in  France
             at the moment, when the family go to live in Mauritius.  These
             family members would not  doubt  assist  the  appellants  with
             regard to integration in Mauritius.

         40.  I am satisfied that at the time of  the  application,  over  4
             years  ago,  the  dependent  child  [MA]   had   been   living
             continuously in the  UK  for  7  years.   In  addition,  I  am
             satisfied that both  the  dependent  children  have  now  been
             living in the UK for over 7 years.  However, I do not consider
             it unreasonable to expect both children to  leave  the  UK  as
             they  will  be  returning  with  both  of  their  parents   to
             Mauritius.  In making such a finding I have of course paid due
             regard to Section 55.

         ...

         43.  As was held in the decision in MA  the  only  significance  of
             Section 117B(6) is that where the 7 year rule was satisfied it
             is a factor of some weight  leaning  in  favour  of  leave  to
             remain being granted.  Notwithstanding such a significance and
             the appropriate weight I do  not  allow  these  appeals.   The
             maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the public
             interest.  It is in particular in the interest of the economic
             well-being of the UK that persons who seek to enter or  remain
             in the UK are financially independent.  Furthermore, whilst  I
             accept that the parents have a genuine and subsisting parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, I do not accept that  it
             would be unreasonable to expect the child(ren)  to  leave  the
             UK."



27. The First-tier Tribunal undertook the correct approach  when  assessing
    the reasonableness of the children leaving the UK. This was a  detailed
    analysis and weighing of all the relevant factors. There was  no  error
    of law in the First-tier Tribunal approach to  the  assessment  of  the
    reasonableness of expecting the third and fourth  appellants  to  leave
    the UK. As set out above any failure to make  a  finding  on  paragraph
    276ADE is not material as the same factors and approach to the test  of
    reasonableness should be applied.

28. There is no merit in the ground that the judge's conclusions  regarding
    the children's understanding of Creole was inconsistent.  In  paragraph
    38 the judge was satisfied that the children had some understanding  of
    the language which would assist them when going to live  in  Mauritius.
    This is not inconsistent with the finding at paragraph  31  that  their
    use of the language was limited.  Even a limited understanding will  be
    of assistance.

29. There were no  material  errors  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision. The appellants' appeals are dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 16 September 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw








