
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40670/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         | Decision & Reasons           |
|                                             |Promulgated                   |
|On 17th September 2015                       | On 28th September 2015       |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI

                                   Between

                       MR NIMESHKUMAR AMRUTLAL PANCHAL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H Patel, Hiren Patel Solicitors
For the Claimant: Mr P Duffy, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ghani  dismissing   the   appeal   against   the
    Respondent's decision to refuse leave as a Tier 4 student  and  removal
    directions under section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality
    Act 2006. It is important to note from the outset that  there  are  two
    refusals. The first refusal is dated 30 June 2014 whereas the second is
    dated 12 August 2014. The first refusal  carried  a  right  of  appeal,
    whilst the second did not.




 2. The Appellant appealed against the decision  of  Judge  Ghani  and  was
    granted permission to appeal by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Kelly.  The
    basis upon which permission was granted may be summarised as follows:


      i) The judge arguably failed to  engage  with  the  fourth  ground  of
         appeal, namely that the Appellant had submitted a  valid  variation
         of an earlier application for further leave to  remain  at  a  time
         when he had extant leave to  remain  and  that,  consequently,  the
         first decision to refuse the application (i.e. the  refusal  of  30
         June 2014) was invalid and the Tribunal ought to have  treated  his
         appeal as being against the second refusal (i.e. the refusal of  12
         August 2014) of his varied application and the  first  refusal  was
         void  ab  initio.  This  argument  was  arguable  in  light  of  JH
         (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 78.






 3. I was provided with a Rule 24 response from the Respondent wherein  she
    appeared to accept that  the  Appellant  had  successfully  varied  his
    application to that of a dependent upon a Points Based  System  migrant
    and  the  Respondent  was  entitled  to  a  decision  on   his   varied
    application. Thereafter, following the subsequent decision,  which  was
    pre-empted to be a refusal, the Appellant would have a right of  appeal
    against  the  subsequent  refusal.  It  was  also  accepted  that   the
    respondent considered the decision was not in accordance with  the  law
    and that the matter should be remitted to the Respondent  so  that  she
    could issue a lawful decision.





    Discussion


 4. At the close of submissions, I indicated that although  there  appeared
    to be an error of law as stated in the Rule 24 Reply my decision  would
    follow in writing. That decision follows hereafter. I find  that  there
    was an error of law in the decision such that it should be  set  aside.
    My reasons for so finding are as follows.





 5. In relation to the Rule 24 Reply, Mr Duffy confirmed that the
    concessions made within were maintained and should be taken as read. Mr
    Duffy accepted that the first refusal of 30 June 2014 demonstrated that
    the author was unaware of the variation of the application which took
    place on 6 June 2014 and consequently dealt with the Tier 4 mattes and
    the variation of the application was consequently dealt with by an
    erroneous process.


 6. Mr Patel for the Appellant indicated that he concurred with Mr Duffy
    and the Rule 24 Reply. He submitted that the Tier 4 decision was void
    ab initio and irrelevant.


 7. Given that both advocates were in agreement, I considered their
    pragmatic stances and could discern no reason not to follow the course
    that they jointly proposed and requested me to follow.




    Error of Law


 8. In light of the above agreement and concession by the Respondent, I
    find that the decision of Judge Ghani involves the making of an error
    of law such that it should be set aside.



 9. I reach this conclusion given that the Respondent accepts that the
    decision of 30 June 2014 addresses a Tier 4 application as it was
    previously made however that application was varied on 6 June 2014 to
    that of a dependent upon a Tier 4 migrant, which the author of the
    refusal of 30 June 2014 appears to have been unaware of.




10. Furthermore, the Respondent accepts that the decision of 12 August 2014
    was made on an erroneous basis, and I further find this to be so, as
    the Appellant deserves a lawful decision upon his varied application,
    and given the Rule 24 Reply, it is clear that one remains to be
    lawfully made.




11. Consequently, I set aside the decision and the findings made by Judge
    Ghani and I substitute that decision with my own allowing the appeal
    pursuant to section 86(3)(a) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002.




12. As the appeal has succeeded and the Respondent has indicated she will
    issue a lawful decision shortly, I confirm for the sake of clarity that
    in the interim the Appellant's section 3C/3D leave shall continue for
    the time being as the appeal has succeeded. In short, the Appellant's
    position naturally reverts to that of a person whom has made an "in-
    time" valid application for further leave, whose previous leave has
    expired and whose leave has been statutorily extended via section 3C
    whilst he awaits a lawful decision on his application.





    Decision

13. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.




14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.




15. The Appellant's appeal is remade and allowed given that the decision is
    not in accordance with the law.


    Anonymity

16. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an  anonymity  order.  I  was  not
    invited to make any such order and in any event, I  see  no  reason  to
    make such an order.






    Fee Award


17. I make a fee award in the Appellant's favour given my decision allowing
    the appeal.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini







































