
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)               Appeal number: IA/40597/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London            |Determination Promulgated |
|On 4 November 2014                      |On 6 November 2014        |
|                                        |                          |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                        Appellant
                                     and

                                 AMANAT ALI

                                                     Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Ms M Malhotra, instructed by Berkleys Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Whilst this is an appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department, for  convenience  I  will  refer  to  the  parties  in  the
    determination as they appeared before the First-tier Tribunal

 2. The appellant is a national of Pakistan. He is the husband  of  Shabana
    Aslam, a British national and the sponsor in this appeal. The appellant
    applied for leave to remain as the spouse of a British  national  on  6
    July 2012 and that application was refused by the Secretary of State on
    19 July 2013 and a decision was made to remove the appellant  from  the
    UK. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Gillespie allowed his appeal.  The
    Secretary of State now appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

 3. The background to this appeal, which is not in  dispute,  is  that  the
    appellant entered the UK in 2007 as a visitor. He overstayed after  the
    expiry of his visa and met the sponsor in November 2010.  According  to
    her statement the sponsor was born in Pakistan but came to the UK  with
    her family when she was 6 or 7 and is a British  national  because  her
    father is British. Her extended  family  is  in  the  UK.  The  sponsor
    qualified as a solicitor and is now a managing partner in  her  current
    firm. The relationship developed and in  2011  the  appellant  made  an
    application to remain as the sponsor's partner. The couple  married  on
    12 May 2012. The appellant and sponsor wish to have  children  but  the
    sponsor suffers from a condition which affects her  fertility  and  she
    has commenced hormone treatment  with  a  view  to  undergoing  further
    fertility treatment. At the time of the hearing  the  couple  had  been
    living together for three years and married for two.  The  sponsor  was
    working and supporting the appellant.

 4. The Judge found that the appellant could not meet the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules. He found that the appellant could not  meet  the
    requirements of Appendix FM because he is an  overstayer  or  paragraph
    276ADE as he has not been in the UK for 20 years and he still has  ties
    in Pakistan. These findings are not challenged.  The  Judge  considered
    whether there were arguably good grounds for considering the case under
    Article 8 and, having decided that there were, he went on  to  consider
    Article 8 and concluded that it would not be  proportionate  to  remove
    the appellant.

 5. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal contend that in  this  case
    there were no compelling circumstances not sufficiently  recognised  by
    the Immigration Rules to justify the  Judge's  decision  to  go  on  to
    consider the appeal under Article 8 outside the Immigration  Rules.  Mr
    Melvin submitted that the judge failed to give reasons for going on  to
    consider the case outside the Rules.

 6. The Judge did consider the relevant case law at  paragraph  12  of  the
    determination and the relevant principles at paragraph 13. He correctly
    identified the need to identify arguably good grounds for going  on  to
    Article 8 and at paragraph 15 he set out his reasons for deciding  that
    there were. These were 'the existence of the  individual  circumstances
    of impaired  fertility  and  the  general  consideration  expounded  in
    Chikwamba v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] UKHL 40'.
    I am satisfied that the Judge did properly consider the  case  law  and
    did, as he was required to, did identify arguably or  'potential'  [15]
    good grounds for considering the appeal outside of the Rules.

 7. In considering Article 8 the Judge accepted that the  appellant  has  a
    private and family life in the UK and that removing him would interfere
    with  that  family  life.  In  considering  proportionality  the  Judge
    considered a number of factors as weighing against  the  appellant.  He
    took  account  of  the  appellant's  extended  unlawful  presence   and
    employment in the UK. I accept Ms Malhotra's submission that the  Judge
    did not ignore this factor.

 8. The Judge took  account  of  the  decision  in  Chikwamba  although  he
    acknowledged that the fact that  there  would  be  no  separation  from
    children reduced the exigency of the principle  in  Chikwamba  in  this
    case. Mr Melvin submitted that the decision  in  Chikwamba  is  not  in
    keeping with the current case law in relation  to  proportionality.  He
    submitted that the decision in  SSHD  v  Hayat  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  1054
    watered down the principles in Chikwamba. This  is  not  the  case.  In
    Hayat the Court of Appeal considered the case law, including  Chikwamba
    and concluded;


 "a) Where an applicant who does not have lawful entry clearance pursues an
 Article 8 claim, a dismissal of the claim on the  procedural  ground  that
 the policy requires that the applicant should have  made  the  application
 from his home state may (but not necessarily will) constitute a disruption
 of family or private life sufficient to  engage  Article  8,  particularly
 where children are adversely affected.


 b) Where Article 8 is engaged, it will be a disproportionate interference
 with family or private life to enforce such a policy unless, to use the
 language of Sullivan LJ, there is a sensible reason for doing so.


 c) Whether it is sensible to enforce that policy will necessarily be fact
 sensitive; Lord Brown identified certain potentially relevant factors in
 Chikwamba. They will include the prospective length and degree of
 disruption of family life and whether other members of the family are
 settled in the UK.


 d) Where Article 8 is engaged and there is no sensible reason for
 enforcing the policy, the decision maker should determine the Article 8
 claim on its substantive merits, having regard to all material factors,
 notwithstanding that the applicant has no lawful entry clearance.


 e) It will be a very rare case where it is appropriate for the Court of
 Appeal, having concluded that a lower tribunal has disproportionately
 interfered with Article 8 rights in enforcing the policy, to make the
 substantive Article 8 decision for itself. Chikwamba was such an
 exceptional case. Logically the court would have to be satisfied that
 there is only one proper answer to the Article 8 question before
 substituting its own finding on this factual question.


 f) Nothing in Chikwamba was intended to alter the way the courts should
 approach substantive Article 8 issues as laid down in such well known
 cases as Razgar and Huang.
 g) Although the cases do not say this in terms, in my judgment if the
 Secretary of State has no sensible reason for requiring the application to
 be made from the home state, the fact that he has failed to do so should
 not thereafter carry any weight in the substantive Article 8 balancing
 exercise."

 9. In light  of  this  analysis  the  Judge  was  right  to  consider  the
    possibility of the appellant making application for entry clearance  in
    Pakistan and it was open to him to take this into account as a relevant
    factor in considering the proportionality as he had accepted  that  the
    appellant  meets  all  of  the  requirements  of  the  Rules  bar   the
    requirement to have entry clearance. The Judge, as he was  entitled  to
    do, considered this in  the  proportionality  assessment  and  attached
    reduced weight to the principles in Chikwamba in this case.

10. The Judge also took account of the fact that the appellant had  made  a
    'protracted and conscientious attempt' to regularise his  status  since
    2011. He took account of the sponsor's  responsible  position  and  the
    fact that her career path would be adversely affected by  a  return  to
    Pakistan with her husband. The Judge took account  of  the  appellant's
    overstaying but also considered that this history may lead to a refusal
    of entry clearance and a prolonged  period  of  separation  should  the
    sponsor choose to not return to Pakistan because of her career. However
    against all of  this  the  Judge  considered  that  the  parties  could
    voluntarily agree to separate  to  pursue  the  application  for  entry
    clearance.

11. The Judge considered the current recourse to  fertility  treatment  and
    the likely effect of a separation upon this  treatment  as  the  matter
    which tipped the balance in favour of the appellant in  this  case.  Mr
    Melvin submitted that the Judge failed to give adequate reasons for his
    findings and that there was inadequate  evidence  in  relation  to  the
    fertility treatment which was mentioned  for  the  first  time  at  the
    hearing. However it is clear from  the  determination  that  the  Judge
    accepted the oral evidence from the appellant and the sponsor as to the
    fertility treatment.

12. Mr Melvin submitted that the Judge's finding  that  the  plans  of  the
    appellant and the sponsor  to  have  a  baby  amounted  to  exceptional
    circumstances was  irrational.  I  do  not  agree.  The  Judge,  having
    considered all relevant factors, gave clear reasons  for  finding  that
    this issue tipped the balance in the appellant's  favour.  This  was  a
    finding open to the Judge on the evidence before him.

13. In summary I am satisfied that the Judge considered all of the evidence
    before him. In conducting the proportionality assessment he  took  into
    account all  relevant  considerations  and  his  conclusions  were  not
    irrational.

Conclusions:

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

Signed
                            Date: 4 November 2014


A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



