









UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40972/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 1 October 2015                    |on 19 October 2015                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                       Miss Lamour Anne Alvior Jabile
                         no anonymity direction made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of the  Philippines,  born  on  7  December
    1981. Her appeal against the decision of the  respondent  refusing  her
    application for leave to remain in the UK outside the immigration rules
    was  dismissed  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in   a   decision
    promulgated on 30 January 2015.

 2. On 6 May 2015, First-tier Tribunal Judge Levine granted her  permission
    to appeal on the basis that there are no removal directions in  respect
    of the appellant's child, albeit that there are directions  under  s.47
    of the 2006 Act in respect of the appellant  herself.  Accordingly,  he
    stated that it  was  arguable  that  the  respondent's  decision  would
    potentially result in the separation of the appellant from her baby  as
    the Judge failed to consider the best interests of the child under s.55
    of the 2009 Act and that the consideration of her appeal under  Article
    8 was arguably flawed.

 3. On 15 September 2015, the appellant's solicitors on record informed the
    Tribunal that the appellant requested "to go  for  the  paper  hearing"
    instead of an oral hearing. The appellant's appeal was also decided  by
    the First-tier Tribunal on the papers.

 4. The appellant had applied on 23 July 2014 for leave to remain in the UK
    outside of the immigration rules because she was pregnant. In  refusing
    her application, the respondent  stated  that  it  was  her  policy  to
    consider granting leave  outside  the  rules  only  where  particularly
    compelling circumstances existed. Such grants of leave are rare and are
    only given for genuinely compassionate reasons [7].

 5. The First-tier Judge noted  that  she  was  due  to  give  birth  on  5
    September 2014. There was however nothing in the evidence presented for
    consideration  suggesting  that  the  appellant  was   prevented   from
    returning to the Philippines to give birth.

 6. Her immigration history was set out  by  the  Tribunal  at  [8].  After
    completing her MBA, she applied for a Tier 1 Post Study Work visa which
    was approved and was valid until 24 July 2014.

 7. In the meantime the appellant had visited the Philippines  and  married
    Mr Kaiser Alipis on 9  December  2013.  She  became  pregnant  with  an
    expected delivery date of 5 September 2014. A GP letter confirmed  that
    it is not suitable for her currently to travel [9].

 8. The appellant in fact gave birth on 10 September  2014.  She  submitted
    before the First-tier Tribunal that the baby had an appointment at  the
    hospital in October 2014 and as she had just given  birth,  it  may  be
    difficult for her to travel to the Philippines as it is a long journey.
    The child would also be having  an  appointment  for  an  after-  birth
    routine check up and BCG vaccination. She requested that she be allowed
    to stay in the UK and that a few more months should be granted [11].

 9. The Judge noted that the appellant had made no  application  under  the
    Immigration Rules and that the only basis upon which she  could  appeal
    the respondent's decision is where her removal would breach her  rights
    under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.

10. The Judge considered whether there were any considerations justifying a
    finding that on the direct consideration of Article 8, there would be a
    breach of her rights. However, there were no such matters  set  out  in
    the evidence justifying such a finding. Whilst she has family  life  in
    the UK with her child, neither she, the child, nor the  child's  father
    are British citizens. On return to the Philippines, she will be able to
    enjoy family life with her  husband  and  their  child.  The  appellant
    herself submitted in October 2014 that she should be allowed to  remain
    for only "a few more months." In the  circumstances,  the  Judge  found
    that her removal would not be a disproportionate interference with  her
    family life.

11. After being granted permission to the appellant through her  solicitors
    sought to produce a further  statement  dated  15  September  2015.  No
    application  had  been  made  in  compliance  with  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.
    In particular there has been no explanation as to why the evidence  had
    not been submitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

12. I have had regard to the Rule 24 response. It is noted  that  from  the
    determination, the baby's medical appointments were routine.  There  is
    no indication that there was  any  medical  evidence  that  either  the
    appellant or her baby would not be able to travel.

13. In particular, the Judge noted that the  appellant's  own  request  for
    leave to remain had been for only a few more months.

    Assessment

14. I have had regard to the appellant's grounds of appeal before the First-
    tier  Tribunal.  There  she  submitted  that  she   has   had   various
    appointments at the St Albans City Hospital, scheduled for  the  middle
    of October 2014.  It  may  be  difficult  for  her  to  travel  to  the
    Philippines as it is a long journey. She urged the Tribunal to consider
    her request to stay "back here in UK for few more months."

15. The Judge has had proper regard to the appellant's evidence, which  was
    set out at paragraphs [8] and [9]. The Judge noted the appellant's  own
    request that she be allowed  to  remain  here  "for  only  a  few  more
    months." As at the date of promulgation at the end of January 2015, she
    has had the benefit of those extra months.

16. There was moreover no indication of any medical  evidence  that  either
    she or her child would not be able to travel.

17. Although there was no express reference to the provisions  of  s.55  of
    the 2009 Act, it is clear that the best interests of the child  are  to
    remain with the mother. The child is still very young and cannot  claim
    to have any private life in the UK.

18. Even though there are no removal directions regarding the child, it  is
    evident that she would be able to return with the appellant in order to
    resume family life in the Philippines which would include  the  child's
    father. Neither the child nor her parents are British citizens.

19. In the circumstances I find that there is no reason to suppose that the
    child would ever be separated from the appellant.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not  involve  the
    making of any material error on a point of law.  It  shall  accordingly
    stand.

    No anonymity direction is made.




    Signed   Date 15/10/2015
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer
