
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40420/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 September 2015                  |On 14 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              QAZI NAVEED AHMED
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms A. Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs J. Smeaton, Counsel instructed by Marks & Marks
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. In this decision I will refer to the appellant  as  "the  Secretary  of
    State" and to the respondent as "the claimant".

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal  promulgated  on  24  February  2015  allowing  the
    claimant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State, dated
    26 September 2014, to refuse his application for  leave  to  remain  on
    human rights grounds.

 3. I have not been asked to and see no reason to  make  a  direction  with
    respect to anonymity.

 4. The claimant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 1 March 1943.

 5. He entered the UK on 5 April 2011 as a visitor along with his  wife  to
    visit his two daughters and grandchildren living in the UK.  Whilst  in
    the UK his wife became ill and sought medical treatment. An application
    for further leave  to  remain  was  made  but  during  the  application
    process, on 28 November 2012, his wife died.

 6. On 12 April 2013 the claimant applied for  leave  to  remain  on  human
    rights grounds. On 26 September 2014 this application  was  refused  on
    the basis that he could not fulfil  the  requirements  under  Paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules and  that  there  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances which warranted consideration of leave outside the Rules.



First-tier Tribunal Decision

 7. The appellant appealed and his  appeal  was  determined  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Edwards ("the judge") on the papers. The  judge  allowed
    the appeal for the following reasons:

         "The evidence now before the Tribunal shows that the appellant is a
         sick man, who is neither able to travel to his homeland, or to live
         independently. That is, in my view an exceptional circumstance that
         would justify a grant of leave outside the Rules, at least until  a
         further assessment is completed into the appellant's health. ...the
         decision to remove the appellant is not a  proportionate  decision,
         in compliance with Article 8."

 8. The evidence relating to the claimant's  health,  to  which  the  judge
    refers in the above cited paragraph,  is  explained  by  the  judge  as
    follows:

         "There is in the appellant's bundle a letter dated 3 February  2015
         from  a  Dr  S.  Ather,  who  is  an  associate  to  a   consultant
         psychiatrist employed by the Leicester Partnership  NHS  Trust.  He
         has examined the appellant and finds  that  he  is  suffering  from
         Alzheimer's Dementia. He  has  prescribed  Glantamine  XL  8mg  and
         various other strategies. He opines that the appellant is not  able
         to travel to Pakistan independently or to  live  independently.  He
         advises a further assessment by a Dementia Care Advisor."

 9. The grounds of appeal submit that the judge erred by  failing  to  have
    regard to Sections 117A-117B of the Nationality  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    ("the 2002 Act")  in  his  proportionality  assessment  including  that
    little weight should be given to a private  life  established  when  an
    immigration status is precarious.  The grounds  also  submit  that  the
    judge failed to indicate  why  further  assessment  of  the  claimant's
    medical condition would not be possible in  Pakistan  following  return
    chaperoned by family members,  particularly  given  there  were  family
    members who  remain  in  Pakistan.   It  is  also  submitted  that  the
    appellant could have applied  under  an  appropriate  category  in  the
    Immigration Rules if he was unable to return to  Pakistan  due  to  his
    condition.



Submissions

10. Ms Fijiwala, for the Secretary of State, submitted that the judge erred
    both by failing to explain how  he  reached  the  view  Article  8  was
    engaged  and,  in   considering   proportionality,   not   giving   any
    consideration to the public interest or to  the  factors  specified  in
    Sections 117A-B of the 2002 Act. Moreover, the judge had not identified
    the relevant Immigration Rules: the only Rules  to  which  he  referred
    were Sections E-LTRP 2.1 and EX1  of  Appendix  FM  which  are  plainly
    irrelevant.

11. Mrs Smeaton, for the claimant, submitted that the judge did not err  by
    dealing only with Article 8 rather than the Rules as the  claimant  had
    conceded he could not satisfy the requirements of the Rules. She argued
    that Article 8 was clearly engaged such that  if  the  judge  erred  by
    moving straight to the issue of  proportionality  such  error  was  not
    material.

12. She highlighted that the judge had directed that leave be granted for a
    period of twelve months only in order that further assessment as to the
    claimant's health could be carried out. This, she  argued,  meant  that
    the judge did not find removal in  the  future  would  be  contrary  to
    Article 8 but rather that at the date of his  decision,  based  on  the
    medical  position   at   that   specific   time,   removal   would   be
    disproportionate.  In  these  particular  circumstances,  because   the
    decision related to exceptional circumstances arising in  a  period  of
    uncertainty, failure to address Section 117A-B  of  2002  Act  was  not
    material as it would not have affected the outcome.

Findings

13. Ill health alone is not a sufficient basis for Article 8 to be  engaged
    and is only a factor to be considered in a proportionality  assessment.
    As stated in GS (India) [2015] EWCA Civ 40 at [111]:

         "First, the absence or inadequacy of medical treatment, even  life-
         preserving treatment, in the country of return, cannot be relied on
         at all as a factor engaging Article 8: if that is all there is, the
         claim must fail. Secondly, where Article  8  is  engaged  by  other
         factors, the fact that the claimant is receiving medical  treatment
         in this country which may not be available in the country of return
         may be a factor in the proportionality exercise;  but  that  factor
         cannot be treated as by itself giving rise to a breach  since  that
         would contravene the "no obligation to treat" principle."

14. The judge's approach to Article 8 was not consistent  with  GS  (India)
    and, for the reasons set out below, involved the making  of  errors  of
    law.

15. Firstly, the judge did not undertake any analysis  as  to  whether,  or
    consider any evidence with respect to, the question of whether  Article
    8 was engaged. At paragraph [19] he stated that, in considering Article
    8, he would "proceed directly to  the  issue  of  proportionality."  GS
    (India) makes it  clear  that  the  claimant's  medical  situation,  of
    itself, is not a sufficient basis to find Article 8 is engaged but  the
    decision by the judge, in which he states at [15] that "the sole  point
    of issue here seems to be the appellant's state of health", appears  to
    assume Article 8 is engaged only because of the claimant's  health.  It
    may be that there are other factors relevant to Article  8  discernible
    from the claimant's family and private circumstances such that  Article
    8 should be engaged, but the judge has made no findings to support such
    a conclusion and it was not open to him to find Article 8  was  engaged
    solely on the basis of the claimant's health needs.

16. Secondly, the judge's proportionality assessment is plainly inadequate.
    The only information taken  into  consideration  is  that  weighing  in
    favour of the claimant being permitted to stay in  the  UK.  The  judge
    made, in this regard, the following findings:

          a. the appellant was a sick man,

          b. he was unable to travel to his homeland,

          c. he was unable live independently.

          d. he was not able to travel to Pakistan independently

          e. his doctor had advised a further assessment by a Dementia Care
             Advisor.

17. A proportionality assessment under Article 8, however,  requires  these
    interests to be balanced against the public interest. As stated  in  SS
    (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 386 at [44]:

         "If there is a reasonably arguable case under Article 8  which  has
         not already been sufficiently dealt with by  consideration  of  the
         application under the  substantive  provisions  of  the  Rules  (cf
         Nagre, para. [30]), then in considering that  case  the  individual
         interests of the applicant and others whose Article 8 rights are in
         issue should be balanced against the public interest, including  as
         expressed in the Rules, in order  to  make  an  assessment  whether
         refusal  to  grant  LTR  or  LTE,  as   the   case   may   be,   is
         disproportionate and hence unlawful by virtue of  section  6(1)  of
         the HRA read with Article 8."

18. No such balancing exercise has been undertaken and no consideration was
    given to the public interest. This is a clear error of law.

19. Both parties agreed that if I found there to be an error of  law  there
    should be an opportunity for there to be a full  oral  hearing.  Having
    regard to the President's Practice Statement 7.2(b), I have decided  to
    remit the case to the First Tier Tribunal.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The appeal is allowed.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law such that it should be set aside in its entirety and
    the appeal heard afresh.

    The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh
    before a judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge J. D. L. Edwards.

    No anonymity order is made.


Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan    Dated
