







UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40411/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                       |Determination Promulgated      |
|On: 29 January 2015                         |On 19 February 2015            |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Mr george Owusu-Ampong
                         no anonymity direction made
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr L Doyle, Legal Representative, Maliks and Khan
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. For the sake of convenience I shall  refer  to  the  appellant  as  the
    secretary of state and the respondent as "the claimant."

 2. The claimant is a national of Ghana, born on 5  May  1963.  His  appeal
    against the decision of the secretary of state to remove him  from  the
    UK was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese in a determination
    promulgated on 4 August 2014. The claimant entered the  UK  on  4  June
    1996 as a visitor. In May 2002 he married Theresa  Abjei-Yeboah.  On  3
    September 2004, his eldest son, Kevin, was born. On 16 January 2004  he
    married Rose Dankwa. His application for an EEA Residence card  as  her
    spouse was refused in June 2004. That decision  was  maintained  on  31
    August 2005.

 3. On 12 March 2006, he applied for  leave  to  remain  as  the  unmarried
    partner of  Theresa  Abjei-Yeboah.  His  second  child  was  born.  His
    application was refused on 4 October 2007.

 4. In May 2001 he was served with an IS151A Notice as an illegal  entrant.
    In June 2001 he then applied  for  leave  to  remain  on  human  rights
    grounds and he withdrew his earlier appeal in July 2011.

 5. His application was considered by the secretary  of  state.  He  failed
    under the suitability requirements of S-LTR of the Immigration Rules as
    well  as  the  eligibility  requirements  under  E-LTRPT.  It  was  not
    considered that he and his spouse,  Theresa  Abjei-Yeboah,  were  in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship. No evidence was submitted that  he
    was not still legally married in the UK to Rose Dankwa or that  he  had
    divorced her. Polygamous marriages are not recognised here.  There  was
    thus no evidence showing that the relationship had  permanently  broken
    down.

 6. Nor had he met the requirements under E-LTRPT  2.4(b)  as  he  had  not
    shown that he is currently taking or  intends  to  continue  taking  an
    active role in the children's lives.

 7. The respondent considered the exceptions to the rules outlined in EX.1.
    He was not in a genuine and subsisting relationship with the  children.
    He had failed to provide evidence suggesting that  it  is  unreasonable
    for the children to leave the UK. He therefore  did  not  benefit  from
    EX.1(a).

 8. He also failed  to  show  that  he  is  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with Theresa Abjei-Yeboah. Nor were  there  insurmountable
    obstacles preventing family life being enjoyed elsewhere.

 9. He did not satisfy the requirements under paragraph 276ADE.

10. It was also decided with respect to private and family  life  that  his
    circumstances are not such that his removal would breach Article 8. Nor
    was the length of time he had spent here sufficient to warrant a  grant
    of leave when balanced with the circumstances of his case.  There  were
    no  exceptional  circumstances.   Accordingly  his   removal   remained
    appropriate.

11. First-tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese found  that  the  claimant  did  not
    satisfy the requirements of the rules in relation to  his  suitability,
    eligibility and the exceptions under  EX.1.  Nor  did  he  satisfy  the
    requirements under paragraph 276ADE [9].

12. He then considered whether the claimant  provided  sufficient  evidence
    warranting further consideration of his appeal. He referred to  Gulshan
    [2013] UKUT 640.

13. He found that the claimant provided good arguable grounds  to  consider
    whether  there  are  compelling  circumstances.  The  evidence  of  the
    claimant and his  partner  was  credible  and  consistent  "with  their
    relationship." [11] He considered Article  8  under  the  Human  Rights
    Convention. He directed himself in accordance with Razgar.

14.  He  concluded  that  the  claimant's  removal  would   constitute   an
    interference with his family life. He accepted that  the  claimant  had
    formed such family life with his partner in the UK and that  they  have
    two children together.

15. It would not be in the public interest for the claimant to be  removed.
    His children are British and have a close  relationship  with  him.  It
    would be difficult for them to adjust to life in Ghana. [13]  It  would
    also be "difficult" for them to be away from their father  if  he  were
    removed and they remained in the UK.

16. He had regard to the public interest considerations in the Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended. He took into account s.117.
    He and his family are very much a part of their  local  community.  The
    claimant is an influential figure in the church community [13].

17. He found that the claimant was "credible in respect of  his  separation
    from his  former  wife."  [14]  He  is  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with his partner. It was not disputed that he had been  in
    the UK since 1996.  He  had  two  children  aged  9  and  7.  He  lived
    separately  from  his  partner  and  children  because   of   reporting
    restrictions but spent a substantial period of time with them [14].  He
    takes them to school, he enjoys activities with them. They are British.
    Even though this could not on its own be treated  as  a  "trump  card",
    when looked at under s.55 of the Borders Act  2009,  it  was  in  their
    interests that the claimant remains with them in the UK. They are at an
    age when they could reasonably adjust to life in Ghana but  this  would
    constitute a negative step "to ask them both to make this  adjustment."
    His   removal   would   accordingly   constitute   a   disproportionate
    interference in the circumstances [14].

18. On 4 December 2014, Upper Tribunal Judge Keki? granted the secretary of
    state permission to appeal on the basis that the factors identified  by
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge at paragraphs 12-13 were matters  already
    covered within the rules and there were  no  other  compelling  factors
    warranting a grant of discretionary leave under Article 8.

19. Mr Melvin submitted that the First-tier Judge gave  no  'case  specific
    findings'  that  there  were  arguably  good  grounds  and   compelling
    circumstances not sufficiently recognised  under  the  rules.  Nor  was
    adequate attention given to the fact  that  the  claimant  is  not  the
    children's primary carer and does not  live  with  the  family  at  the
    family home.

20. Nor did the Judge adequately consider the provisions  of  s.117B(4)  of
    the 2002 Act. The claimant was without leave when  family  and  private
    life took place. At best his position here was precarious.

21. On behalf of the claimant,  Mr  Doyle,  who  represented  the  claimant
    before the First-tier Tribunal as well, submitted that it was not clear
    why the Judge found that the claimant did not meet Appendix FM  of  the
    rules. However, he accepted that there  had  been  no  application  for
    permission to appeal by the claimant in that respect.

22. He nevertheless submitted  that  there  was  a  proper  basis  for  the
    Tribunal to have allowed the appeal under Article 8.

23. He referred to recent decisions on Article 8, including  Ganesabalan  R
    (on the application of) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2014] EWHC 2712 (Admin) and in particular paragraphs 9  and  10  where
    the Court held that there  is  always  a  second  stage  in  which  the
    Secretary must consider the exercise of discretion  outside  the  rules
    and must be in a position to demonstrate that she has done so. Appendix
    FM and Rule 276ADE are  not  a  complete  code  insofar  as  Article  8
    compatibility is concerned.

24. Accordingly, it was permissible for  the  First-tier  Judge  to  assess
    Article 8 on the  basis  that  the  appendix  FM  requirements  do  not
    constitute a complete code.

25. He referred to paragraph 134 of MM (Lebanon) [2014] EWCA  Civ  985,  to
    the effect that if the relevant group of immigration  rules  is  not  a
    complete code then the proportionality test  will  be  more  at  large,
    albeit guided by Huang tests and the UK and Strasbourg jurisprudence.

26. The Huang test was endorsed in Patel and Others v SSHD [2013] UKSC  72.
    The decision to remove the claimant  would  have  sufficiently  serious
    consequences, given that he has  a  British  partner  and  two  British
    children. In the circumstances, the Tribunal was entitled  to  consider
    and assess the claimant's case under Razgar.

27. He also referred to the recent judicial review decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in R (on the application of Oludoy and Others) v SSHD (Article
    - MM (Lebanon) and Nagre) IJR [2014] UKUT  00539  (IAC).  There,  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Gill stated that there was nothing in Nagre, Gulshan  or
    Shahzad that suggest that a  threshold  test  was  being  suggested  as
    opposed to making it clear that  there  was  a  need  to  look  at  the
    evidence to see if there  was  anything  which  has  not  already  been
    adequately considered in the context of the immigration rules and which
    could lead to a successful Article 8 claim. These authorities must  not
    be read as seeking to qualify or fetter the assessment  of  Article  8.
    That is consistent with paragraph 128 of  R  (MM  and  Others)  v  SSHD
    [2014] EWCA Civ 985 that there is no  utility  in  imposing  a  further
    intermediate test as a preliminary to a consideration of an  Article  8
    claim beyond the relevant criterion based rule.

28. Judge Gill referred to Ganesabalan, supra, to the effect that there  is
    no prior threshold which dictates whether the  exercise  of  discretion
    should be considered; rather, the nature  of  the  assessment  and  the
    reasoning  which  are   called   for,   are   informed   by   threshold
    considerations.

29. He also submitted that paragraph 117B(4) of the  Immigration  Act  2014
    was subject to s.117B(6) which provides that in the case  of  a  person
    who is not liable to deportation, the public interest does not  require
    the person's removal where the person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with a qualifying  child  and  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the child to leave  the  UK.  A  qualifying  child
    means a person who is under the age of 18 and who is a British citizen.



Assessment

30. First-tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese found the evidence of  the  claimant
    and his partner to be credible. He accepted that he had formed a family
    life with his partner in  the  UK  and  that  they  have  two  children
    together. His  partners  as  well  as  the  two  children  are  British
    citizens. The children have a close relationship with him and it  would
    be difficult for them to adjust to life in  Ghana.  It  would  also  be
    difficult for them to be separated from their father.

31. The current approach is that the immigration rules, and  in  particular
    Appendix FM, cannot be considered as a "complete code."

32. Judge Abebrese has directed himself in accordance with Razgar. He  took
    into account factors including the claimant's very lengthy residence in
    the UK. The evidence showed that he was no  longer  with  his  ex-wife.
    Further, he had regard to  the  interests  of  the  children,  who  are
    British citizens, aged 9 and 7. He noted his involvement with their day
    to day life. He enjoyed activities with them. Even  though  they  could
    adjust to life in Ghana, this would constitute a negative step  to  ask
    them both to make this adjustment. [14]

33. Finally, he had regard to s.117 of the 2002 Act. Although little weight
    should ordinarily be given to a private life established by a person at
    a time when his immigration status is precarious, the  public  interest
    does not require his removal where he  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with his British children and  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK.

34. I conclude from the above analysis that there was nothing irrational or
    perverse in those findings, which  are  sustainable  in  terms  of  the
    evidence available.

    Notice of Decisions

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of any  errors  on  a  point  of  law.  The  decision  shall
    accordingly stand.

    The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

    No anonymity direction is made.






    Signed        Dated 19 February 2015


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer
