
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/40383/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 2 June 2015                       |On 8 June 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 MAHID TARIQ
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Livingstone
                    Brown, Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as described above, but the rest of this  determination
    refers to them as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on 15 September 1998.   On
    14 April 2014 the respondent granted limited leave to remain  until  31
    July 2014 so that he could finish  his  exams  for  the  academic  year
    2013/2014.  On 25 July 2014 he sought further  leave.   The  respondent
    refused that application by decision  and  letter  dated  24  September
    2014.  Under reference to paragraph 276ADE(i) of the Immigration Rules,
    it was considered reasonable to expect the appellant to  leave  the  UK
    because:

          a) You have completed your exams for the academic year 2013/2014,
             the sole reason for your previous grant of leave  outside  the
             Rules;

          b) You spent 7 years of your life living in Pakistan;

          c) You speak some Urdu, a  language  widely  spoken  in  Pakistan
             which will aid your re-integration into Pakistani society;

          d) You last travelled back to Pakistan as recently as 2009; and

          e) Given that your parents and siblings have no  valid  leave  to
             remain in the UK it is expected that you will  all  leave  and
             return to Pakistan as a family unit, so you  can  continue  to
             enjoy your family life together.

 3.  The  respondent  found  no  exceptional   circumstances   to   warrant
    consideration outside the Rules.

 4. By determination promulgated on 26  January  2015  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Kempton allowed the appellant's appeal, concluding  at  paragraph
    27:

         "... the appellant has shown that  interference  with  his  private
         life would be disproportionate if he were to be expected  to  leave
         the UK ... whatever  his  father  may  have  done  in  relation  to
         immigration history is not relevant  in  the  assessment  for  this
         particular appellant."

 5. The respondent sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the
    following grounds:

          i) ... the  Tribunal  failed  to  provide  adequate  reasons  for
             considering the case outside the Immigration Rules ... when no
             findings have been made  in  respect  of  the  merits  of  the
             appellant's case within the Rules.

         ii) ... the Tribunal erred by not considering section  117B(1)  to
             (5) [of the 2002 Act]  with  regards  to  weight  placed  when
             making a reasonableness assessment  under  117B(6)(b).   While
             the legislation is referred to, along with the Rules ... there
             are no documented findings in respect of this legislation.

        iii) The Tribunal found ... that it  would  not  be  reasonable  to
             expect the  appellant  to  leave  the  UK  because  he  is  in
             education.  While the Tribunal refers to ... EV  (Philippines)
             [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874  ...  insufficient  reasons  have  been
             provided for going against the findings in  that  judgment  at
             paragraph 60 ... that it is reasonable to expect  children  to
             leave the children with their parents, and the  UK  cannot  be
             expected to educate the world.

         iv) ... the judge notes ... that the appellant  does  speak  Urdu,
             that his father needed an Urdu interpreter ... at court  which
             indicates that the family speak Urdu at home ... that  he  has
             family in Pakistan ... and this,  together  with  the  judge's
             findings that it is in the best interests of  a  child  to  be
             with  his  parents,  fails  to  address   the   [respondent's]
             submission that there is no reason why the appellant could not
             continue his education in Pakistan.

 6. The judge granting permission to appeal observed that the judge  should
    perhaps also have had regard to Patel [2013] UKSC72 where  the  Supreme
    Court held that a foreign student has no right to remain in the  UK  to
    receive education on private life grounds.

 7. Mr Matthews pointed out that the family came to the UK on the basis  of
    a work permit fraudulently obtained by his father in 2005,  in  respect
    of which his father was later subject to a  criminal  conviction.   The
    appellant's residence has always been either  unlawful  or  precarious.
    Although the judge at paragraph 9 set  out  the  legislation  including
    section 117B which provides that  little  weight  is  to  be  given  to
    private life in such circumstances, the substance of the  determination
    did not suggest that the principle had been  recognised.   It  was  not
    clear whether the judge had allowed the appeal on the basis of  section
    117B(6) and whether in or out of the Immigration Rules.  The outcome of
    the case should not have been dictated by the better interests  of  the
    child and no more.  The whole family  circumstances  and  history  were
    glossed over in the determination.  The statutory  provision  that  the
    maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the public interest
    was recited but not applied.  The judge focused on the  appellant  only
    and ignored the family context.  The appellant's mother  father  and  2
    younger siblings are also in the UK and all lack status.  The judge did
    not consider what was to happen to the wider family.  The future of the
    appellant as a child could not be determined without  that  assessment.
    The judge did not address whether it was reasonable to expect the whole
    family to go or to stay.

 8. Mr Winter submitted that there was no error in the determination.   The
    judge set out the relevant provisions of statute and of the Rules.  She
    should not be taken to have thereafter overlooked them.  Alternatively,
    if there were any error, it was not material.  Read sensibly and  as  a
    whole the judge adequately justified her conclusion on whether  it  was
    reasonable and proportionate to expect the appellant to leave  the  UK.
    As to section 117B it was plain that the appellant spoke English.   The
    judge had not said anything explicitly about his financial independence
    but it was obvious that he is in the UK as a student.  As to the  wider
    effect of the decision this was an  appeal  only  by  the  son  of  the
    family, not by the family as a whole.  It was appropriate to assess his
    position rather than that of the family.  Mr Winter accepted that it is
    the known policy of the respondent that if a family  includes  a  child
    with leave to remain other members are  not  usually  removed,  on  the
    basis of family life and proportionality. The judge should be taken  to
    have been aware of  that.   The  assumption  behind  her  decision  was
    plainly that all the family would stay.  Absence of explicit  statement
    of a particular point on which the outcome depended need not  be  fatal
    to a determination.  The judge had it in mind  that  the  appellant  is
    here with his parents and his siblings.  Her decision implied  that  it
    was not reasonable to expect the return of the rest of the family.  The
    case turned not so much on the best interests of  the  child  as  on  a
    reasonability question.  If it was reasonable for the appellant to stay
    it was reasonable also for his parents and siblings to stay.

 9. I observed at this point that although it had been assumed all round so
    far that section 117B(6) raises a question relevant to  this  case,  in
    fact it does not.  It applies where another party, not the child, is to
    be removed.  Parties agreed.

10. To this, Mr Winter submitted  that  the  appeal  properly  fell  to  be
    allowed under  paragraph  276ADE(i)(iv)  of  the  Rules,  which  raised
    precisely the question whether it would be "reasonable  to  expect  the
    applicant to leave the UK."  That does I  think  identify  the  crucial
    issue, as indeed the respondent did in the decision under  appeal.   Mr
    Winter said finally that the judge answered that question, so any error
    was immaterial.

11. I indicated that in my view the determination errs materially in law.

12. As to whether the judge paid any real attention to section 117B(4)  and
    (5), Mr Winter pointed out that at paragraph 21 the  judge  noted  that
    the appellant had established family  and  private  life  here  "albeit
    without right to do so."  That is the only recognition of the nature of
    the appellant's residence.  That was not split  down  by  either  party
    into its various periods, but appears to have been always either on  an
    unlawful or on a precarious basis.   That of course is  not  personally
    attributable to him, but the judge was under a statutory obligation  to
    give  little  weight   to   private   life   established   under   such
    circumstances.

13. The judge did not consider that point at all.  The provision  does  not
    apply  only  to  periods  of  adult  life.   There  is  of  course  the
    requirement in section 55  of  the  2009  Act  for  the  respondent  to
    discharge her functions "having regard to the  need  to  safeguard  and
    promote the welfare of children who are in the  UK",  which  the  judge
    also set out in her determination.  It is to be presumed that  the  two
    statutory provisions do not result in conflict.  The obligation on  the
    respondent under section 55 is intended to be expressed and  discharged
    in terms of the Immigration Rules, including paragraph 276ADE.

14. It is not a question whether a judge sets out in full the  requirements
    of part 5A of the 2002 Act, but whether in substance she applies  them.
    In this case the provisions were set out but not applied.

15. The judge in my opinion was also wrong to find the immigration  history
    of the appellant's father (and the rest of the family) irrelevant.  The
    reasonability of expecting the appellant to leave  the  UK  turned  not
    only on his better interests but  on  whether  that  was  a  reasonable
    expectation in the whole  circumstances  of  the  case.   That  plainly
    included factor (e) expressed in the respondent's refusal letter.   The
    judge was wrong to bypass that matter and the effect of her decision on
    whether not the whole family was to be expected to leave or to  remain.
     Although there was only one party to the appeal, that did  not  enable
    the appellant to succeed without consideration of  the  family  context
    and immigration history.  The judge was not relieved from an assessment
    along the lines explained in Zoumbas [2014] SC (UKSC) 75, in EV and  in
    PW [2015] CSIH 36, to which Mr Matthews made reference.

16. The determination errs materially in law, principally because the judge
    answered the crucial question (a) after citing Part 5 of the  2002  Act
    but without applying it, and (b) confining herself to  the  appellant's
    immediate interests, and wrongly excluding the wider  circumstances  of
    the case.

17. The determination is set aside.  No findings of the First-tier Tribunal
    are to stand.

18. The respondent took a neutral course on whether the decision should  be
    remade in the First-tier  Tribunal  or  in  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The
    appellant was content for it to be  remitted.   The  case  is  apt  for
    entirely  fresh  consideration  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and   is
    accordingly remitted there.  The member(s) of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    chosen to consider the case are not to include Judge Kempton.

19. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.






           [pic]


           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
           4 June 2015


