
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40251/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31st July 2015                    |On 10th November 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                          MR MUHAMMAD USMAN ABBASI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Shergill, promulgated on 19th February 2015,  following  a  hearing  at
    Taylor House on 5th February 2015.  In  the  determination,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal of Mr Muhammad Usman Abbasi under  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The Respondent Secretary of State subsequently applied for, and
    was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and  thus  the
    matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, who  was  born  on  3rd
    June 1987.  He appealed against the decision of  the  Respondent  dated
    19th September  2014  refusing  his  application  for  a  variation  of
    existing leave to remain in the UK as a Tier 4 (General) Student.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he is below the maximum period  of  three
    years  and  should  be  allowed  to   study   a   "one   year"   course
    notwithstanding the bar on  undergraduate  courses  that  go  for  five
    years, rather than three years as permitted.  He says that he  did  not
    join the HND course until 7th March 2012.  This meant that he spent one
    year and eleven months and fourteen days studying rather than two years
    and one day.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge held that the Appellant could not have started the HND course
    any earlier than 5th March 2012 as that  is  the  entry  stamp  on  his
    passport which accompanied the application.  The judge held that  there
    was no reason to doubt that 7th March 2012 was his  first  day  on  the
    course as he claimed.  (See paragraphs 11 and 12).  The judge held that
    there was nothing in the guidance or the Rules to suggest that the case
    put forward by the Appellant was impermissible (see paragraph 14).  The
    appeal is allowed on immigration grounds.

Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds of application say that the judge erred in failing to  have
    regard to the Upper Tribunal judgment in  Islam  (paragraph  245ZX(ha):
    five years' study) [2013] UKUT 608.  In this case it was held that  the
    relevant rule required that time spent at degree level by the Appellant
    as a student under the pre-Tier 4 Rules had to be taken into account in
    calculating the maximum period of five years in paragraph 245ZX(ha).

 6. Furthermore, the Upper Tribunal established that  it  is  a  period  of
    leave and not the actual study which is the measure for calculating the
    period spent in the UK imposed by  paragraph  245ZX(ha).   Accordingly,
    the judge had simply misconstrued the Rules.

 7. On 14th April 2015, permission to appeal was granted on the basis that,
    if one applied Islam, it was arguable that the appeal simply had to  be
    refused under the Immigration Rules.

 8. Furthermore, although the Notice of Appeal raised reliance upon Article
    8 rights, this could only ever have been on the evidence, on the  basis
    of a "private life".  However, under Section 117A -  D,  the  Appellant
    could not succeed because his immigration status was always precarious.



Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me on 31st July 2015, the Appellant  was  not  in
    attendance.   Neither,  was  any  representative  on  his   behalf   in
    attendance.  Nor, was any explanation given to the  Tribunal  for  this
    non-attendance.

10. Mr Walker, appearing on behalf of the Respondent  Secretary  of  State,
    submitted that the Appellant could not succeed  on  the  basis  of  the
    Upper Tribunal's decision in Islam because that made it clear  that  it
    is a period of leave and not the actual study which is the measure  for
    calculating the period of time spent in the  UK  imposed  by  paragraph
    245ZX(ha).  The judge had, in terms set out in the  determination,  had
    regard to the  period  of  study  (see  paragraph  11),  and  this  was
    impermissible.  The appeal  could  not  have  been  allowed  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

Error of Law

11. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law  (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  It is plain that, if one were to apply  the  Upper  Tribunal
    judgment in Islam, the Appellant could not succeed  but  because  under
    the relevant Immigration Rule, it is the period of leave  and  not  the
    actual period of study which is the measure for  calculating  the  time
    spent in the UK.  The Appellant's argument, on this basis,  was  doomed
    to failure.  He could not succeed under the Immigration Rules.

Remaking the Decision

12. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, and the evidence before her, and the  submissions  that  I  have
    heard today.  I am dismissing this appeal for the following reasons.

13. First, the Appellant cannot succeed, for the  reasons  I  have  already
    given above, under paragraph 245ZX because of the time that he has been
    in the UK.

14. Second, the Appellant  cannot  succeed  under  Article  8  ECHR  rights
    because no evidence was put before the Tribunal, and none has been  put
    before this Tribunal today, to show that "private  life"  existed.   In
    point  of  fact,  the  Appellant's  presence  in  the  UK  was   always
    precarious.

15. Third, there is no evidence before me of sufficient substance to render
    it disproportionate to remove the Appellant (see Patel [2013]  UKSC  72
    and Naseem [2014] UKUT 25).  The appeal is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law such that it  falls  to  be  set  aside.   I  set  aside  the
decision of the original judge.  I remake the  decision  as  follows.   This
appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity order is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    9th November 2015

