
[pic]
IAC-TH-WYL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40170/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7th January 2016                  |On 29th January 2016                 |
|Prepared 8th January 2016            |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                         miss carol marian mcintosh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M. Kanu, Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr. Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Jamaica  born  on  29th  May  1969.   She
    appeals against a decision of Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Howard
    sitting at Richmond on 14th April 2015 in which he dismissed an  appeal
    against a decision of the Respondent dated 22nd September  2014.   That
    decision was to remove the Appellant from the United Kingdom by way  of
    directions pursuant to Section 10 of the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    1999 and to refuse to grant leave to remain.  The Appellant argued that
    the decisions put this country  in  breach  of  its  obligations  under
    Article 8 (right to  respect  for  private  and  family  life)  of  the
    European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  and  were  in  breach  of  the
    provisions of the Immigration Rules which relate to private and  family
    life contained in Appendix FM and  paragraph  276ADE.   The  burden  of
    proof of establishing this rested upon the Appellant and  the  standard
    of proof was the usual civil standard of balance of probabilities.

2.   The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom as a visitor on 21st  March
    2002.  She subsequently applied for leave to remain as a student  which
    was granted and thereafter  extended  until  31st  October  2006.   The
    Appellant submitted a further application for  leave  to  remain  as  a
    student in time but this was refused by the Respondent  and  an  appeal
    lodged against that refusal was dismissed.  The Appellant became appeal
    rights exhausted without any further leave to remain in this country on
    6th  November  2007.   The  Appellant  sent   an   unsolicited   legacy
    questionnaire to the Respondent on 16th September 2009 and submitted an
    application for further leave to remain on 31st March  2011  which  was
    refused a month later.  The Respondent  requested  further  information
    from the Appellant and after considering this further  information  the
    decision of 22nd September 2014 was issued which forms the  subject  of
    this appeal.

The Application

3.   In a letter  dated  16th  May  2011  requesting  that  the  Appellant's
    application on  Form  FLR(O)  be  reconsidered  the  Appellant's  legal
    representatives referred to the care which the Appellant was  providing
    for the Sponsor.  The Appellant lived in the same house as that of  her
    partner, the Sponsor which took care of her accommodation  needs.   The
    Appellant also received help from another Sponsor.  The  Appellant  had
    met the Sponsor in 2005 and the couple had thus  been  living  together
    for a sufficient period which would have been recognised by Home Office
    Policy DP3/96 before it was withdrawn in 2008.  (The Respondent's reply
    to this was that such a policy was irrelevant in any event since it had
    been withdrawn).  The Appellant had lived with lawful leave  to  remain
    in this country for at least five years before her leave expired.

Explanation for Refusal

4.   On 22nd September 2014 the  Respondent  wrote  an  eleven  page  letter
    refusing the Appellant's claim and noting the documentation received in
    support of the  application.   No  information  had  been  provided  to
    demonstrate how and when the Appellant and the Sponsor met or how their
    relationship began.  The Appellant had failed to demonstrate  that  her
    relationship with the Sponsor was one that went beyond that of a friend
    or carer.  The Appellant did  not  meet  the  eligibility  requirements
    contained within Appendix FM E-LTRP.1.7. This requires the relationship
    between the Appellant and the partner to  be  genuine  and  subsisting.
    Even if there was a genuine relationship the Appellant could not  bring
    herself within EX.1 of Appendix FM as she could  not  show  that  there
    were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  with   the   Sponsor
    continuing outside the United Kingdom.

5.   No information had been provided which demonstrated  that  the  Sponsor
    was currently receiving any form of medical treatment  for  his  spinal
    condition.  He had been discharged from the Community Therapeutic  Team
    Facilitated Exercise Programme.  If the Sponsor  decided  to  accompany
    the Appellant to Jamaica he would have access to any necessary  medical
    treatment there.  The Sponsor had been born  in  Jamaica  in  the  same
    parish  in  which  the  Appellant  was  born.   He  had   applied   for
    naturalisation as a British citizen on  26th  September  1996  and  was
    naturalised as such on 12th March  1998.   If  the  Sponsor  wished  to
    relocate to Jamaica with the Appellant he could  renounce  his  British
    citizenship but retain his Jamaican nationality.  As a Jamaican citizen
    he would have access to medical care,  disability  support,  etc.   The
    letter quoted from the Country of Origin Information Report  on  health
    services in Jamaica.  The Sponsor had last visited Jamaica in 2001  and
    the country would be familiar to him.  He would not face  any  barriers
    in adapting to life there.  The Appellant herself  had  worked  in  the
    United Kingdom and could do  so  in  Jamaica.   Whilst  in  the  United
    Kingdom she had received financial support from friends and her church.
     She had failed  to  demonstrate  that  she  had  met  and  formed  her
    relationship with the Sponsor at a time  when  she  the  Appellant  had
    valid leave to remain in the United Kingdom.   The  claim  was  refused
    under  paragraph  E-LTRP.1.3.  with  reference  to  R-LTRP.1.1.(d)   of
    Appendix FM.

6.   The Respondent considered  whether  the  Appellant  had  established  a
    private life in this country and whether she could bring herself within
    the provisions of paragraph 276ADE.  The Appellant  did  not  fall  for
    refusal under any of the suitability grounds in Section S  but  due  to
    her age and length of residence she failed to meet sub-sections  (iii);
    (iv); (v) and (vi) of paragraph  276ADE.   The  Appellant's  length  of
    residence amounted to twelve years but such a period would  not  result
    in  the  development  of  obstacles  significant  enough  to  make  the
    Appellant  unable  to  reintegrate  herself  back  into  Jamaica.   The
    Appellant had spent the majority  of  her  life  including  her  youth,
    formative years and most of her adulthood in  Jamaica  and  would  have
    developed ties and attachments to that country which  would  facilitate
    reintegration.  The Sponsor  shared  a  cultural  background  with  the
    Appellant which would facilitate the  Appellant's  reintegration.   The
    Appellant had failed to demonstrate that  she  would  face  significant
    obstacles  to  being  assimilated  back  into  Jamaican  society.   The
    Appellant had resided illegally within the United Kingdom for the  last
    six years and her removal  was  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim
    pursued.   There  was  insufficient   evidence   of   any   exceptional
    circumstances that would make it appropriate to allow the Appellant  to
    remain outside of the Immigration Rules.

7.   The Appellant appealed that decision arguing that  sufficient  evidence
    had been provided to establish that the Appellant and Sponsor were in a
    genuine  and  subsisting  relationship.   It   was   unreasonable   and
    impractical to expect  the  Sponsor  to  relocate  to  Jamaica  if  the
    Appellant should be removed there and that would be a  disproportionate
    interference with the Appellant's Article 8 rights.  The Appellant  and
    Sponsor had become intimate friends  in  2005  three  years  after  the
    Appellant arrived.  They had been living together since then.

The Appeal at First Instance

8.   The Judge heard oral evidence from the Appellant  and  Mr  Owen  Gordon
    who she said was her partner. In a relatively brief  determination  the
    Judge dismissed the appeal stating that the Appellant had not satisfied
    him that she was in a relationship akin  to  marriage  with  Mr  Gordon
    "they share the same accommodation, but  no  more".   There  were  more
    distant  family  members  who  spoke  of  their  association  with  the
    Appellant but that had not satisfied the Judge that the Appellant had a
    family life with any of those persons either.  The Appellant's  removal
    would not constitute an interference with any right to a  family  life.
    Noticeably, the Judge did not deal with whether  the  Appellant  had  a
    claim for private  life.   Nor  did  the  Judge  consider  whether  the
    Appellant could meet the provisions  of  Appendix  FM  in  relation  to
    family life or paragraph 276ADE in relation  to  private  life  stating
    that as the application that was made to the  Respondent  was  on  31st
    March 2011 it was to be considered under what the Judge referred to  as
    "the old Rules".

9.   I take that last remark to mean that  the  Judge  held  that  the  Rule
    changes introduced in July 2012 by way of  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph
    276ADE did not apply in this case because the application had been made
    before those  Rules  were  introduced.   The  Respondent  had  in  fact
    considered this application under the 2012 Rules but  had  nevertheless
    refused the application.  In deciding not  to  deal  with  this  appeal
    under the post-July 2012 regime the Judge appeared  to  be  basing  his
    view on the authority of Edgehill (although not cited  by  him  in  his
    determination).  The correct position was  explained  in  a  subsequent
    Court of Appeal decision of Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 74  delivered  before
    the Judge heard the instant appeal which makes clear  that  apart  from
    decisions taken in a narrow window between July and September 2012  the
    Respondent's decision under the  Immigration  Rules  should  take  into
    account the Rules as at the date  of  the  decision  not  the  date  of
    application.

The Onward Appeal

10.  The Appellant appealed the dismissal of her  appeal  arguing  that  the
    Judge was wrong in law in  confining  himself  to  jurisprudence  under
    Article 8 without considering the  post-July  2012  Immigration  Rules.
    The Judge had failed to clarify which standard of proof he employed  in
    his assessment of the evidence and whether or not it was the balance of
    probabilities.  Although the Judge had directed himself  in  accordance
    with Razgar he had only considered the first step and in  finding  that
    there was not a family life in this case had not gone  on  to  consider
    proportionality.  Evidence  of  the  genuineness  of  the  relationship
    between the Appellant and the Sponsor was for example that the  Sponsor
    had included the Appellant in his household bills.  The Judge  had  not
    weighed the evidence contained in the Appellant's bundle.

11.  A letter  from  the  Sponsor's  doctor,  Dr  Ali,  had  spoken  of  the
    Sponsor's need for assistance with activities  of  daily  living.   The
    Judge had queried why Dr Ali had not made mention of the care  provided
    by the Appellant if indeed the Appellant was providing such  care.  The
    Judge had misinterpreted and then come to the wrong conclusion about Dr
    Ali's letter as it was written  for  the  Sponsor  to  obtain  adequate
    accommodation. It was thus not relevant to the  Appellant's  case  that
    she required leave to remain in this country and  was  caring  for  the
    Sponsor.

12.  The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Frankish  on  7th  October  2015.   In
    granting permission to appeal he wrote that:

         "The application for permission to appeal asserts that the case was
         considered under the old Rules but the  timing  of  its  submission
         meant that it had to be considered under transitional  arrangements
         by which both old and new Rules were to be considered (MM (Lebanon)
         [2014] EWCA Civ 985)  and  the  Respondent's  correspondence  there
         referred to in  the  application  (ground  1);  failed  to  specify
         whether or not  the  balance  of  probability  was  being  applied;
         despite referring to the five stages of Razgar failed  to  consider
         proportionality; insufficient account taken of the duration of  the
         relationship relied upon; focussed excessively on the evidence  not
         in the bundles.  While the application asserts that  correspondence
         supporting ground 1 is enclosed in fact it is not.  It is  arguable
         nevertheless  that  there  is  merit  in  ground  1.   However  the
         Appellant must come fully prepared  with  documentary  evidence  to
         support his assertion in ground 1."

13.  I note here that the reference to correspondence arises from  paragraph
    3 of the Appellant's application for permission  to  appeal  the  First
    Tier Tribunal's decision.  Although the paragraph is  not  particularly
    clear the objection taken was that the Judge had restricted himself  to
    considering certain correspondence listed as:

         "The enclosed [Appellant's  representatives']  covering  letter  of
         28th March 2011 and the case review letter of 16th May 2011 to  the
         Chief Immigration Officer.  Our CIO letter of  16th  May  2011  was
         responded to by the  UKBA's  Reconsideration  Team  in  an  undated
         UKBA's letter received on 15th June 2011 (copy enclosed)."

14.  As was indicated by Judge Frankish those documents  were  not  enclosed
    with the application for permission but the correspondence was  in  the
    Appellant's  bundle.    The   letter   written   by   the   Appellant's
    representatives  on  28th  March  2011  was  a  covering  letter  which
    accompanied the Appellant's FLR(O) application form.  It  detailed  the
    history of the Appellant's relationship with the Sponsor and said  that
    the Appellant had extended her visa as a student for most part  of  her
    stay until she  encountered  "personal  problems".   The  "case  review
    letter"  of  16th  May  2011  was  a  further  letter  written  by  the
    Appellant's representatives taking issue with what at  that  stage  was
    the Respondent's rejection of the  Appellant's  claim.   It  emphasised
    that the Appellant was living in the same house as the Sponsor and that
    the Sponsor had provided evidence of his financial status.  The undated
    Respondent's letter was a pro forma one acknowledging  the  Appellant's
    request for a reconsideration of the decision at that stage  to  refuse
    the application and indicating that no removal action would be  pursued
    until the request for reconsideration had  been  dealt  with.   It  was
    correct that this documentation had not been specifically  referred  to
    in the Judge's decision at first instance  but  the  correspondence  in
    question was brief and said nothing which was different to the  matters
    which the Judge did consider.

15.  The Respondent replied to the grant of permission pursuant to  Rule  24
    of the Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules on 19th October 2015 noting  that
    the Judge  had  found  that  Article  8  was  not  engaged.   In  those
    circumstances the Judge would not have found for the Appellant even  if
    he had had been otherwise properly directed.

The Hearing Before Me

16.  As a consequence of the grant the matter came before  me  to  determine
    in the first place whether there was a material error of law such  that
    the determination of the First-tier fell to be set aside.  If not, then
    the decision of the First-tier would  stand.   At  the  outset  of  the
    hearing I observed to the parties that there was a clear error  in  the
    Judge's determination  in  his  misunderstanding  of  the  transitional
    provisions following the  decision  in  Edgehill  but  overlooking  the
    subsequent decision of Singh (see above paragraph 9).  The question was
    whether that error was material such that it led to the decision  being
    set aside in its entirety or in part.

17.  For the Appellant it was argued that the Appellant could bring  herself
    within Appendix FM as the Sponsor  came  within  the  definition  of  a
    partner contained in Section Gen.1.2. of Appendix FM, that is a  person
    who had been living together with the Appellant in a relationship "akin
    to marriage for at least two years prior to the date  of  application".
    The Appellant in this case had cohabited with  the  Sponsor  for  seven
    years.  She had made her application in  2011  but  it  had  taken  the
    Respondent three years to make a final  appealable  decision  which  if
    anything served to increase the number of years of  cohabitation.   The
    Appellant had also established a private life and any removal  decision
    would have to be proportionate to the  interference  with  private  and
    family life.  The Appellant had been living in the United  Kingdom  now
    for over thirteen years and had no living relatives  in  Jamaica.   She
    would find it  intolerable  to  reintegrate  back  into  Jamaica.   The
    Sponsor suffered from a number of ailments and he too could not go  and
    live in Jamaica.

18.  For the Respondent it was  acknowledged  that  the  Judge  should  have
    looked at the July 2012 Rules as amended.  However Appendix FM in  this
    case was not material as the Judge had found that there was  no  family
    life (see paragraph 8 above).  There were letters from doctors  telling
    the Tribunal about the health of the Sponsor but there was  no  mention
    in them that the Appellant and Sponsor were  in  a  relationship.   One
    would only get as far as the proportionality stage if one  could  clear
    the hurdle of establishing that family life existed.  It  was  conceded
    by the Respondent  that  the  Judge  had  not  considered  whether  the
    Appellant had established a private life under  paragraph  276ADE  that
    was something which was absent from the determination.  The finding  as
    to family life was adequately  reasoned  and  the  appeal  was  a  mere
    disagreement in that regard.

19.   For  the  Appellant  the  Appellant's  representative  reiterated  the
    Appellant's argument as to both private and family life.  There was  no
    evidence to contradict the claim that the Appellant  and  Sponsor  were
    living as husband and wife.

The Error of Law Decision

20.  The Judge did not consider whether  the  Appellant  had  established  a
    private life which would be disproportionately  interfered  with.  That
    was an error and was an issue that would  need  to  be  re-heard.   The
    question of whether there was an  error  in  the  conclusion  that  the
    Appellant had not established a family life with the Sponsor  was  more
    complex.  The Judge had considered that aspect of the  matter  but  had
    rejected the Appellant's claim to have a family life.  The evidence  of
    the Appellant and the Sponsor had conflicted as  to  when  cohabitation
    had started.  The Sponsor had said it was in 2008 when  he  acquired  a
    council  property  whereas  the  Appellant's   claim   was   that   the
    relationship had commenced in 2005.  The Respondent had pointed out  in
    the refusal letter there was no mention made of this relationship  when
    the Appellant applied for leave in 2006.  It  was  reasonable  to  have
    expected the Appellant  to  have  mentioned  the  relationship  in  her
    application if the relationship had begun by then.

21.  The Judge placed weight on what he referred  to  as  "the  two  missing
    years" for which there was no or insufficient evidence.  The Judge  was
    satisfied that the Appellant and Sponsor occupied the same address  and
    was well aware that Dr Ali's letter was written in support of a housing
    application. The grounds for permission to appeal were wrong to suggest
    that the Judge had misunderstood  the  purpose  of  the  letter.   What
    troubled the Judge was that the medical documentation did not recognise
    the fact that the Sponsor was said to be in a  long  term  relationship
    let alone naming who that was with.  The Judge took the  view  that  it
    was reasonable to have expected Dr Ali to  have  referred  to  who  was
    currently providing the Sponsor with assistance if the Sponsor required
    that assistance.  That the doctor did not do that undermined the  claim
    that the relationship between the Appellant  and  Sponsor  went  beyond
    sharing the same accommodation.

22.  The issue was whether the Judge had  given  adequate  reasons  for  his
    finding that the Appellant and Sponsor were not in a relationship  akin
    to marriage so as to bring  the  Appellant  within  the  provisions  of
    Appendix FM.  It was an error for the Judge not to apply  the  Appendix
    FM test.  The question was whether it would have  made  any  difference
    (in the light of the Judge's findings) if he had referred  to  Appendix
    FM.  In my view the use by the Judge of the phrase "a relationship akin
    to marriage" is evidence that the Judge was in fact aware of  the  test
    under Appendix FM.  He fell into error in coming to the conclusion that
    this test arose from the pre-July 2012 Rules and  jurisprudence  rather
    than the post-July 2012 Rules.  That was an error of law but it was not
    a material one since if the Judge had directed himself to the July 2012
    Rules he would have found that his understanding of what  the  pre-July
    2012 position was was in fact what the post-July 2012 position was. The
    result in short would inevitably have been the same.

23.  Judge Frankish when granting permission did not state  that  the  Judge
    had arguably erred in law in finding that  there  was  no  family  life
    between the Appellant and Sponsor.  What Judge Frankish  was  concerned
    about was the allegation that the Judge had  not  considered  the  2011
    correspondence.  As I have indicated that was not an error because  the
    Judge had considered that  correspondence.   Judge  Frankish  was  also
    concerned that the Judge had erred in not applying the July 2012 Rules.
     As I have indicated that is correct, the Judge  appeared  to  indicate
    that the July 2012 Rules did not apply  but  nevertheless  went  on  to
    apply the test ("a relationship akin to marriage") which  arises  under
    the July 2012 Rules.  This was an error of law but not a  material  one
    since he would have arrived at the same conclusion in any event.

24.  I indicated to the parties that there was no material error of  law  in
    the Judge's conclusion that  there  was  no  family  life  between  the
    Appellant and the Sponsor.  There was an error in that  the  Judge  did
    not consider the Appellant's private life  which  would  be  interfered
    with by her removal to Jamaica.  I indicated that I would proceed to re-
    hear the matter allowing the Appellant to give further  oral  testimony
    in relation to that issue.

The Appellant's Oral Testimony

25.  The Appellant stated that she did have a loving relationship  with  the
    Sponsor notwithstanding the decision at first instance.  However due to
    her status she could not marry the Sponsor.  In order to marry him  she
    would have to prove identification and her passport was currently being
    held by the Respondent.  She had no family members "back home" (as  her
    representative  put  it)  because  both  her  mother  and  father  were
    deceased.

26.  In cross-examination she stated that before  she  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom she had worked in a haberdashery store.  She had been  away  so
    long now that it would be a struggle for her to  pick  up  the  pieces.
    She had worked in the United Kingdom in  a  care  home.   She  had  not
    returned to Jamaica when her studies finished and her leave had expired
    because she had not known what to do or how to appeal. Her  mother  had
    died in 2005 so it was not possible for her to return to  Jamaica.   At
    the time she came to the United Kingdom as a student she did  have  the
    intention of returning to Jamaica at the conclusion of her studies.

Closing Submissions

27.  In closing for the Respondent reliance was placed on the  2014  refusal
    letter.  There were  no  serious  obstacles  to  reintegration  of  the
    Appellant upon return to Jamaica and nothing to meet the test  set  out
    in paragraph 276ADE(vi).  The Appellant had grown  up  in  Jamaica  and
    spoke the language.  She had worked previously there and there  was  no
    reason why she could not return there.  It was very  unlikely  that  it
    would be proportionate to allow her appeal outside the Rules.

28.  In closing for  the  Appellant  the  argument  was  repeated  that  the
    Appellant could meet the requirement of the Rules as a partner  due  to
    the length of time she had cohabited with the Sponsor.   The  Appellant
    had established both a private and family  life.   She  was  a  student
    until some  problems  happened.   The  Appellant  and  Sponsor  started
    cohabiting in 2007 and her partner was supporting her.   She  lost  her
    mother and had never known her father and could not return to  Jamaica.
    It would be unduly harsh for her to be on her own  there.   Her  appeal
    should be allowed.

Findings

29.  As I have indicated although the Appellant  continues  to  assert  that
    she has an established family life with the Sponsor, that was  not  the
    finding of the Judge at first instance and I see no reason to go behind
    that decision in the light of  the  concerns  of  the  Judge  at  first
    instance.  The Respondent did not accept that the Appellant and Sponsor
    were in a relationship but did consider the matter on an even if  basis
    that even if the Appellant and Sponsor were in a relationship,  it  was
    reasonable to  expect  the  Sponsor  to  return  to  Jamaica  with  the
    Appellant as he held dual nationality and had  not  lost  his  ties  to
    Jamaica either.  I have considered the evidence of  the  Appellant  and
    Sponsor including their written statements made for the proceedings  at
    first instance and the lengthy and somewhat repetitive  representations
    made on behalf of the Appellant but I have to  say  that  I  have  seen
    nothing which would cause me to come to a different view to  the  Judge
    at first instance.  For the reasons I have given above (see  paragraphs
    22) I do not consider that the Judge's error of law in not specifically
    directing himself to  apply  Appendix  FM  would  have  resulted  in  a
    different decision nor do I consider that it infected his  findings  in
    relation to whether there was a genuine and subsisting relationship.  I
    therefore confine myself  to  considering  the  issue  of  whether  the
    Appellant has an established private life in this  country  and  if  so
    whether it would be disproportionately interfered with by requiring her
    to return to Jamaica.

30.  The Appellant cannot bring  herself  within  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  It is clear that she has not so  severed  her  ties
    with  Jamaica  that  there  are  very  significant  obstacles  to   her
    reintegration into Jamaica.  She has  not  lived  continuously  in  the
    United Kingdom for twenty years. She  would  have  to  demonstrate  the
    existence of very significant obstacles to her reintegration to succeed
    under the paragraph.  This she cannot do.   She  has  resided  in  this
    country for almost fourteen years but nevertheless spent  the  majority
    of her life (until she was 32) in Jamaica.  Her evidence  is  that  she
    has no living relatives in Jamaica but she is an adult with  a  history
    of work in Jamaica and I see no reason why she could  not  re-establish
    herself there.  Indeed even if I had accepted that there was  a  family
    life between the Appellant and  Sponsor  I  would  have  considered  it
    reasonable to expect the Sponsor to  relocate  with  the  Appellant  to
    Jamaica given that he remains a Jamaican citizen  as  well  as  holding
    British nationality and was born in the same parish in Jamaica  as  the
    Appellant.  The Respondent makes a sound point at paragraph 42  of  the
    refusal letter when she notes that the Appellant  had  entered  into  a
    relationship with someone who had shared a cultural background with her
    which would result in the Appellant maintaining ties to  Jamaica  which
    would in turn facilitate reintegration.  Even if the  Sponsor  requires
    medical treatment the Respondent submitted  cogent  evidence  at  first
    instance which was not  seriously  disputed.  It  indicated  that  such
    medical treatment as was necessary would be available to the Sponsor in
    Jamaica and which he would be able to access as a Jamaican citizen.

31.  The Appellant's claim to remain in this country under Article  8  falls
    to be decided outside the Immigration Rules.  The Appellant  must  show
    that she has established a private life in  this  country.   Given  her
    residence of almost fourteen years and her studies I  accept  that  she
    has established a private life.  Her return to Jamaica would  interfere
    with that private life but the interference would be  pursuant  to  the
    legitimate  aim  of  immigration  control  since  she  has  lived  here
    unlawfully  for  the  last  eight  years.   To  demonstrate  that   the
    interference would be disproportionate the  Appellant  must  show  some
    compelling reason why that would be so (see SS (Congo [2015]  EWCA  Civ
    387).  I do not find that there are  any  compelling  reasons  in  this
    case.  In effect the only reason  the  Appellant  relies  upon  is  the
    length of time she has been here and her friendship/relationship  which
    she claims with the Sponsor.

32.  In assessing proportionality the  Tribunal  must  have  regard  to  the
    provisions of Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002.  The Appellant's evidence as to when  her  relationship  with
    the Sponsor began has  changed  in  that  she  now  contends  that  the
    relationship  began  after  her  leave  expired  when  she   was   here
    unlawfully.  Even if I were to accept that the relationship between the
    Appellant and Sponsor were genuine (which I  do  not  for  the  reasons
    given above) the relationship  was  established  at  a  time  when  the
    Appellant's status here was unlawful and therefore little weight  would
    be attached to it in any event.  Similarly the Appellant's private life
    has been established either during the period when she  has  been  here
    unlawfully or  when  her  status  was  precarious  with  no  legitimate
    expectation it would be extended. Little or no weight can  be  attached
    to  her  private  life  in  the  proportionality  exercise.   In  those
    circumstances given that little weight it is difficult to see  how  the
    Appellant's appeal could succeed under  Article  8  outside  the  Rules
    given the weight to be attributed to the  legitimate  aim  pursued.   I
    therefore dismiss the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law in relation to the Appellant's claim under Article 8 (private life).   I
have  therefore  set  that  decision  aside.   I  re-make  the  decision  by
dismissing the Appellant's appeal under Article 8.

Appellant's appeal dismissed under both the Immigration  Rules  and  Article
8.

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 28th day of January 2016

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal has been dismissed there can be no fee award.


Signed this 28th day of January 2016

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft

