
[pic]
ST

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/40374/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 July 2015                      |On 13 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                                WASEEM ABBAS
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Garrod, counsel, instructed by Pride
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This matter comes before us for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge P J Clarke ("the FTTJ") promulgated on 14 January  2015,
    in which he dismissed the Appellant's appeal  against  the  refusal  of
    leave to remain in the UK as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.

 2. No anonymity direction was made by the FTTJ and we see no need for such
    a direction in these proceedings.

Background

 3. The Appellant's application for  leave  to  remain  was  refused  under
    paragraph 245ZX(o) of the Immigration Rules on  the  grounds  that  the
    Appellant had not demonstrated that he genuinely intended to  study  on
    the course he claimed to want to follow.

 4. The Appellant issued a notice of appeal and the matter duly came before
    FTTJ  Clarke  on  8  January  2015.  Neither  the  Appellant  nor   his
    representative attended the  hearing which proceeded  in  his  absence.
    The FTTJ failed to take into account that  the  Appellant's  solicitors
    had applied, by fax sent to the Tribunal on  5  January  2015,  for  an
    adjournment on the grounds of the  Appellant's  ill  health.  The  FTTJ
    decided that, the notice of hearing having  been  properly  served  and
    there being no request  for  an  adjournment  or  indication  that  the
    position would be any different on any other occasion, it  was  in  the
    interests of justice to proceed with the hearing,  in  accordance  with
    Rule 28 of the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal (Immigration and
    Asylum) Rules 2014.

 5. Mr Garrod's principal submission is that the Appellant failed to have a
    fair  hearing,  the  FTTJ  having  failed  to  take  into  account  the
    Appellant's  application.  Had  the  FTTJ  done  so,  he   would   have
    appreciated the medical evidence indicated the Appellant was too ill to
    attend the hearing and to give oral evidence.  As it was, the Appellant
    had lost the opportunity to give oral evidence to the  effect  that  he
    was a genuine student, the sole reason for refusal of his  application.
    Furthermore, the fact the Judge had seen the complete interview  record
    whereas the Appellant had not, prejudiced the Appellant: he should have
    been examined on it.  Mr Garrod accepted that no witness  statement  or
    bundle had  been  provided  by  the  Appellant  for  the  hearing.   He
    submitted that the Judge had made findings which were not accurate  and
    which might not have been made had the Appellant given  oral  evidence.
    It would, for example, have assisted the Judge  if  the  Appellant  had
    clarified the timescales pertaining to his study and the revocation  of
    his College's sponsorship licence; whereas  the  Judge  had  found  the
    Appellant had been away from formal study "for a period  of  (about)  2
    years", the Appellant's evidence was that it was nearer 18 months.   As
    Mr Garrod put it to us "the Judge may have come to the same conclusions
    on the evidence, but he may not".  He submitted that it was "likely  he
    wouldn't have come to the same conclusion"; he would  have  taken  into
    account what the Appellant was doing,  including  getting  his  English
    language qualification.  He submitted that the FTTJ had failed to  take
    into account the Respondent's 60 day policy and where the Home Office's
    responsibility on that issue lay.  Mr Garrod accepted that  he  was  in
    some difficulty with arguing  an  error  of  law  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's Article 8 rights,  stating  that  the  case  law  had  been
    "fluid" at the date of decision.  He conceded that if  the  Appellant's
    appeal under the Immigration Rules  had  failed,  it  would  have  been
    unlikely to succeed on human rights grounds.

 6. For the Respondent, Mr Avery submitted  that,  even  if  the  FTTJ  had
    considered the application and medical evidence in  support,  it  would
    have made no difference because the nature of the Appellant's condition
    was not such as to warrant an adjournment.  There was no indication the
    Appellant's medical condition  would  have  prevented  the  Appellant's
    attendance at the hearing or his ability  to  give  oral  evidence.  He
    submitted  that  no  reasonable  Judge,  seeing  the  application   and
    evidence, would have adjourned.  There  was  insufficient  evidence  to
    demonstrate a good reason for adjournment; in particular  no  diagnosis
    had been provided.

 7. Insofar as the materiality of any potential error of law was concerned,
    Mr Avery submitted  that  the  Appellant  had  not  been  disadvantaged
    because s85A(3) Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  limited
    the evidence to be considered  by  the  FTTJ  in  appeals  against  the
    refusal of leave under the  points  based  scheme  in  the  Immigration
    Rules. Furthermore, the Appellant had had the  opportunity  to  address
    the issues identified in the reasons for refusal letter  prior  to  the
    hearing taking place yet had not lodged a witness statement or a bundle
    of documents for the hearing. The Appellant was, he said, "angling  ...
    for another hearing".  Mr Avery noted the FTTJ had taken  into  account
    the extensive grounds of  appeal  lodged  by  the  Appellant.   If  the
    Appellant had had an issue with the lack of a  complete  transcript  of
    the interview, he should have raised it prior to the hearing before the
    FTTJ, rather than at the  Upper  Tribunal  hearing;  to  challenge  the
    matter at this late stage was not, he said, "a realistic approach".

 8. In response, Mr Garrod noted that s85A had been repealed.  He  referred
    to Ahmed and Another (PBS: admissible evidence) [2014] UKUT 00365 (IAC)
    as a possible source of guidance albeit he noted  some  differences  in
    the circumstances of that case.  He also invited us  to  disregard  the
    Respondent's submission that s85A prohibited reliance by the  Appellant
    on oral evidence in a points based appeal: it was common  practice,  he
    submitted, for oral evidence to be admitted in points based appeals and
    the Respondent had herself  relied  on  post-application  evidence.  Mr
    Garrod submitted that it had been incumbent on the FTTJ to  ensure  the
    Appellant had had a copy of the interview record; he should have  "kept
    matters under observation". He submitted that an adjournment "may  have
    been appropriate"; the Appellant had wanted to be present and he should
    have been given the opportunity to adduce evidence in  support  of  his
    appeal.

Discussion

 9. We are satisfied that the Appellant's application for  an  adjournment,
    together with the medical evidence in support, had been  faxed  to  the
    Tribunal in advance of the hearing and that it was either on  the  file
    and missed by the Judge or had not yet  reached  the  file.  In  either
    case, it was an error of procedure for the application to be overlooked
    and not considered or a decision taken on it.  We therefore turn to the
    issue of materiality.

10. The power to adjourn the hearing was in Rule 4(3)(h)  of  The  Tribunal
    Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Rules
    2014. Also relevant is Rule 2 which sets out the  overriding  objective
    and the  parties'  obligation  to  co-operate  with  the  Tribunal,  as
    follows:

          1) The overriding objective of these Rules is to enable the
             Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly.

          2) Dealing with a case fairly and justly includes

             (a) dealing with the case in ways which are proportionate to
             the importance of the case, the complexity of the issues, the
             anticipated costs and the resources of the parties and of the
             Tribunal;

             (b) avoiding unnecessary formality and seeking flexibility in
             the proceedings;

             (c) ensuring, so far as practicable, that the parties are able
             to participate fully in the proceedings;

             (d) using any special expertise of the Tribunal effectively;
             and

             (e) avoiding delay, so far as compatible with proper
             consideration of the issues.

          3) The Tribunal must seek to give effect to the overriding
             objective when it-

             (a) exercises any power under these Rules; or

             (b) interprets any rule or practice direction.

         (4)      Parties must-

             (a) help the Tribunal to further the overriding objective; and



             (b) co-operate with the Tribunal generally.

11. The Court of Appeal in Ex parte  Martin  [1994]  Imm  AR  172  set  out
    guidelines on the various matters which should be  taken  into  account
    when a judicial body is asked to adjourn proceedings.   These  include:
    (i) The importance of the proceedings and their likely consequences  to
    the party seeking the adjournment; (ii) the risk  of  the  party  being
    prejudiced in the conduct to the proceedings if  the  application  were
    refused; (iii) the risk of prejudice or other disadvantage to the other
    party if the adjournment were granted;  (iv)  the  convenience  of  the
    court; (v)  the  interests  of  justice  generally  and  the  efficient
    despatch of Court business;  (vi)  the  desirability  of  not  delaying
    future litigants by adjourning early and thus leaving the court  empty;
    and (vii) the extent to which the party applying  for  the  adjournment
    has been responsible for creating the difficulty which has led  to  the
    application.

12. In Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) it was  held
    that, if a Tribunal refuses to accede to an adjournment request, such a
    decision could, in principle, be erroneous in law in several  respects:
    these  include  a  failure  to   take   into   account   all   material
    considerations;  permitting  immaterial  considerations   to   intrude;
    denying the party concerned  a  fair  hearing;  failing  to  apply  the
    correct test; and acting irrationally. That said, the  principal  issue
    is whether the refusal of an adjournment deprived the affected party of
    his right to a fair hearing. Where an adjournment refusal is challenged
    on fairness grounds, it is important to recognise that the question for
    the Upper Tribunal is not whether the FtT  acted  reasonably.   Rather,
    the test to be applied is that of fairness:  was there any  deprivation
    of the affected party's right to a fair hearing?  Also relevant is  the
    guidance in  SH  (Afghanistan)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284.

13. We have  been  referred  by  Mr  Avery,  for  the  Respondent,  to  the
    application of s85A. In that regard, Mr Garrod referred us to Ahmed and
    Another (PBS: admissible evidence) [2014] UKUT 365  (IAC)  although  he
    accepted it may not be wholly relevant.  The Tribunal said in that case
    at paragraph 5 that the purpose of s85A Exception 2 "is quite clear. It
    is that where a Points Based  application  is  made  and  refused,  the
    assessment by the Judge is to be of the material that  was  before  the
    decision-maker rather than a new  consideration  of  new  material.  In
    other words the appeal if it is successful is on  the  basis  that  the
    decision-maker  with  the  material  before  him  should  have  made  a
    different decision, not on the basis that a different way of presenting
    the application would have produced a different  decision".     Section
    85A restricts the ability of an applicant to adduce  new  material;  it
    does not restrict  the  ability  of  the  Respondent  to  adduce  post-
    application evidence, such as that obtained in interview.   We  do  not
    consider that Ahmed assists either party because it  does  not  address
    the ability of an appellant to adduce oral evidence at a hearing  on  a
    points based appeal.

14. The Appellant was aware the hearing was  to  take  place  on  the  date
    listed. He took a risk,  in  our  view,  in  failing  to  instruct  his
    solicitors to attend to make the application orally to  the  judge,  in
    circumstances where no response had been received in  response  to  the
    written application faxed 3  days  before  the  hearing.   The  medical
    evidence  he  produced  in  support  of  his  application  referred  to
    difficulties standing and sitting as a result of  his  back  condition;
    whilst it may be implicit that he  could  not  travel  to  the  hearing
    centre, this was not specifically stated. More importantly, the medical
    evidence did not suggest he was incapable of giving  oral  evidence  at
    the hearing, drafting a witness statement or giving instructions to his
    solicitors.   Nor  was  there  any  indication   in   the   solicitors'
    application or the medical evidence as to when the Appellant  would  be
    able to attend a hearing in the future. We also note that  the  medical
    evidence predated the  hearing  date  by  about  a  week;  it  was  not
    therefore contemporaneous.  No explanation was given by the Appellant's
    solicitors for the failure to file a witness statement  and  bundle  of
    documents in readiness for the appeal. Nor was an application made  for
    an extension of time to do so.  For these reasons,  we  consider  that,
    had the Judge been aware of the application and  medical  evidence,  he
    would have refused the application, particularly as the content of  the
    Appellant's bundle was likely to have been limited to  those  documents
    submitted in support of his application and these were  available  from
    the Respondent's bundle  in  any  event.   The  FTTJ  would  also  have
    considered it relevant that the Appellant had provided detailed grounds
    of appeal  which  resembled  a  witness  statement  (albeit  without  a
    statement of truth) setting out his case and specific responses to  the
    reasons for refusal.  We  also  consider  the  Judge  would  have  been
    particularly concerned that there was no  indication  as  to  when  the
    Appellant would be able  to  attend  an  adjourned  hearing.   We  find
    therefore that he would, bearing in mind the overriding objective, have
    considered it was in the interests  of  justice  to  proceed  with  the
    hearing in the Appellant's absence.

15. We have also taken into account that the  FTTJ  was  provided,  at  the
    hearing by the Respondent's representative, with a complete copy of the
    interview record, whereas the Appellant had not been provided with one.
     It should have been apparent to the Appellant and his solicitors  that
    their copy was incomplete and yet neither they, nor indeed  Mr  Garrod,
    had noted prior to  the  hearing  before  us  that  their  copies  were
    incomplete.  We also note that the Respondent  had  identified  in  her
    reasons for refusal the specific questions and answers in interview  on
    which she relied in support of her decision and the Appellant commented
    on those matters in his detailed grounds of appeal.  Thus the FTTJ  had
    before him the Appellant's evidence, albeit in the form of his  grounds
    of appeal, on the issues which had formed the basis of the refusal.  If
    the Appellant and/or  his  representatives  had  attended  the  hearing
    before the FTTJ, they would have been provided by  the  Respondent  (as
    was the FTTJ) with a full copy of the interview record and  could  have
    sought an adjournment to enable  them  to  consider  it  (if  that  was
    required).  The fact that neither the Appellant nor those  representing
    him, had noticed, until being alerted to it at the hearing  before  us,
    that the record was incomplete suggests  to  us  that  the  lack  of  a
    complete record was not material to the issues before the FTTJ.

16. Mr Garrod's submission is that, because the Appellant had not seen  the
    full interview record, the Appellant was  prejudiced  and  should  have
    been examined on it. However, we do not  consider  examination  of  the
    Appellant on the content of the interview record  would  have  assisted
    the FTTJ or altered the outcome, particularly  as  Mr  Garrod  conceded
    that the  complete  interview  record  was  largely  accurate.  We  are
    satisfied, on this basis, that it is not a contentious document.

17. We do not consider s85A impacts on the issues before us: the Judge  had
    the benefit of detailed grounds of appeal which were fact specific  and
    tailored to the appeal.  Whilst not in the form of a  signed  statement
    or containing a statement of truth, the FTTJ treated them as  such.  He
    sets out the content of the grounds  in  paragraph  15  and  states  at
    paragraph 17 that he assumes (in the Appellant's favour) that they  are
    the basis of the Appellant's claim.  It is evident that the  FTTJ  bore
    the detailed grounds in mind when making his decision.  It is not clear
    to us how examination of the  Appellant  would  have  impacted  on  the
    outcome. The FTTJ put particular store  by  the  Appellant's  admission
    that he had been "away from formal study for  a  period  of  (about)  2
    years". Whilst it was submitted by  Mr  Garrod  that  this  period  was
    nearer 18 months, it remains the case that the Appellant had been  away
    from formal study for a prolonged period and that  home  study  is  not
    relevant for the purpose of a Tier 4 application. Whether or  not  that
    period was about two years or was 18 months  is  immaterial:  both  are
    significant periods of absence from formal study.

18. Whilst Mr Garrod submitted  that  some  of  the  FTTJ's  findings  were
    inaccurate, they were based on the grounds of appeal before him and are
    therefore sustainable.

19. We note the FTTJ's finding that "A genuine student ... would have  made
    far greater efforts to obtain a new College, and  would  have  informed
    the Home Office of his situation".   Mr Garrod submitted that, had  the
    Appellant been examined, he would  have  provided  an  explanation  for
    failing to be in contact with the Home Office. However, the  FTTJ  took
    into account the Appellant's explanation  in  his  grounds  of  appeal,
    namely that his previous college had told him he had to wait for a Home
    Office letter; the FTTJ found this lacked credibility and  his  finding
    is sustainable given the content of the grounds of appeal.

20. If any disadvantage arose as a result of the lack of oral evidence,  it
    was possibly to the Respondent who did  not  have  the  opportunity  to
    cross-examine the Appellant at  the  hearing  on  the  content  of  his
    grounds of appeal which the  FTTJ  effectively  treated  as  a  witness
    statement.

21. We are satisfied the FTTJ took account of all  material  considerations
    and we are satisfied that the Appellant did not lose  his  right  to  a
    fair hearing as a result of the FTTJ's procedural error in  overlooking
    the application for an adjournment.

Decision

22. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of procedure but it was not  material  to
    the outcome.

23. We do not set aside the decision.

24. We dismiss the appeal.


Signed      Dated 12 October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black



Fee Award

There can be no fee award.


Signed      Dated 12 October 2015.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black
