
[pic]
IAC-TH-CP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40679/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st July 2015                     |On 19th November 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                           Mr Mqamlandaba Mthethwa
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Symes (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant's appeal against  a  decision  to  remove  him  from  the
    United Kingdom was dismissed by  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  in  a
    decision promulgated on 27th  January  2015.   That  decision  was  set
    aside, as containing errors of law, on 28th  May  2015  and  directions
    were given to the parties on the same date regarding  the  remaking  of
    the decision in the Upper Tribunal.

2.   The documentary evidence  before  me  consisted  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's bundle, which was before the First-tier Tribunal,  and  a  file
    minute made by an officer with "Operational Barrier Casework", in  late
    March 2013, regarding  the  Secretary  of  State's  assessment  of  the
    appellant's circumstances at that time.  Also before me  was  a  bundle
    prepared by the appellant's  solicitors  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing.  Mr Symes handed up a skeleton argument  and  I  was  provided
    with copies of the judgments in Sunassee [2015] EWHC 1604  (Admin)  and
    SS (Congo) and Others [2015] EWCA Civ 387 and the Secretary of  State's
    guidance to caseworkers on applications for limited leave to remain  as
    a parent and whether it would be  unreasonable  to  expect  non-British
    citizen children to leave the United Kingdom.

3.   The Secretary of State's removal decision  was  made  on  10th  October
    2014.  In an earlier letter dated 29th September that  year,  she  gave
    reasons for the decision and for refusing an application for indefinite
    leave to remain made by the appellant as long ago as  24th  June  2005.
    There was a brief apology for the delay  of  almost  nine  years.   The
    application was refused under  paragraph  322(1C)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules ("the  rules")  in  the  light  of  a  conviction  (not  properly
    identified in the letter) and the fact that a period of seven years had
    not yet  passed  since  the  end  of  the  sentence  imposed  upon  the
    appellant.  His immigration history was taken into account.  He arrived
    in the United Kingdom from Zimbabwe in March 1999  and  was  given  six
    months' leave to remain.  He was given further  leave  until  September
    2001 but an application made shortly before  expiry  was  refused.   An
    asylum claim made in 2003 also failed.

4.    The  Secretary  of  State  applied  the  rules  to   the   appellant's
    application for indefinite leave, in  the  light  of  his  private  and
    family life ties here.  He had two children, aged 3 and 11 at the time,
    present in the United Kingdom for their entire  lives.   The  appellant
    lived apart from the children, who lived with their mother, but visited
    them twice a month, attended parents' evenings and took  them  out  for
    recreational activities.  The Secretary of State concluded that he  was
    not their primary carer.  Neither of the children was a British citizen
    although  both  were  born  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  elder  was
    approaching 12 years of age and as she had  established  herself  here,
    the Secretary of State concluded that requiring her to leave the United
    Kingdom would not be reasonable.  In any event she had limited leave to
    remain, as did her sister and her mother.  They had no remaining family
    ties in Zimbabwe.  Neither child had visited the country.

5.    Overall,  the  Secretary  of  State  concluded  that  there  were   no
    exceptional circumstances in the appellant's case, meriting a grant  of
    leave to remain outside the rules.  Although he had spent fifteen years
    in the United Kingdom, as at the date of the  letter,  he  was  present
    here unlawfully for much of that time.

6.   Reference  was  made  to  the  appellant's  convictions  and  cautions,
    spanning the years 2001 to 2014.  Although no  details  appear  in  the
    letter, the Secretary of State concluded that  his  character,  conduct
    and associations told against him in the assessment of his application.

7.   In a witness  statement  the  appellant  made  on  4th  July  2014,  he
    referred to a conviction for assault in 2001, which he disclosed in  an
    asylum  application  in  2003.   He  was  sentenced  to  a  period   of
    imprisonment of six months.  More recently, on 1st January 2014, he was
    convicted of motoring offences while driving his sister's vehicle.  She
    was indisposed at the time.  The appellant claimed that he felt  unable
    to decline her request for help.  He was arrested by the police on  the
    way back from collecting his sister's daughter.  He was  convicted  for
    failing to provide a sample and fined.  In a more recent statement made
    on 9th January 2015, the  appellant  described  his  relationship  with
    Nomagugu Mpofu, the mother  of  his  children.   Their  first  daughter
    Zibongeni was born on 5th November 2002.  The  appellant  continued  to
    reside with his uncle in Forest  Hill  whilst  his  partner  stayed  in
    Northampton.  They continued to be close  although  their  relationship
    came to an end.  It was  rekindled  in  November  2009  and  they  then
    married in April 2011, according to Zimbabwean traditional custom.  The
    birth of their second daughter Wakhile followed on  10th  August  2011.
    The appellant and his partner then lived together from October of  that
    year until the end of February 2012, after which they applied for  NASS
    accommodation so that they could continue to live together as a family.
     Although they wished to live together, this proved not to be  possible
    and  they  were  housed  apart.   Notwithstanding  that  setback,   the
    appellant continued to visit his family regularly  in  Southampton  and
    they spent Christmas together in Forest Hill in 2011 and then again  in
    2012, this time with a  cousin  in  Gravesend.   In  2013.  They  spent
    Christmas together in Southampton in 2013 and in Leeds  in  2014.   For
    some of his visits, the appellant stayed for a week or  more  and  when
    able  to,  he  helped  his  partner  with  household  chores   at   her
    accommodation in Southampton.  The appellant stated that, as at January
    2015, he had been present in the  United  Kingdom  for  nearly  sixteen
    years and had not returned to Zimbabwe at all in that time.  He had  no
    ties there.  His father passed away in September 2006.  The appellant's
    stepmother and his half-brother remained in Zimbabwe but there were  no
    close bonds between them.  The appellant had been close  to  his  uncle
    here, Godfrey, who passed away in February 2010 and was still close  to
    Godfrey's children.   He continued to live at Godfrey's house  as  part
    of a close-knit family.

8.   The children's mother, the appellant's partner Ms Nomagugu Mpofu,  made
    a  statement  on  7th  January  2015.    She   described   herself   as
    traditionally married to the appellant.  She is a  Zimbabwean  national
    and the mother of their two children.  The appellant continued to visit
    at least twice a month and played an active role in the  family.   They
    work hard to ensure that the best interests  of  their  daughters  come
    first.  Ms Mpofu described the appellant as a loving father and  stated
    that the family would be devastated if he  were  forced  to  return  to
    Zimbabwe.

9.   The evidence also included a report prepared by  Dr  Rozmin  Halari,  a
    consultant clinical psychologist,  in  early  January  2014.   She  was
    instructed to assess the family relationships and  concluded  that  the
    appellant played a positive and  significant  role  in  the  children's
    lives and that the children expressed  their  relationship  with  their
    father positively.  She found that the appellant's removal would have a
    significant detrimental impact on each child's  psychological,  social,
    emotional and educational development.

The Hearing

10.  The appellant gave evidence and adopted  his  two  witness  statements.
    He was asked why he did not have more photographs showing him with  his
    children.  Copies  of  those  he  had  appeared  in  his  bundle.   The
    appellant  said  that  there  was  sometimes  no  opportunity  to  take
    photographs when he was with the children and  he  sometimes  felt  odd
    asking strangers to take photographs.

11.  In cross-examination, the appellant said that it  was  still  the  case
    that he visited the children at their mother's home every other weekend
    and on special occasions.  He would spend  time  with  his  partner  on
    these occasions, although when she was tired he  would  leave  her  and
    take the children.  At birthdays they spent time together.  He and  his
    partner  had  lived  apart  since  2012  or  2013  when  she  moved  to
    Southampton.  That created problems.  She  and  the  children  now  had
    discretionary leave and they were no longer in NASS accommodation.   Mr
    Duffy asked whether there was anything to stop the appellant moving  in
    with them now.  He replied that the finances were difficult.  He had no
    capacity to provide for his partner and he did not wish to be dependent
    upon her.  He had to travel back and forth to see  them  and  sometimes
    she helped him with travel costs.  She was a  community  nurse  working
    full-time,  in  the  field  of  learning  disabilities.   They  had   a
    childminder close to the house  and  the  elder  of  the  two  children
    started secondary school in September 2014.  If the appellant moved  in
    full-time or permanently, they would not need a childminder but  within
    their culture, he should be the one who provided for the family.  There
    was some discomfort.  He had reservations about moving in on this basis
    and so did his partner.  It was awkward for him to  be  dependent  upon
    her.

12.  The appellant said that at present, he and his wife were not  a  couple
    and their relationship was currently "not on".   However,  they  had  a
    strong mutual understanding about bringing up their  children  as  best
    they could.  The appellant currently lived  with  his  cousin  and  his
    aunt.  His cousin had two sisters, one here and one in Australia.   The
    appellant had members of his family in  the  United  Kingdom  from  his
    aunt's side.  There were two cousins,  the  aunt  and  extended  family
    members.  Also present was a relative the appellant referring to as his
    brother.  The actual relationship was as cousins as this person was his
    father's brother's son.  The appellant said that his father had  passed
    away and his stepmother remained in Zimbabwe, as did a stepbrother  and
    a stepsister.  He had no cousins or extended  family  members  that  he
    knew there.

13.  When he lived in Zimbabwe, the appellant was  an  apprentice  in  motor
    mechanics.  In the United Kingdom he worked in information systems  and
    studied for part of a nursing course but did not  finish  it.   He  was
    able to do some care work at the time.  He had taken no work as a motor
    mechanic.

14.  There was no re-examination.

15.  The appellant's cousin, Ndabezinhle Mtetwa, gave evidence  and  adopted
    the witness statement he made on 6th January 2014.  Mr Mtetwa has lived
    in the United Kingdom for ten  years  and  is  employed  by  a  housing
    association in Manchester.  In his statement, Mr  Mtetwa  set  out  his
    knowledge of the appellant's  involvement  in  the  upbringing  of  his
    children.  The appellant went to stay with his partner when they stayed
    in Northampton and after that  in  Southampton.   He  helped  with  the
    search for schools, babysitters and fully supported his children.   The
    couple attended parents' evenings at schools.  He would babysit for the
    younger child, particularly  when  a  childminder  was  not  available.
    There was no cross-examination.  Mr Langalibalelle Mthethwa  then  gave
    evidence and adopted  the  witness  statement  which  appeared  in  the
    appellant's bundle at page 99.  He is  the  appellant's  late  father's
    brother's son.  He was born in the United Kingdom and  has  lived  here
    all his life.  The  appellant  regarded  Mr  Langalibalelle  Mthethwa's
    father, Godfrey, as he would a father.  He described the appellant as a
    responsible parent and as a role model.  Mr  Langalibalelle  Mthethwa's
    sisters look to the appellant for guidance and he played a strong  role
    in arranging a family wedding in September 2014.  There was  no  cross-
    examination.

16.  In submissions, Mr Duffy relied upon the Secretary of State's  decision
    letter, dated 29th September 2014.  Both paragraph 317 of the old rules
    and the new rules, in relation  to  the  partner  or  parent  route  to
    settlement, were considered.  The requirements  of  the  partner  route
    were not satisfied.  The parent route led to an assessment  of  whether
    leave should be given as a matter of discretion because  the  appellant
    could not meet the suitability requirements, not least because  of  his
    past convictions.  The private life requirements were also not met.

17.  The appellant could not meet the requirements  of  the  rules  for  the
    reasons given by the Secretary of State  in  the  letter.   The  appeal
    might turn on his relationship with the  children.   The  Secretary  of
    State accepted that he played an active role although he did  not  live
    with them.  If he were  removed,  they  could  maintain  some  form  of
    contact with him.  The failure on the  appellant's  part  to  meet  the
    requirements of the rules strongly showed that the removal decision was
    a proportionate response and that the Secretary of State was  justified
    in making the decision she had.  The appellant might  apply  to  return
    for visits or as a parent with rights of contact.   Removal  would  not
    necessarily entail permanent severance but even if it were  to  do  so,
    the  decision  was  made  in  accordance  with  the  rules  and  was  a
    proportionate response.

18.  Mr Symes said that, dealing with the parent route  first  of  all,  the
    convictions were referred to in the decision letter, in the part of  it
    dealing with the old rules.  The decision was made  in  late  September
    2014, after the "window" explained  in  Singh  and  Khalid.   What  was
    required was an assessment under the new rules contained in Appendix FM
    with the initial focus on the suitability requirements.  S-LTR.1.5  and
    1.6 were the relevant candidates but the conviction for assault in 2001
    was spent.  The only recent offences mentioned in the witness statement
    made in January 2015 were the motoring offences.

19.  Nonetheless, Mr Symes accepted that the suitability  requirements  were
    not met.  This was so in relation to the parent route, in the light  of
    the convictions relied upon and  the  appellant's  acceptance  of  what
    appeared in the Home Office minute, prepared in relation to  the  grant
    of leave to his partner, which was handed up (on the first page of that
    document).

20.  The next step  concerned  the  appellant's  circumstances  outside  the
    rules, in the light of the  family  life  ties  established.   In  this
    context, guidance given by the Administrative Court in Sunassee and  by
    the Court of Appeal in SS (Congo) and Others fell to be applied.  There
    was no substantial challenge to the evidence in this regard and it  was
    clear from the decision letter that the  Secretary  of  State  accepted
    that it would not be reasonable for the children to  move  to  Zimbabwe
    and that the appellant played a role in  their  lives.   The  appellant
    also relied on the report prepared  by  the  clinical  psychologist  in
    January 2014 and the letter from his daughters which appeared  at  page
    16 of the bundle, albeit that this was prepared at an earlier stage, in
    October 2011.  The  report  from  the  clinical  psychologist  strongly
    supported the appellant's  case,  as  paragraphs  62,  64,  65  and  67
    particularly  showed.   There  was  sufficient  material   before   the
    Tribunal, not challenged by the Secretary of State,  that  family  life
    between the appellant and his children subsisted and was strong.  There
    were also family life ties between the appellant and the witnesses, his
    close relatives.   Removal  to  Zimbabwe  would  interfere  with  these
    relationships and the prospects of maintaining them by means of  visits
    to the United Kingdom were very poor.  The  children's  best  interests
    were required to be assessed, the Secretary of State paying this aspect
    attention in the decision letter.  They had both been present here  all
    their lives, the elder of the two for over fourteen years.  That  built
    a strong case that it would be unreasonable  to  expect  them  to  move
    abroad.  The daughters had discretionary leave.

21.  The appellant had also been present here for many years, without  going
    to ground and had been in contact with the Secretary of State.  He  had
    private life ties which deserved respect.

22.  Mr Symes said that there were reasons to move from the rules,  to  make
    an assessment outside them, as the rules did not fully  cater  for  the
    appellant's circumstances.  Because of his offending behaviour,  albeit
    that the serious offence led to a conviction which was  now  spent  and
    the recent offences were minor, the suitability requirements caused the
    application to fail under both the partner and  parent  routes.   As  a
    result, an assessment was required outside the rules, although that the
    offending behaviour and the failure to meet  the  requirements  of  the
    rules still had to be taken into account.  The only  non-spent  offence
    was the recent motoring offence, as explained by the appellant  in  his
    January 2015 witness statement.  He did not pose any present  risk  and
    the Secretary of State had not suggested at any stage  that  she  might
    deport the appellant.

Findings and Conclusions

23.  In this appeal, the burden lies with the appellant to prove  the  facts
    and matters he relies upon and the standard  of  proof  is  that  of  a
    balance of probabilities.

24.  This is a very unusual case for several reasons.  First, there  is  the
    extraordinary  period  of  delay,  of  some  nine  years,  between  the
    application made by the appellant for leave in the light of his  family
    ties, at a time when his firstborn was very  young,  and  the  date  of
    decision in the autumn of 2014.  In all those years, his daughter  has,
    of course, grown up and  is  now  at  secondary  school  and  a  second
    daughter has been born to the appellant and his partner.  Secondly, the
    scheme of the new rules is such that the appellant has been  found  not
    to meet the suitability requirements in  S-LTR,  which  apply  to  both
    parent and partner route.  Mr Symes accepted that this was  so  in  the
    light of the appellant's convictions and offending behaviour.  However,
    the Secretary of State appears  to  have  accepted  that  although  the
    appellant  has  relatively  minor  recent  convictions   for   motoring
    offences, committed very early in 2014, the only serious conviction  he
    has is now spent.  He was convicted of an assault in 2001 and served  a
    term of imprisonment of some six or seven months (the evidence was  not
    clear).   The  consequence  of  failing   to   meet   the   suitability
    requirements of the rules is that the appellant has no  access  to  the
    expression of the Secretary of State's policy in EX.1,  which  provides
    an exception to certain eligibility requirements for leave to remain as
    a partner or parent.  EX.1 is  not  an  exception  to  the  suitability
    requirements.  A failure to meet  the  suitability  requirements  means
    that  the  assessment  under  the  rules  comes  to  a  halt  and   any
    consideration of discretionary  leave  or  the  proportionality  of  an
    adverse decision has to take place outside them.  EX.1 requires  weight
    is to be given to a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a
    child who is under the age of 18 years and who is in the UK and has (if
    not a British citizen) lived in the United Kingdom continuously for  at
    least the seven years immediately preceding the  date  of  application.
    Of course, as the date of application was long ago in 2005, and as  the
    appellant's daughter was about 3 years old at the time,  he  could  not
    derive any benefit from EX.1.  The Secretary  of  State  has,  however,
    accepted in her decision letter that it would  not  be  reasonable  for
    either child to leave the United Kingdom.  That is hardly surprising in
    view of the years the children have spent here, particularly the elder.

25.  In the appellant's case, therefore, relatively minor motoring  offences
    committed recently and a spent conviction have combined to show that he
    cannot meet the suitability requirements of the rules, in circumstances
    where, largely by reason of  the  Secretary  of  State's  extraordinary
    delay, one of his two children has grown up  in  this  country,  having
    been born here, and has spent far more  years  here  than  required  to
    attract weight under the rules, in EX.1, which exception the  appellant
    cannot in any event avail himself of because of  the  requirement  that
    the seven years the child must have lived here immediately precede  the
    date of application.

26.  The evidence, largely unchallenged by the  Secretary  of  State,  shows
    that the appellant does play a substantial role in his children's lives
    and that he still has substantial contact with his partner, albeit that
    their relationship is "not on", as described in the evidence.  I accept
    Mr Symes' submission that the report  from  the  clinical  psychologist
    supports the appellant's case in this regard.   There  are  also  other
    relationships  the  appellant  enjoys  here,  with   close   relatives,
    including the two witnesses, although these have  less  weight  in  the
    assessment.

27.  The first critical question is whether the rules,  as  applied  by  the
    Secretary of State, fully cater for the appellant's circumstances  and,
    if not, whether an assessment outside the rules is required.   What  is
    plain from the evidence is that there are substantial family life  ties
    between the appellant and his children which have been established over
    a period of many years, both before and largely after  the  application
    for leave to remain.  Do the rules fully cater for these relationships?
     In the particular circumstances of the appellant's  case,  I  conclude
    that they do not.  The offending behaviour which causes him to fail  to
    meet the suitability requirements  consists  of  a  spent  offence  and
    relatively minor motoring offences and there is no evidence at  all  to
    suggest that the appellant is a present threat or likely  to  reoffend.
    Important guidance appears in the judgment of the Court of Appeal in SS
    (Congo), for example in paragraph 44 where there is the following:

         "If there is a reasonably arguable case under Article 8  which  has
         not already been sufficiently dealt with by  consideration  of  the
         application under the substantive provisions of the rules ...  then
         in considering that case the individual interests of the  applicant
         and others whose Article 8 rights are in issue should  be  balanced
         against the public interest, including as expressed in  the  rules,
         in order to make an assessment whether refusal to grant LTR or LTE,
          as the case may be, is  disproportionate  and  hence  unlawful  by
         virtue of section 6(1) of the HRA read with Article 8."

28.  Insofar as there is a threshold to be surmounted before  an  assessment
    outside the rules is required, the test is  sometimes  expressed  as  a
    requirement  to  show   compelling   circumstances   not   sufficiently
    considered under the rules.

29.  In the present appeal, the only substantial barrier in relation to  the
    rules identified by the Secretary of  State  in  the  decision  letter,
    (save in relation to the private life rules and EX.1) is the failure to
    meet the suitability  requirements.   Even  accepting  that  the  spent
    offence is serious and even if, taken in combination with the  motoring
    offences, it were capable of showing that the appellant is a persistent
    offender, in preventing success under  the  rules  altogether  at  this
    point, no sufficient account is taken of the parental relationship  the
    appellant in fact enjoys with his children.  The  significance  of  the
    suitability requirements must be carried forward  into  any  assessment
    outside  the  rules  but,  viewed  sensibly,  the  offending  behaviour
    recorded by the Secretary of  State  is  a  relatively  modest  factor.
    There is nothing to show any present threat or propensity to reoffend.

30.  Nor can the delay of nine years be simply overlooked,  although  it  is
    not a determinative factor.  It was in the  years  of  delay  that  the
    family ties strengthened.  In March  2013,  one  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's officers considered the appellant's partner's  case,  accepting
    that substantial private life ties would have been established  in  the
    years spent in the United Kingdom, similar to the period  of  time  the
    appellant has spent here.  The Secretary of State was clearly aware  of
    the appellant's own circumstances at that time and the conclusion  that
    it would not be reasonable  to  expect  the  children  to  relocate  to
    Zimbabwe also appears in the file minute.   The  significant  level  of
    integration into the United Kingdom of the  older  child  is  expressly
    mentioned and the best interests of the two children are described as a
    weighty consideration in the appellant's partner's case.  I  find  that
    they are a weighty consideration in the appellant's case too.

31.   Applying  the  approach  in  SS  (Congo),  succinctly  summarised   in
    Sunassee, I  conclude  that  there  are  compelling  circumstances  not
    sufficiently  recognised   under   the   rules,   in   the   particular
    circumstances of this case, which show that an assessment  outside  the
    rules is required.  The rules in  this  context  do  not  amount  to  a
    complete code.  The factors not fully reflected in the rules,  relevant
    to the proportionality assessment, include the substantial family  life
    the appellant has with his children in particular,  and also  with  his
    close relatives here.  The relationship with his children is not  fully
    catered for in  the  rules  because  he  cannot  meet  the  suitability
    requirements.  Failure in this  respect  is  a  relevant  factor,  but,
    nonetheless, a factor of relatively modest weight.  This is because the
    spent offence and the motoring convictions fall short of  showing  that
    it is undesirable to allow  the  appellant  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom or that he has caused serious harm and has shown  a  particular
    disregard for the law,  even  though  their  impact  is  to  cause  his
    application to fail.

32.  Of course, the Secretary of State went on in  her  decision  letter  to
    consider whether there were exceptional circumstances in the  case  but
    the assessment of the children's best interests proceeded on the  basis
    that the appellant merely saw the children twice  a  month,  informally
    and the respondent did not have the benefit of all the  evidence  which
    was before  the  Tribunal,  including  the  report  from  the  clinical
    psychologist.  Although  the  Secretary  of  State  took  into  account
    contact between the appellant and his  children,  the  decision  letter
    does not reveal  that  weight  has  been  given  to  the  fact  of  the
    relationship between the appellant and his children  over  many  years.
    For example, in considering whether it would be unreasonable to  expect
    the children to leave, the fact that the elder child has put down roots
    in her (then) nearly twelve years in the United Kingdom is  noted,  but
    without any apparent regard to the very substantial contact she has had
    with her father in all of those years.  Some doubt about the extent  of
    the appellant's involvement appears in the letter, for example  at  the
    bottom  of  page  4,  due  to  the  absence   of   "any   corroborating
    documentation".  Again,  the  evidence  before  the  Tribunal,  largely
    unchallenged, does show strong family life ties.

33.  Turning to the statutory factors contained in section 117A - D  of  the
    2002 Act required to be taken into account when the Tribunal  considers
    the public interest question, meaning whether an  interference  with  a
    person's right to respect for private and family life is justified, the
    first point to be made is that I find that the evidence does show  that
    the appellant's removal would substantially interfere with  the  family
    relationships he relies upon.  Even accepting the possibility of visits
    from Zimbabwe, or perhaps visits to Zimbabwe by the children and  their
    mother, the possibility of maintaining  contact  by  electronic  means,
    including Skype or other video link, could not remotely  reproduce  the
    current intensity of the relationships, as the two children enter their
    critical teenage years.  This is not a case where the appellant has had
    regular contact with his children  only  for  a  limited  period.   His
    involvement has been regular throughout their entire  lives.   Although
    the appellant has convictions, this is not a deportation appeal and the
    strength of the public interest in removal is not enhanced  by  serious
    criminality showing that the appellant is a present risk or that  there
    is a need to deter others.

34.  The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in  the  public
    interest and weight is to be given to the appellant's failure  to  meet
    the suitability requirements of the rules, although there is no need to
    repeat what I have said  about  this  aspect  already.   The  appellant
    speaks English but he  is  not  financially  independent.   He  is  not
    permitted to work.  He has no "qualifying partner", as  the  mother  of
    his children is not settled in the United  Kingdom,  although  she  has
    limited leave given on a discretionary basis.  Little weight should  be
    given to his private life as it was established while  he  was  present
    here unlawfully.  On  the  other  hand,  the  private  life  aspect  is
    relatively minor.  There is  no  evidence  showing  that  important  or
    enduring private life ties were established  while  the  appellant  had
    temporary leave, between March 1999 and  September  2001  but  even  if
    there were, his status was precarious and so those ties should be given
    little weight.  On the other hand, section 117B(6)  provides  that  the
    public interest does not require a person's removal, where he or she is
    not liable to deportation, where he or she has a genuine and subsisting
    parental relationship with a qualifying  child  and  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom.  For  these
    purposes, "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of  18
    and who has lived in the United Kingdom  for  a  continuous  period  of
    seven years or more.  The appellant's  elder  child  is,  therefore,  a
    qualifying child and the Secretary of State has herself concluded  that
    it would not be reasonable to expect her, or her sibling, to leave  the
    United Kingdom.  The evidence shows that the appellant  has  a  genuine
    and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  both   children.    This
    particular statutory  factor  is  one  which  clearly  strengthens  the
    appellant's case and weakens, even if it does not reduce it altogether,
    the public interest in his removal.

35.  Bringing the threads of analysis together, I  conclude  in  summary  as
    follows.  The appellant  has  accepted,  through  Mr  Symes,  that  the
    suitability requirements of the rules  were  not  met  in  relation  to
    either the partner or the parent route.  Nonetheless, the rules do  not
    fully cater for his circumstances as there are no means whereby  weight
    can properly be given to the family life ties  in  the  light  of  that
    failure.  Although the Secretary of  State  herself  went  outside  the
    rules to consider exceptional  circumstances,  she  did  not  have  the
    benefit of the evidence before the Tribunal.   Following  the  guidance
    given in SS (Congo) and Others, in the particular circumstances of this
    case an assessment outside the rules is required, for the  reasons  set
    out above.  Having made that assessment, and having taken into  account
    both the adverse factors shown by the appellant's failure to  meet  the
    suitability requirements and the  statutory  factors  which  appear  in
    section 117B of the 2002 Act, I conclude that the  appellant's  removal
    would amount to a disproportionate  response.   It  would  lead  to  an
    unjustified interference with the relationships he enjoys with his  two
    children, who have discretionary leave to remain  and  who  have  lived
    here for their entire lives and in relation to whom  the  Secretary  of
    State has accepted that it would not be reasonable for  them  to  leave
    the United Kingdom.  His removal in consequence of the  decision  under
    appeal would so disrupt the family life ties as  not  to  be  justified
    under Article 8(2).

36.  The appeal is allowed.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal having been set aside, it is  remade
as follows: appeal allowed.

ANONYMITY

There has been no application for anonymity and I make no direction on  this
occasion.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As no fee has been paid, no fee award may be made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

