
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40619/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |                Decision & Reasons   |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 30th October 2015                   |                On 18th November 2015|
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                            mr daniel zabala paez
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr James Davies (LR)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    K St. John Wiseman, promulgated  on  9th  February  2015,  following  a
    hearing at Richmond on 27th January 2015.  In  the  determination,  the
    Judge allowed the appeal of Mr  Daniel  Zabala  Paez.   The  Respondent
    Secretary  of  State  subsequently  applied  for,  and   was   granted,
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the  matter  comes
    before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Venezuela, who was  born  on  8th
    January 1975.  He appealed  against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State dated 4th October 2014, refusing his application for
    a residence card as confirmation of his right to reside in the UK as  a
    partner of an EEA national exercising treaty rights,  under  Regulation
    8(5) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.  His partner  for  more
    than three years was said to be Maria Gabriela Concha Fumero, who was a
    Spanish citizen born on 19th January 1979.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The Judge observed that the point before him was a narrow one.   He  is
    related to the fact that the support of bundle  of  documents  in  this
    case appeared not to have been received and that, "it was on that basis
    that the application was refused for lack of supporting evidence"  (see
    paragraph 25).  The Judge found that, "it is overwhelmingly likely that
    the documents were  with  the  Home  Office  but  in  some  way  became
    separated from the papers the caseworker was using to make the  initial
    decision ..." (paragraph 27).  The Judge decided that,  "the  documents
    certainly provided significant  evidence  that  the  parties  had  been
    living together in Spain or that there appears to be somewhat  less  in
    relation to their current cohabitation ..." (paragraph 28).

 4. The appeal was allowed on the basis that the parties were living  in  a
    durable relationship.

Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds of application state that the Judge erred in law in failure
    to apply Regulation 8(5) in the appropriate manner, because  under  the
    provision, the issue of a residence card was a matter for the Secretary
    of State's discretion under Regulation 17(4).  If the  Judge  had  held
    (see paragraph 32) that, "in all the  circumstances  the  Appellant  is
    entitled to the documentation he seeks", then this was an error of  law
    because it had the effect of fettering the Home Office's discretion  to
    decide this matter in the light of documentation that was plainly  with
    the Home Office but had been overlooked.

 6. On 25th June 2015, permission to appeal was granted.

 7. On 6th August 2015, a Rule  24  response  was  entered.   This  was  to
    reflect that the Appellant's representatives did not disagree with  the
    Grounds of Appeal that  the  proper  construction  of  the  appropriate
    Regulations was that the matter remained with the  Secretary  of  State
    for her determination, rather than for a  determination  at  the  first
    instance by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me on 30th October 2015, Mr  Nath,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Respondent Secretary of State submitted  that  the  point
    was a simple and discrete one in that,  in  what  was  a  rather  short
    determination, the Judge decided a  question  that  properly  speaking,
    ought to have been decided by the  Secretary  of  State,  had  all  the
    papers been looked at, given that they had been overlooked.

 9. In reply, Mr Davies, very sensibly and properly drew my attention to  a
    letter that had been written by him on 14th August 2015.  This  letter,
    which is a Rule 24 response, states that there is no challenge  to  the
    Respondent's assertion that the  Appellant  is  not  "entitled  to  the
    document he seeks", but is rather entitled to have his application  for
    the document considered by the Secretary of State.

10. This is  the  effect  of  paragraph  16(5)  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2006, where the relevant word  is  that  the  Secretary  of
    State "may" issue a registration  certificate  to  an  extended  family
    member.

11. Secondly, however, Mr Davies submitted that, given that the  Respondent
    Secretary of State had an extended family member's policy, it stood  to
    amuse him that,  unless  there  were  countervailing  factors  such  as
    criminality on the part of the Appellant, the application really  stood
    to be allowed by the Respondent Secretary of State, and that  I  should
    record this as a basic consideration once the matter goes back  to  the
    Secretary of State.

12. For his part, Mr Nath  submitted  that  nothing  could  be  a  foregone
    conclusion because under Regulation 17(5) the issue of a residence card
    was a matter solely for the Secretary of State's discretion,  and  that
    decision had not been made.

Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  Judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.

14. The error of law arises from the fact that the Judge could not arrogate
    to himself the right to make the decision  that  a  residence  card  be
    granted  to  the  Appellant,  if  the  matter  had  not  been  properly
    considered on the evidence by the  Secretary  of  State  in  the  first
    place, since this was  a  matter  solely  for  the  discretion  of  the
    Secretary of State in the first instance.

Remaking the Decision

15. In remaking the decision, I have had regard to the evidence before  the
    Judge, the findings by the Judge, and the submissions that I have heard
    today.  I allow this appeal to the extent that the matter  is  remitted
    back to the Respondent  Secretary  of  State  for  her  decision  under
    Regulation 17  in  a  way  that  takes  account  of  all  the  relevant
    considerations and disregards all the irrelevant considerations.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law such that I set aside the decision of the original Judge.   I
remake the decision as  follows.   This  matter  is  returned  back  to  the
Respondent Secretary of  State  for  her  decision  in  the  first  instance
because a discretion appears not to have been properly exercised  the  first
time around, since critical documents were overlooked, which ought  to  have
been taken into account, before a lawful decision can be made.

No anonymity order is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 16th November 2015




