
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/40485/2013
     IA/40489/2013
     IA/40493/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 January 2015                            |On 4 February 2015            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                            Mr RAJIV SINGH JEEBUN
                        MRS PRISCILLA VANNESSA JEEBUN
                         MASTER ELESH KRISHNA JEEBUN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr P Turner
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In a decision and reasons promulgated on 3 December 2014,  I  concluded
    that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss the appellants'
    appeals against decisions to refuse to vary their leave and  to  remove
    them should be set aside and remade.  The background facts are set  out
    in that determination.

2.   At the conclusion of the hearing (on 14 November 2014),  the  Secretary
    of State's representative on that occasion indicated that consideration
    might be given to guidance on "long residence" under paragraph  276  of
    the rules, in the light of submissions made on the appellants' behalves
    that it appeared that the first appellant, Mr Jeebun, could  show  that
    he met the relevant requirements, having been  present  in  the  United
    Kingdom lawfully since 6 June 2004.

3.    After  promulgation  of  the  decision  on  error  of  law,  a  formal
    application for indefinite leave to remain, under the rules,  was  made
    on the first appellant's behalf (and on behalf of his wife and child as
    his  dependants)  and  the  application  was  accompanied  by  a   pass
    notification letter in relation to the Life in the UK test. It was also
    accompanied by confirmation that he  had  passed  with  merit  an  ESOL
    skills for life test.

4.   Ms Everett said that she had spoken to Mr  Wilding,  who  appeared  for
    the Secretary of State in November 2014, and it was clear that  he  had
    made assiduous efforts to elicit a response from  caseworkers,  in  the
    light of the indication  that  consideration  might  be  given  to  the
    relevant guidance.  It appeared to  the  Secretary  of  State  that  Mr
    Jeebun did meet the requirements of paragraph 276 of the rules  and  he
    had produced a Life in the UK test result, which was not  tied  to  the
    date of application.   It also appeared that his wife and child met the
    requirements of the rules but the Secretary of State had made no formal
    decision on the application for indefinite leave.

5.   Mr Turner said that, in essence, the appellants' stance  was  that  the
    requirements   of  paragraph  276B-D  were  met.   In  any  event,  the
    appellants were entitled to succeed under Article 8 of the Human Rights
    Convention.  The Secretary of  State's  guidance  under  paragraph  276
    showed that an applicant with a Life in the UK test  certificate  might
    expect to receive indefinite leave, whereas a person without one  might
    receive a grant of two years' leave.  On the face of it,  it  would  be
    disproportionate to seek to remove the first appellant and  his  family
    members, as they appeared to meet the requirements of the  rules.   The
    precise grant of leave was, of course, a matter for  the  Secretary  of
    State.

6.   Ms Everett said that no response was required.

Findings and Conclusions

7.   The first appellant and his  dependants  have  applied  for  indefinite
    leave to remain on  the  basis  that  the  requirements  of  the  rules
    contained in paragraph 276 have been  met.  In November  2014,  at  the
    earlier hearing, Mr Jeebun was without certificates showing that he had
    passed the Life in the UK test  and  had  sufficient  English  language
    abilities.   Certificates  confirming  his  success   accompanied   the
    application for indefinite leave made in December 2014.

8.   The application is still with the Secretary  of  State.   It  is  clear
    that her representatives  have  made  proper  enquiries  but  there  is
    nothing to show precisely when a decision will be made.   There  is  no
    need to rehearse the evidence and there is no real disagreement between
    the parties.  Mr Jeebun has been present here  since  June  2004,  with
    leave, and appears to meet all the relevant requirements of the  rules,
    as do his wife and child as his dependants.  The extent  of  any  leave
    granted by the Secretary of State is, of course, entirely a matter  for
    her.

9.   In  these  circumstances,  and  taking  into  account  the  appellants'
    reliance on Article 8, the substantial ties Mr Jeebun  and  his  family
    members have established here with leave, since 2004, show  that  their
    removal  in   consequence   of   the   adverse   decisions   would   be
    disproportionate.  As it has not been  suggested  that  any  particular
    requirement of paragraph 276B has not been met, there is no  reason  to
    doubt that a grant of leave will be made by the Secretary of  State  in
    due course.

Decision

10.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal,  having  been  set  aside,  is
    remade as follows: the appeals are allowed.


Signed                                  Date 2 February 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


ANONYMITY

There has been  no  application  for  anonymity  and  I  make  no  order  or
direction.


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeals have been allowed, I make a fee award in respect of  any  fee
which has been or is payable in these proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 2 February 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

