
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40069/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 April 2015                     |On 29 April 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                             Mrs Dil Maya Tamang
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Peterson, of counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Brocklesby-Weller, a Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   There is before me an appeal  against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal sitting at Birmingham on 7 January 2015 when  the  Immigration
    Judge (Judge of First-tier Tribunal Lloyd) decided to proceed  with  an
    appeal by the appellant against a decision  to  refuse  her  indefinite
    leave to remain. That application for ILR was on the basis that she was
    a victim of domestic violence.  The Immigration  Judge  considered  all
    the evidence before him but concluded that the appellant failed to meet
    the criteria of the relevant Rule which is set out in paragraph 289A of
    the Immigration Rules.  Specifically she failed to meet  the  criterion
    in subparagraph (iv) of that paragraph.

2.   The history of this matter is that the appellant had  been  in  the  UK
    since 2010, after coming here initially as a student, but she had  made
    a fresh application on the basis that she  was  a  victim  of  domestic
    violence on 15 August 2014.  That was  refused  and  the  Secretary  of
    State made removal directions.  Her leave was due  to  expire,  I  have
    been told, on 16 October 2014.  Unfortunately her former legal advisers
    Messrs AM Legal Consultants UK Limited got into difficulties and I have
    been informed that they effectively ceased to  practise  and  therefore
    ceased to act for the appellant on 7 November 2014.

3.   On 11 November 2014 a notice of hearing was sent out to  the  appellant
    and, directions having been made for the hearing, the notice of hearing
    indicated that it was in a reserve list, which means that the appellant
    may have to wait at court for her case to proceed  and  sometimes  that
    would involve waiting until the afternoon but she was advised to attend
    the hearing at 11am on the day of the hearing as every effort would  be
    made to hear the case on  that  day.   The  Tribunal  acknowledged  the
    request from the former solicitors that they go off the record and  the
    new solicitors, who are Messrs Hebbar & Co, replace them.

4.   An application by Hebbar & Co for an adjournment of the case  was  made
    on 5 January to  the  Tribunal.   It  was  supported  by  a  letter  of
    authority dated 17 November 2014 from the appellant.  The  application,
    which was considered on 6th January 2015, was refused  because  it  was
    considered that the representatives, who had had conduct of the  matter
    since the previous November, had an adequate opportunity to prepare for
    the hearing. It was ordered, therefore, that the appeal  should  remain
    in the list.  There was a renewed application before the court  on  the
    following day when, contrary to the notice that had been sent out, only
    the Home Office Presenting Officer attended the hearing.  It seems that
    the request for the adjournment was made by fax or  some  written  form
    but it was considered by the Immigration Judge. The  Immigration  Judge
    had regard to the fact that neither the appellant, nor  anyone  on  her
    behalf actually attended the hearing  to  explain  the  basis  for  the
    adjournment. In the circumstances  it  was  decided  that  it  was  not
    appropriate  to  adjourn  the  case  and  the  FtT  proceeded  to  hear
    submissions from the respondent and deal with the  matter  as  best  he
    could on the evidence before him.

5.   Ms Peterson, who appears for the  appellant  in  this  matter  and  has
    presented the arguments very fully and forcefully. She fairly makes the
    point that, based on the evidence presented before the judge, it  could
    not be said that he made an error of law.  The error he is said to have
    made is not to have adjourned a case that  he  should  have  adjourned.
    Rule 2 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  Rules  2014
    requires the Tribunal to apply the overriding objective of dealing with
    cases fairly and justly.  The Tribunal has traditionally taken a fairly
    robust approach to adjournment applications and it is not my reading of
    the 2014 Rules that they  were  intended  to  effect  a  relaxation  in
    approach, although they may be expressed  in  more  flexible  language.
    The FtT must consider the interests of justice, deal with  cases  in  a
    manner proportionate to the complexity of the  issues  considering  the
    anticipated costs, the resources of the party and the resources of  the
    Tribunal and ensure a level playing field for the parties. It must also
    avoid delay wherever possible and this needed to  be  judged  not  just
    from the viewpoint of the appellant and the respondent  but  also  from
    the wider aspect of other appellants who are waiting for their  appeals
    to be heard. However, Rule  4  contains  an  unfettered  discretion  to
    adjourn a case where it is necessary and in the interests of justice to
    do so.

6.   I am satisfied that the judge had a discretion to grant an  adjournment
    but in my view it cannot be said that it was a material  error  of  law
    for  him  to  have  exercised  his  discretion  against   granting   an
    adjournment. Ms Peterson would have to surmount the hurdle  of  showing
    that the manner in which the Immigration Judge exercised his discretion
    was outside a reasonable range of responses so as to make  it  unlawful
    but in my view there were sound reasons, which the judge gave, for  not
    adjourning this case.  The appellant's new  legal  representatives  had
    been acting since the previous November and, with respect, they  should
    have taken appropariate steps to prepare for the hearing whether or not
    they were still awaiting information from the Home Office  before  they
    felt were in possession of all available  information.   The  appellant
    either through herself  or  through  her  representatives  had  already
    presented a good deal of evidence in support of her  domestic  violence
    allegation  and  it  was  open  to  the  new  representatives  to  take
    instructions from her based on her instructions and update the evidence
    in the light of the circumstances as they were  at  the  hearing  on  7
    January. This was a straightforward case and in  many  cases  the  Home
    Office will informally assist appellants at hearings where they are not
    in possession of all the documents. The present representatives  simply
    failed to take adequate steps to prepare for the hearing.

7.   Furthermore the appellant could have attended the hearing and whilst  I
    have some sympathy with her if it was not  spelt  out  to  her  by  her
    representatives that she should attend the hearing, I  am  afraid  that
    she has to take responsibility  for  that  failure  as  the  notice  of
    hearing makes clear that the  Tribunal  would  proceed  with  her  case
    whether  or  not  she  attended.  Furthermore,  unfortunately,  she  is
    responsible for the  acts  or  omissions  of  her  agents.   It  is  an
    unfortunate fact  that  in  this  country  where  solicitors  or  legal
    representatives are appointed to act, but they fail to  do  so  to  the
    required standard, their client  ultimately  takes  responsibility  for
    that.  I further have some sympathy  with  the  appellant  because  she
    appears to have  been  poorly  served  by  her  first  solicitors  and,
    possibly, was not well served by  the  second  solicitors.  However,  I
    found that this is not a case where it can be said  that  there  was  a
    failure of the  judge  to  exercise  his  discretion  properly  and  in
    accordance with the overriding objective summarised above.

8.   I should add that I  am  also  not  persuaded  that  the  new  evidence
    described by Ms Peterson today, for example updating medical  evidence,
    further letters and emails and a more detailed witness  statement  from
    the appellant, would necessarily  have  led  the  FtT  to  a  different
    conclusion in relation to the appellant's appeal.  As I say, this is  a
    case where had the appellant attended the hearing it may  be  that  she
    may have made a greater impression on  the  Tribunal  than  simply  her
    written evidence but the  judge  did  consider  all  the  evidence  and
    reached a conclusion that he was entitled to  come  to  based  on  that
    evidence .Therefore, regrettably, I must dismiss the present appeal.  I
    find no material error  of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed. The decision of the FtT to dismiss the  appellant's
appeal to that Tribunal stands.

No anonymity direction was made and that decision also stands.



Signed   Date 28 April 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The judge below dismissed the appeal and  therefore  there  can  be  no  fee
award.



Signed   Date 28 April 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury
