
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/40371/2013
      IA/46240/2013
      IA/49378/2013
      IA/49382/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Promulgated |
|On 27th October 2014                   |On 5th December 2014      |
|                                       |                          |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Mr Godfrey Edojariogba
                           Mrs Bridget Edojariogba
                     Miss Oghenetega Elfred Edojariogba
                        Miss Kevwe Emilia Edojariogba
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)

                                                                 Respondents
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Omonirube, instructed by JDS Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State but nonetheless I  shall  refer  to  the  parties  as  they  were
    described before the First Tier Tribunal that is Mr Edojariogba and his
    dependents as  the  appellants  and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
    respondent.

 2. The appellants appealed the decision of the Secretary of State  further
    to Regulation 8(2) of  the  EEA  Regulations  refusing  the  appellants
    residence cards as confirmation of the right to reside in the UK as the
    extended family members of an EEA national that is the  sister  of  the
    first appellant, Mrs Anthea Edojariogba 'who is now a Dutch  national'.
    The appellants  entered  the  UK  in  2012.   The  refusal  dated  24th
    September 2013 asserted that there was no evidence that the  appellants
    were dependent on the EEA sponsor immediately prior to entering the  UK
    as required under Regulation 8(2)(a).

 3. In a determination dated  26th August 2014 First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Cockrill  allowed  the  appellants'  appeals  on  all   grounds.    The
    respondent made an application for permission to appeal contending that
    the Judge failed to make findings on a  relevant  and  material  issue,
    failed to properly apply the standard of proof and made a  misdirection
    in law in allowing the appeal outright.   Despite  the  fact  that  the
    sponsor relied on was the sister of the first appellant  there  was  no
    indication of when she became an  EEA  national.   The  judge  had  not
    applied the correct burden of proof as the determination  indicated  he
    was unclear about aspects of the evidence and he had allowed the appeal
    outright, all of which were errors of law.

 4. The following extract from Dauhoo  EEA  Regulations  -reg(8)(2)  [2012]
    UKUT 79 IAC  sets out the requirements in respect of Regulation 8(2) of
    the EEA Regulations.

      '10. It may help to clarify these requirements in the  following  way.
      Under the reg 8(2) scheme, a person can succeed in  establishing  that
      he or she is an "extended family member"  in any one of four different
      ways, each of which requires proving a relevant connection both  prior
      to arrival in the UK and in the UK:


             i. prior dependency and present dependency


            ii. prior membership of a household and present membership of  a
                household


           iii. prior dependency and present membership of a household;


            iv. prior membership of a household and present dependency.


      11. It  is  not  necessary,  therefore,  to  show  prior  and  present
      connection in the same capacity: dependency- dependency  or  household
      membership-household membership, i.e. (i) or (ii) above. A person  may
      also qualify if able to show (iii) or (iv).


      12. Although the above scheme is consistent with case law, it is  fair
      to consider one possible semantic objection to it. It  might  be  said
      that the use of the present tense  verb  "continues"  in  reg  8(2)(c)
      denotes that a person can only meet the requirement  to  show  present
      dependency if that is a "continued dependency" and, likewise,  that  a
      person can only meet the requirement to show present membership of  an
      EEA national's household if that is a "continued membership". If  that
      reading were correct, then permutations (iii) and (iv) above would  be
      impermissible. However, such  an  interpretation  cannot  be  correct.
      Leaving aside that if the drafters had intended  the  meaning  of  reg
      8(2)(c) to be restricted in this way they  would  have  said  so,  reg
      8(2), being an attempt  to  transpose  Article  3(2)(a)  of  Directive
      2004/38/EC, must be construed purposively so as to  be  compatible  as
      far as is possible with that provision. Article 3 provides:

       "1. This Directive shall apply to all Union citizens who move  to  or
      reside in a Member State other than that of which they are a national,
      and to their family members as defined in point 2  of  Article  2  who
      accompany or join them.
      2. Without prejudice to any right to free movement and  residence  the
      persons concerned may have in their own right, the host  Member  State
      shall, in accordance with its national legislation,  facilitate  entry
      and residence for the following persons:


           (a) any other family members, irrespective of their nationality,
           not falling under the definition in point 2 of Article 2 who, in
           the country from which they have come, are dependants or members
           of the household of the Union citizen having the  primary  right
           of residence, or where serious health grounds  strictly  require
           the personal care of the family members by the Union citizen;
           (b) the partner with  whom  the  Union  citizen  has  a  durable
           relationship, duly attested.


      The host Member State shall undertake an extensive examination of  the
      personal circumstances and  shall  justify  any  denial  of  entry  or
      residence to these people."

 5. The key issue here is that there was no finding as to when the  sponsor
    became a Dutch national and the case was put forward on the basis  that
    it was the sponsor sister of the first appellant who had supported  the
    appellants since prior to their arrival in the UK. The evidence on this
    was minimal and not addressed in the determination.  Indeed  the  judge
    at [42] stated that this evidence should have been brought out and  was
    not. Indeed the relationship between the sponsor and her  'partner'  in
    Holland who was a Dutch national was not made  clear  at  the  relevant
    time. Both Article 3(2) and reg 8 make clear it has to be dependency on
    someone who is a Union citizen/EEA national. Ihemedu (OFMs  -  meaning)
    Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00340(IAC).

 6. The judge stated at [42] 'what was not brought out in  the  proceedings
    and really it ought to have been brought out was the  exact  date  when
    the EEA national sponsor gained her citizenship  of  the  Netherlands'.
    This was critical in relation to the dependency issue.

 7. The findings in relation  to  the  timing,  level  and  nature  of  the
    financial support, which are critical, are not clear or adequate.   The
    judge himself expressed doubt about the evidence.  The  judge  referred
    to the burden of proof being on the appellant and the relevant standard
    of proof and recorded at [41] that he had 'some disquiet  by  the  fact
    that there has been some conflict in the evidence which  I  heard  most
    notably between the account given  by  the  First  Appellant  and  that
    provided by the sponsor'.

 8. The  judge  recorded  'in  my  overall  assessment  and  judgment  [the
    appellant] has tried to exaggerate the extent of the contribution  made
    by  the  EEA  national  sponsor'.   There   was   evidence   of   'some
    documentation which, taken at face value, would be  supportive  of  the
    account provided by the sponsor that she had  supplied  funds  for  the
    benefit of the First Appellant for  an  appreciable  period  from  2003
    through until 2005' [41].

 9. The judge accepted [42] that

    'when she started working from July 2004 onwards the sponsor was  in  a
    position then to make the  payments  that  have  been  recorded.   They
    weren't enormous sums but I do find as a fact that they were made  with
    some regularity about 100  Euros  per  month  as  an  average.   It  is
    difficult to know really the full  financial  situation  of  the  First
    Appellant but what I accept specifically is that there  was  a  payment
    made for one year's course fees and that was in 2005'.

    and

    'Although the state  of  the  evidence  is  not  terribly  good,  I  am
    satisfied on balance that the sponsor did make  that  specific  payment
    for the benefit of the  First  Appellant  and  thereafter  in  the  two
    following years made payments to the First Appellant just to assist him
    supplementing his income'.

10. Further the judge stated 'the documentation does not support  the  long
    term financial support from the sponsor as it ends in August 2005' [43]
    but then proceeds [44] 'what I am prepared to accept, although as I say
    the matter is not well documented is that there was a period from  2004
    through until 2005 particularly when there were financial contributions
    made by the sponsor to the First Appellant of sufficient sum, as I  see
    it, with sufficient regularity, to mean that the  First  appellant  was
    dependent upon those sums.  The picture presented is that  he  did  not
    have a lot of money and he did need help and support  for  things  like
    the course fee.  He has also  required  help  and  support  in  meeting
    things like his rent and there has been enough evidence adduced to show
    a sufficient measure of support by the sponsor for the first  appellant
    to show that he was dependant upon her before he came to this country'.



11. That conclusion, however, was not supported by the  evidence  given  as
    the judge recorded earlier in the determination  that  the  appellant's
    wife gave evidence of the assistance with rent after they came  to  the
    UK.   As Moneke  (EEA  OFMs  -  assessment  of  evidence)  [2011]  UKUT
    00341(IAC)  makes  clear  judges  must  scrutinise  the  existence   of
    sufficient reliable information to satisfy themselves that  the  burden
    or proof had been demonstrated.   The judge was not  assisted  in  this
    task by the confused presentation and conflicts within the evidence.

12. For example, the judge only accepted that there was a payment made  for
    one year course fees and that was in 2005.   Thereafter,  however,  the
    judge accepted 'on balance' that the sponsor did make 'in the following
    two years, made payments to the First  Appellant  just  to  assist  him
    supplementing his income' [42].  This appeared to contradict  what  the
    judge stated in [41] where it was accepted that the payments  were  for
    fees and ceased in 2005. (I note that there also appears to be an issue
    of lapsed dependency.  Bigia v ECO [2009]  EWCA  Civ  79  confirms  the
    'requirement  of  very  recent  dependency  or  household   membership.
    Historic but lapsed dependency  or  membership  is  irrelevant  to  the
    Directive policy of removing obstacles to the Union  citizen's  freedom
    of movement and residence rights').

13. Lastly, Ihemedu adds that  'Regulation  17(4)  makes  the  issue  of  a
    residence card to an OFM/extended family member a matter of discretion.
    Where the Secretary of State has not yet exercised that discretion  the
    most an Immigration Judge is entitled to do is to allow the  appeal  as
    being not in accordance with the law leaving the matter of  whether  to
    exercise this discretion in the  appellant's  favour  or  not  to   the
    Secretary                          of                           State'.
    Mr Omonirube accepted that there was an  error  of  law  in  the  judge
    allowing the appeal outright and the matter should be  put  before  the
    Secretary of State  in  order  for  her  to  exercise  her  discretion.



































































































































































































































































































































14. For the above reasons I find that there were errors of law  and  I  set
    aside the determination of Judge Cockerill.

15. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified.  I set aside the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (ii) of the TCE 2007 and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement


Signed                                  Date 3rd December    2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
