
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: IA/40327/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On February 19, 2016                 |On February 24, 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                           MR RAJA AHTSHAM KIYANI
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Mr Wells, Counsel, instructed by M & K Solicitors
Respondent  Mr Staunton (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, citizen of Pakistan applied to vary his leave  to  enter
    or remain as the partner of a person present and settled in the  United
    Kingdom on May 21, 2014. On September 24, 2014 the  respondent  refused
    the application and issued  directions  for  his  removal  pursuant  to
    Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality  Act  2006.  The
    appellant appealed this decision on October 9, 2014 under section 82(1)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 2. The appeal came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Camp  on
    December 17, 2015 and he allowed the appellant's appeal under  Appendix
    FM of the Immigration Rules on the basis the respondent had  failed  to
    demonstrate any dishonesty on behalf of the appellant in respect of his
    English language test.

 3. The respondent sought permission to appeal that decision and permission
    to appeal was granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Black on September
    29, 2015. The matter initially came before me on December 23, 2015  and
    on that occasion I found there had been an error in law and I set aside
    the First-tier Tribunal's decision and I did not preserve any findings.



 4. I found there had been an error because  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    demonstrated no engagement with either the bundle of documents  or  the
    original refusal letter and whilst the issue  of  dishonesty  may  have
    been  central  to  Section  S-LTR  of  Appendix  FM  there  were  other
    requirements to be met which the  respondent  had  highlighted  in  her
    refusal letter.

 5. The matter came back before  me  on  the  above  date  and  I  had  the
    opportunity to hear oral evidence from both the appellant and his wife,
    Samiyah Akhtar.

 6. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I see no reason to make an order now.

    EVIDENCE

 7. The appellant adopted his statement of December 2, 2014. He  gave  oral
    evidence in English and confirmed that he had been attending college in
    Ilford and an agent approached him and suggested he  took  his  English
    test in Ilford, despite the fact he lived over an hour  away  in  Hemel
    Hempstead. He described how he recalled taking  his  speaking/listening
    and reading/writing tests on one day. He stated there  were  up  to  25
    others in the room and the tests took around 90  minutes  in  total  to
    complete. He explained that when he came to renew his visa  he  had  to
    take a further tests and he took this one at Trinity College by  Euston
    Station.

 8. When challenged by Mr Staunton by the fact the test is taken  over  two
    days he responded that he recalled it being on the one day but  he  was
    not certain as it was over three years ago.

 9. He confirmed that when he took this test he was not in  a  relationship
    with his wife and it was therefore unlikely that  she  could  give  any
    evidence about this issue.

10. The appellant's wife adopted her statement and was  not  questioned  by
    either representative.

11. Both Mr Wells and Mr Staunton agreed on the following:

      a. The only issue now to be decided in whether the Rules were met  was
         whether the appellant met the suitability requirements.

      b. In the event he met those requirements then he would be entitled to
         remain under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules as a  partner  as
         he met all the other requirements.

      c. In the event that I  found  he  did  not  satisfy  the  suitability
         requirement (i.e. he cheated) then the appellant would not  succeed
         under article 8 bearing in mind that Section 117B of the  2002  Act
         places great emphasis on the importance of immigration control  and
         the appellants both had immediate family living in Pakistan.

    SUBMISSIONS

12. Mr Staunton relied on the refusal letter and the two witness statements
    of Miss  Collins  and  Mr  Millington.  He  also  referred  me  to  the
    appellant's tests result and the fact the finding was  the  appellant's
    test results were invalid. In inviting  me  to  refuse  the  appeal  Mr
    Staunton asked me to have regard to the following points:

      a. The test was arranged by an agent.

      b. The test was taken in an area over an hour from where he lived.

      c. The test was taken over two days  and  the  appellant  had  clearly
         stated that he recalled doing them at the same time.

13. Mr Wells asked me to place little weight  on  the  statements  of  Miss
    Collins and Mr Millington because their evidence was  generic  and  did
    not address the appellant's specific test. The report was a  screenshot
    of an excel printout and the respondent had provided no evidence of how
    fraudulent tests were detected and had little or no regard to the  fact
    others were taking the test at the same time and people  had  different
    accents. He criticised the  respondent's  evidence  and  submitted  the
    respondent had failed to satisfy the Tribunal,  on  balance,  that  the
    appellant had acted illegally. He invited me  to  have  regard  to  the
    following points:

      a. The appellant was able to  speak  English  successfully  and  at  a
         higher level when he took a second test in March 2014.

      b. The appellant spoke good English at the hearing and  therefore  had
         no reason to cheat.

      c. There was insufficient evidence to show that he cheated.

14. I reserved my decision.

    DISCUSSION AND FINDING

15. The claimant  had  been  granted  entry  clearance  as  a  student  and
    subsequently he was granted further leave to remain  and  part  of  the
    evidence which he had had  to  submit  was  an  English  language  test
    certificate (ETS) for which he claimed to have undertaken a test at  an
    ETS testing centre in Ilford.

16. Following a Panorama programme in which  fraud  was  detected  by  many
    people undertaking this test the Home Office  conducted  tests  on  ETS
    service centres in general and following these tests a number amounting
    to many thousands of people were alleged to  have  taken  the  test  by
    using a proxy.

17. In all of these  cases  generic  evidence  has  been  given  which  has
    consisted of witness statements given by  two  witnesses  of  the  Home
    Office, Mr Millington and Miss Rebecca Collins, which set out  how  the
    forensic tests were conducted and the basis upon which the Home  Office
    is able to say that in the particular cases in question it is much more
    likely than not that the tests relied on were among the ones which were
    fraudulent.

18. In a general case where an application for leave has  been  refused  in
    this country an appellant will have an out of country right  of  appeal
    and there are many decisions affirming that the Home Office's  position
    in refusing such an appellant an in country right of appeal is  lawful.
    What Parliament has decreed in these cases is that an  out  of  country
    right of appeal is an adequate remedy and the challenge to the decision
    will not give rise to an in-country right of appeal.

19. In this case, however, the decision was taken to  refuse  the  claimant
    leave to enter and to cancel his leave when he tried to  come  back  to
    the country and that decision does carry an in country right of  appeal
    which is why the claimant in this case was able to appeal this decision
    without first leaving the country.

20. The law with regard to the way in which the evidence of the Home Office
    (or for technical reasons in this case the Immigration Officer)  should
    be viewed by Tribunals has been clarified  by  the  President  of  this
    Tribunal Mr Justice McCloskey in the judicial review case of R (on  the
    application of Gazi) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  (ETS
    - judicial review) IJR  [2015]  UKUT  00327  and  the  finding  can  be
    summarised very briefly.

21. Effectively so far as this Tribunal is concerned Mr  Justice  McCloskey
    found that the evidence produced on behalf of the Home Office in  these
    cases is capable of establishing to the requisite degree of proof  that
    a test was taken fraudulently but this test is not infallible and it is
    open to a Tribunal in any case considering the specific facts  of  that
    case to decide that that  particular  case  was  an  exception  to  the
    general rule that such findings should be upheld.

22. In other words, although the generic evidence produced  was  sufficient
    to establish  without  contrary  evidence  that  the  English  language
    certificate had been fraudulently obtained, it was open to  a  Tribunal
    in any individual case on the basis of findings  on  specific  evidence
    adduced to say that that  particular  case  was  an  exception  to  the
    general rule.

23. Based on the above approach I reject  Mr  Well's  submission  that  the
    statements and printout are insufficient to  prove  that  a  proxy  was
    used.

24. The issue for me to consider was whether this appellant's facts were an
    exception to the above rule.

25. I do not attach any weight to the fact he took the March 2013  test  in
    Ilford. It was not disputed he attended college in that area and whilst
    there may have been a test centre closer to where he lived this did not
    mean it was unreasonable for him to take his test in Ilford.

26. The fact his English language abilities, in court,  were  good  do  not
    prove he did not cheat, as claimed by the respondent, in March 2013.  I
    note he took a further test in March 2014 and he passed but he took the
    second test in March 2014 because he  needed  it  for  a  further  visa
    application.

27. The appellant claimed to have taken his test on March 6,  2013  but  in
    giving his evidence he was stated on two occasions that he believed the
    test was taken in one go. Mr Staunton challenged and pointed  out  that
    the tests were taken separately and not at the same time.

28. The appellant was unsure and whilst I have regard to the fact the  test
    was almost three years ago I do bear in mind when considering this that
    he appears to have only ever taken one test at the Ilford test  centre.
    Whilst he was able to describe how many people too the test  and  where
    the centre itself was I do find it surprising that he was  then  unable
    to recall the test format. If he had taken  loads  of  different  tests
    there then I could understand possible confusion but that was  not  the
    case.

29. The court in R (on the application of Gazi) v Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department (ETS - judicial review) IJR [2015] UKUT 00327  made
    it clear that the evidence presented on such tests  was  sufficient  to
    prove fraudulent activity although it  was  open  to  an  appellant  to
    challenge the evidence presented through the facts of his or her case.

30. The appellant produced little evidence to  challenge  the  approach  in
    Gazi and effectively invited me to allow his appeal on the basis he had
    demonstrated an ability now to speak English well but this did not show
    that he did not take the test in March 2013.

31. I therefore find that the respondent demonstrated on balance there  was
    evidence that a fraudulent test was taken and the appellant has  failed
    to rebut that presumption on the balance of probabilities.

32. The appellant cannot therefore satisfy the suitability requirements  of
    Appendix FM and his application under Appendix FM and EX.1 of  Appendix
    FM fail.

33. Mr Wells conceded that if I found the appellant had "cheated"  then  it
    would be difficult for the appellant to succeed on article 8 grounds.

34. Whilst clearly the parties are in a genuine and subsisting relationship
    and all other aspects of Appendix FM were met (apart from  suitability)
    I cannot overlook the fact that Section  117B  requires  weight  to  be
    placed on the public interest in maintaining immigration control and  I
    am satisfied that that outweighs the  appellant's  family/private  life
    rights under article 8 and the fact he speaks now English and is not  a
    burden on the public purse.

35. It would not be disproportionate to  require  the  appellant  to  leave
    especially where, as in this appeal, both the appellant  and  his  wife
    have ties to Pakistan although in carrying out an article 8  assessment
    I acknowledge the appellant's wife is a British citizen.

    DECISION

36. There was a material error and I set  aside  the  earlier  decision.  I
    dismiss the appeal under the Immigration  Rules  and  under  article  8
    ECHR.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
