
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40868/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  3 July 2014                               |On 17 October 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE HADDON-CAVE
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         KAMILA SANTOS CAMPELO CAIN
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr J. Doerfel and Mr J. Chipperfield, Counsel
For the Respondent: Mr C. Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of State. It  is
       convenient however, to refer to the parties as they were before  the
       First-tier Tribunal.

    2. At the heart of this appeal lies the issue of whether  an  unmarried
       partner is entitled to the benefit of the decision in Surinder Singh
       [1992] EUECJ C-370/90 which concerns British citizens  returning  to
       the UK after having exercised Treaty rights in  another  EEA  State,
       and the extent to which a third country national  family  member  of
       such a British citizen  is  entitled  to  reside  in  the  UK  under
       European Community law.

    3. The appellant is a citizen of Brazil, born on 23 August 1978.  On  6
       June 2013 she made an application for a residence card as the family
       member of an EEA national, who in this case is  a  British  citizen.
       That application was refused in a decision dated 18 September 2013.

    4. Her appeal against that decision was allowed by First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Powell after a hearing on 23 April  2014.  He  concluded  that
       regulation  9(2)  of  the  Immigration  (European   Economic   Area)
       Regulations  2006  ("the  EEA   Regulations"),   in   limiting   its
       application to married persons or civil  partners,  is  contrary  to
       Directive 2003/38 ("the Directive").

    5. Permission to appeal against his decision having been  granted,  the
       appeal came before us.

   Submissions

    6. We summarise the submissions of the parties before us. On behalf  of
       the respondent Mr Avery submitted that even if the judge was correct
       to find that the decision in Surinder Singh benefited the appellant,
       he ought to have gone on to  consider  how  this  would  affect  the
       application of other aspects of the EEA Regulations.

    7. It was further submitted that the Directive, in Article 3(2), refers
       to 'facilitating' entry and residence.  In  addition,  relationships
       other than that of spouses are not comparable  and  do  not  benefit
       from the same level of 'protection' as spouses.

    8. In terms of the European Casework Instructions  ("ECI's")  to  which
       the judge referred at [19] of his determination,  it  was  suggested
       that they are rather loosely worded and do not in fact represent  an
       intention on the part of  the  Secretary  of  State  to  extend  the
       Surinder Singh principle beyond what is within regulation 9  of  the
       EEA Regulations. We were referred to  other  aspects  of  the  ECI's
       which were relied on as making good that proposition.

    9. Mr Doerfel for the Appellant relied on  his  skeleton  argument.  He
       submitted that the First-tier judge did not allow the  appeal  under
       the EEA Regulations, having found at [17] that the  EEA  Regulations
       did not apply to the appellant. Surinder Singh does  not  deal  with
       which family members benefit. However, the ratio of the decision  is
       that, if one is a British national exercising Treaty rights, then on
       return to the UK you would be treated exactly the same as any  other
       European national exercising Treaty rights.

   10. In this appeal, the judge had applied  the  Directive  directly.  He
       found that the appellant's partner was exercising Treaty  rights  in
       Portugal and Spain. It is clear from [6] of the  determination  that
       none of the facts were contested, and at [15] and [20] he found that
       the appellant and her partner were in  a  durable  relationship.  He
       concluded that the EEA Regulations denied them rights under EC law.

   11. Mr Doerful submitted that the EEA Regulations discriminated  between
       other EU nationals and British nationals, in terms of those who  are
       able to bring to the UK those  with  whom  they  are  in  a  durable
       relationship. Regulation 9 operated as a complete bar to someone  in
       the appellant's situation.

   12. Mr Chipperfield on behalf of the appellant referred to other aspects
       of the skeleton argument and the authorities cited in it,  in  terms
       of applying the Directive.

   Our analysis

   13. After hearing submissions from the parties, we referred them to  the
       decision of the Upper Tribunal in Ihemedu (OFMs -  meaning)  Nigeria
       [2011]  UKUT  00340(IAC),  in  relation  to  the  discretion  within
       regulation 17(4) to issue a residence card  to  an  extended  family
       member. Because neither party was in a position to make  submissions
       in relation to that  issue  with  reference  to  that  decision,  we
       allowed a period of 7 days for further submissions to  be  made.  It
       was made clear that the further submissions were to be  confined  to
       this issue.

   14. The appellant's  further  written  submissions  provided  after  the
       hearing plainly  misunderstand  the  basis  upon  which  we  allowed
       further  written  submissions  to  be  made.  In  so  far  as  those
       submissions  go  further  than  the  limited  basis  upon  which  we
       consented to the making of further submissions, we do not take  them
       into account. Purely in relation to the issue of the exercise of the
       Secretary of State's  discretion,  we  consider  below  the  further
       written submissions that were put before us after the hearing.

   15. At the outset, we are able to  dispose  of  the  contention  in  the
       respondent's grounds that the First-tier judge  allowed  the  appeal
       with reference to the EEA Regulations. In our  view,  he  manifestly
       did not, as is evident from [17]  of  the  determination.  There  he
       stated that regulation 9(2) does not apply to an  unmarried  partner
       and that the Secretary of State was therefore  correct  to  conclude
       that the appellant does not  meet  the  requirements  of  regulation
       9(2).

   16. The uncontested facts are as follows:

         . The appellant and her partner, Adrian Hamling, are in a  durable
           relationship.

    . They have been living together since 30 June 2008.

         . They have three children; a son born on 1 March 2009, a daughter
           born on 23 November 2010 and another son born on 13 May 2012.

         . The appellant's partner has exercised  Treaty  rights  in  Spain
           from January 2010 until September 2011 and for  four  months  in
           Portugal until January 2012.

         . The appellant and  her  partner  lived  together  in  Spain  and
           Portugal.

         . In January 2012, the appellant, her partner and  their  children
           returned to the UK.

   17. We set out below the relevant provisions  of  the  EEA  Regulations,
       starting with  regulation  9  which  is  that  which  most  directly
       concerns this appeal. The appellant's  skeleton  argument  quotes  a
       version of regulation 9 prior to its amendment in December 2012, but
       the difference is immaterial. With effect from January  2014,  there
       was further amendment to regulation 9. Again, however, the amendment
       is immaterial for the purposes of this appeal. As applicable at  the
       date of the decision, regulation 9 provided as follows:



        "Family members of British citizens

        9.-(1) If the conditions in paragraph (2) are satisfied, these
        Regulations apply to a person who is the family member of a British
        citizen as if the United Kingdom national were an EEA national.

        (2) The conditions are that-

        (a) the British citizen is residing in an EEA State as a worker or
        self-employed person or was so residing before returning to the
        United Kingdom; and

        (b) if the family member of the United Kingdom national is his
        spouse or civil partner, the parties are living together in the EEA
        State or had entered into the marriage or civil partnership and
        were living together in that State before the United Kingdom
        national returned to the United Kingdom.

        (3) Where these Regulations apply to the family member of a British
        citizen the British citizen shall be treated as holding a valid
        passport issued by an EEA State for the purpose of the application
        of regulation 13 to that family member."


   18. Regulation 2 states that "EEA national" means a national of  an  EEA
       State who is not also a British national. Thus, regulation  9  makes
       provision for a British national to be treated as  an  EEA  national
       for the  purposes  of  the  EEA  Regulations  in  the  circumstances
       described in regulation 9.

   19. Regulation 8 provides as follows:

           "Extended family member"


           8.-(1) In these Regulations "extended family member" means a
           person who is not a family member of an EEA national under
           regulation 7(1)(a), (b) or (c) and who satisfies the conditions
           in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).

           (2) A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if the
           person is a relative of an EEA national, his spouse or his civil
           partner and-

           (a) the person is residing in an a country other than the United
           Kingdom and is dependent upon the EEA national or is a member of
           his household;

           (b) the person satisfied the condition in paragraph (a) and is
           accompanying the EEA national to the United Kingdom or wishes to
           join him there; or

           (c) the person satisfied the condition in paragraph (a), has
           joined the EEA national in the United Kingdom and continues to
           be dependent upon him or to be a member of his household.

           (3) A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if the
           person is a relative of an EEA national or his spouse or his
           civil partner and, on serious health grounds, strictly requires
           the personal care of the EEA national his spouse or his civil
           partner.

           (4) A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if the
           person is a relative of an EEA national and would meet the
           requirements in the immigration rules (other than those relating
           to entry clearance) for indefinite leave to enter or remain in
           the United Kingdom as a dependent relative of the EEA national
           were the EEA national a person present and settled in the United
           Kingdom.

           (5) A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if the
           person is the partner of an EEA national (other than a civil
           partner) and can prove to the decision maker that he is in a
           durable relationship with the EEA national.

           (6) In these Regulations "relevant EEA national" means, in
           relation to an extended family member, the EEA national who is
           or whose spouse or civil partner is the relative of the extended
           family member for the purpose of paragraph (2), (3) or (4) or
           the EEA national who is the partner of the extended family
           member for the purpose of paragraph (5).


   20. It is regulation 8(5) which is relevant for  the  purposes  of  this
       appeal. It is to be remembered that on the facts of this  appeal  it
       is undisputed that the appellant is the partner  of  Adrian  Hamling
       and that they are in a durable relationship.  Were  the  appellant's
       partner an EEA national, the appellant would be an "extended  family
       member" because she and her partner are in a  durable  relationship.
       Similarly, we consider that the appellant is to be  regarded  as  an
       extended family member by virtue of regulation 9(1).

   21. However, according to the terms of regulation 9,  the  appellant  is
       not entitled to the benefit of it in relation to her British citizen
       partner's return to the UK, whereby under regulation 9 he would,  in
       the circumstances described in that regulation, be treated as an EEA
       national. If regulation 9 did apply, it would allow for the grant to
       the appellant of a residence permit in  accordance  with  regulation
       17, which, so far as material, provides as follows:

           "17.- Issue of residence card

          ...

          (4) The Secretary of State may issue a residence card to an
          extended family member not falling within regulation 7(3) who is
          not an EEA national on application if-


          (a) the relevant EEA national in relation to the extended family
          member is a qualified
          person or an EEA national with a permanent right of residence
          under regulation 15; and


          (b) in all the circumstances it appears to the Secretary of State
          appropriate to issue the
          residence card.


          (5) Where the Secretary of State receives an application under
          paragraph (4) he shall undertake an extensive examination of the
          personal circumstances of the applicant and if he refuses the
          application shall give reasons justifying the refusal unless this
          is contrary to the interests of national security.

          ..."

   22.  The  contention  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  is  that  although
       regulation 9 does not  itself make provision for a partner who is an
       extended  family  member,  the  appellant  should  nevertheless   be
       entitled to the benefit if the decision in Surinder Singh. That case
       concerned an Indian national who was married to a British  national.
       The couple were employed in Germany before returning to the UK where
       they intended to open a business. The  question  that  the  European
       Court of Justice ("ECJ") was asked to decide was whether the  spouse
       of the British national was entitled under Community law  to  reside
       in the UK on the basis  that  the  British  national  had  exercised
       Treaty rights before returning to the UK.

   23. Basing its reasoning on principles of freedom of movement,  the  ECJ
       held that:

     "19 A national of a Member State might be  deterred  from  leaving  his
           country of origin in order to pursue an activity as an  employed
           or self-employed person  as  envisaged  by  the  Treaty  in  the
           territory of another Member State if, on returning to the Member
           State of which he is a national in order to pursue  an  activity
           there as an employed or self-employed person, the conditions  of
           his entry and residence were not at least  equivalent  to  those
           which he would enjoy under the Treaty or secondary  law  in  the
           territory of another Member State.


           20 He would in particular be  deterred  from  so  doing  if  his
           spouse and children were not also permitted to enter and  reside
           in the territory of his Member State of origin under  conditions
           at least equivalent to those granted them by  Community  law  in
           the territory of another Member State.


           21 It follows that a national of a Member State who has gone  to
           another Member State in order  to  work  there  as  an  employed
           person pursuant to Article 48  of  the  Treaty  and  returns  to
           establish himself in order to pursue  an  activity  as  a  self-
           employed person in the territory of the Member State of which he
           is a national has the right, under Article 52 of the Treaty,  to
           be accompanied in the territory  of  the  latter  State  by  his
           spouse, a national of  a  non-member  country,  under  the  same
           conditions as are laid down by Regulation No 1612/68,  Directive
           68/360 or Directive 73/148, cited above.


           22 Admittedly, as the United Kingdom submits, a  national  of  a
           Member State enters and resides in the territory of  that  State
           by virtue of the rights attendant upon his nationality  and  not
           by virtue of  those  conferred  on  him  by  Community  law.  In
           particular, as is provided, moreover, by Article 3 of the Fourth
           Protocol to the European Convention on Human Rights, a State may
           not expel one of its own nationals or  deny  him  entry  to  its
           territory.


           23 However, this case  is  concerned  not  with  a  right  under
           national law but with the rights of movement  and  establishment
           granted to a Community national by Articles 48  and  52  of  the
           Treaty. These rights cannot be fully effective if such a  person
           may be deterred from exercising them by obstacles raised in  his
           or her country of origin to the entry and residence  of  his  or
           her spouse. Accordingly,  when  a  Community  national  who  has
           availed himself or herself of those rights returns to his or her
           country of origin, his or her spouse must  enjoy  at  least  the
           same rights of entry and residence as would be granted to him or
           her under Community law if his or her spouse chose to enter  and
           reside in another Member State. Nevertheless, Articles 48 and 52
           of the Treaty do not prevent  Member  States  from  applying  to
           foreign spouses of  their  own  nationals  rules  on  entry  and
           residence more favourable than those provided for  by  Community
           law.


           ...


           25 The answer to the question referred for a preliminary  ruling
           must therefore be that Article 52 of the  Treaty  and  Directive
           73/148, properly construed, require  a  Member  State  to  grant
           leave to enter and reside in its territory  to  the  spouse,  of
           whatever nationality, of a national of that State who has  gone,
           with that spouse, to another Member State in order to work there
           as an employed person as envisaged by Article 48 of  the  Treaty
           and returns to establish himself  or  herself  as  envisaged  by
           Article 52 of the Treaty in the territory of the State of  which
           he or she is a national. The spouse must enjoy at least the same
           rights as would be granted to him or her under Community law  if
           his or her spouse  entered  and  resided  in  the  territory  of
           another Member State."

   24. Reliance is also placed by the Appellant on a subsequent decision of
       the ECJ: Eind [2007] EUECJ C-291/05. That case concerned a  national
       of the Netherlands who came to the UK and became employed. Later  he
       was joined by his daughter who was a national  of  Surinam.  The  UK
       authorities accepted that both had a right to reside in the UK under
       Community law. However, on return to the Netherlands the authorities
       there refused Miss Eind a residence permit.

   25. The further detailed  facts  of  that  decision  are  not,  for  the
       purposes of the appeal before us, of great significance. What is  of
       significance however, is  what  the  Court  said  in  the  following
       paragraphs, as follows:
        1. A national of a Member State could be deterred from leaving that
           Member State in  order  to  pursue  gainful  employment  in  the
           territory of another Member  State  if  he  does  not  have  the
           certainty of being able to return to his Member State of origin,
           irrespective of whether  he  is  going  to  engage  in  economic
           activity in the latter State.
        1.  That  deterrent  effect  would  also  derive  simply  from  the
           prospect,  for  that  same  national,  of  not  being  able,  on
           returning to his Member State  of  origin,  to  continue  living
           together with close relatives, a way of life which may have come
           into being in the host Member State as a result of  marriage  or
           family reunification.
        1.  Barriers  to  family  reunification  are  therefore  liable  to
           undermine the right to free movement which the nationals of  the
           Member States have under  Community  law,  as  the  right  of  a
           Community worker to return to the Member State of which he is  a
           national cannot be considered to be a purely internal matter.
        ...
        1. Thus, a person in the situation of  Miss  Eind  may  enjoy  that
           right so long as she has not reached the  age  of  21  years  or
           remains a dependant of her father.

   26. Neither party referred us to the following  cases,  decided  at  the
       same time, namely S and G-Case C-457/12, and O and B Case  C-456/12.
       Both cases concerned third-country  family  members  of  Netherlands
       nationals who had either moved  to  other  Member  States  and  then
       returned or who spent time travelling from the Netherlands to  other
       member states for work.

   27. The Netherlands nationals in O and B had  in  the  past  resided  in
       another Member State; the Netherlands  nationals  in  S  and  G  had
       always resided in the Netherlands, but were regularly travelling  to
       another Member State for work purposes. The  question  arose  as  to
       whether their family members could derive a right  of  residence  in
       the Netherlands from Directive 2004/38  and  Article  21(1)  of  the
       Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.  In the case  of  O
       and B, they were both married to nationals of the Netherlands. In  S
       and G, S was the mother-in-law of a Netherlands national and G was a
       spouse of a national of the Netherlands.

   28. In both of the above cases, the ECJ referred  to  the  decisions  in
       Surinder Singh and Eind and came to conclusions that are broadly  in
       line with them.

   29. However, neither O and B nor S and G are directly on point in  terms
       of the appeal with which we are  concerned  in  that  none  involved
       unmarried partners. Surinder Singh concerned the spouse  of  an  EEA
       national. Eind concerned the daughter of an EEA national.

   30. In all the cases to which we have referred, and  which  applied  the
       Surinder Singh principle, the person claiming a right  of  residence
       was a "family member" as described in  Directive  2004/38/EC   ("the
       Directive"), under Article 2 which states as follows:




              "Article 2


                          Definitions

           For the purposes of this Directive:
           1. 'Union citizen' means any person having the nationality of  a
           Member State;


           2. 'family member' means:


           (a) the spouse;


           (b) the partner with whom the Union  citizen  has  contracted  a
           registered partnership, on the basis of  the  legislation  of  a
           Member State, if the legislation of the host Member State treats
           registered  partnerships  as  equivalent  to  marriage  and   in
           accordance  with  the  conditions  laid  down  in  the  relevant
           legislation of the host Member State;


           (c) the direct descendants who are under the age of  21  or  are
           dependants and those of the spouse  or  partner  as  defined  in
           point (b);


           (d) the dependent direct relatives in  the  ascending  line  and
           those of the spouse or partner as defined in point (b);


           3. 'host Member State' means the Member State to which  a  Union
           citizen moves  in  order  to  exercise  his/her  right  of  free
           movement and residence."

   31. It can be seen that there is no mention of durable  partners  within
       the definition of family member. The expression 'durable partner' is
       to be found in Article 3. It states as follows:


           "Article 3


           Beneficiaries


           1. This Directive shall apply to all Union citizens who move  to
           or reside in a Member State other than that of which they are  a
           national, and to their family members as defined in point  2  of
           Article 2 who accompany or join them.


           2. Without prejudice to any right to free movement and residence
           the persons concerned may have in  their  own  right,  the  host
           Member State shall, in accordance with its national legislation,
           facilitate entry and residence for the following persons:


           (a) any other family members, irrespective of their nationality,
           not falling under the definition in point 2 of Article 2 who, in
           the country from which they have come, are dependants or members
           of the household of the Union citizen having the  primary  right
           of residence, or where serious health grounds  strictly  require
           the personal care of the family member by the Union citizen;


           (b) the partner with  whom  the  Union  citizen  has  a  durable
           relationship, duly attested.
           The host Member State shall undertake an  extensive  examination
           of the personal circumstances and shall justify  any  denial  of
           entry or residence to these people. "

   32. However, notwithstanding that Surinder Singh and the other cases  we
       have referred to which concern family  members  as  defined  in  the
       Directive, we cannot see that there is any distinction in  principle
       between those cases and the case of the appellant before us.  In our
       judgment, the exercise of the right  of  free  movement  by  an  EEA
       national is as likely to be adversely affected by the inability of a
       durable partner to reside with the EEA national in the  host  State,
       as it would be were his or her spouse to be denied residence status.



   33. Although Mr Avery sought to emphasise that Article 3.2 refers to the
       requirement of the host  member  state  to  "facilitate"  entry  and
       residence for persons who  are  "other  family  members",  including
       durable partners, we do not see that that expression undermines this
       appellant's  case.  The  refusal  to  grant  confirmation   of   the
       appellant's residence status by the issuing of a residence card does
       the opposite of facilitating her residence in the UK  as  a  durable
       partner.

   34. That is not to say that there is no difference in principle  between
       the treatment of "family members" as defined in  the  Directive  and
       "other family members", whereby entry and residence is subject to  a
       discretion, as is evident from the wording of Article 3.2.  We  deal
       with that issue below in terms of the appropriate  outcome  of  this
       appeal.

   35. On the other hand, we do not consider that there is any merit in the
       contention that the Respondent failed to follow, or apply,  what  is
       said to be a policy contained within the ECI's.  That  part  of  the
       ECI's relied on on behalf of the appellant states as follows:

           "5.5. Non-EEA family members of British Citizens (Surinder Singh
           ruling)


           A third country national who is the spouse  /  civil  partner  /
           partner or other family member  of  a  British  citizen  can  be
           availed by European law if they have resided  with  the  British
           citizen in another Member state, and  the  British  citizen  was
           either employed or self-employed  in  the  other  Member  state,
           prior to travelling to the U.K.

           In these circumstances the third country nationals  are  treated
           as if the British citizen were an  EEA  national  and  therefore
           will be entitled to an EEA family permit."

   36. We accept Mr Avery's submission that the ECI's in  this  respect  do
       not represent an intention on the part of the Secretary of State  to
       extend the Surinder Singh principle beyond what is within regulation
       9 of the EEA Regulations. It is evident from other sections  of  the
       ECI's that the 'principle' in Surinder Singh is, in the Respondent's
       mind at least, confined to spouses. This is clear from, for example,
       what appears in the very next part of 5.5. That states that:

           "In such circumstances the third country national has the option
           to enter the U.K. either under the Immigration Rules or  as  the
           spouse of an EEA  national,  if  the  British  citizen  is  also
           returning to the U.K." (emphasis as in original)

   37. We do not need to quote other paragraphs of the ECI's  which  follow
       on from the ones we have quoted. Suffice to  say  that  those  other
       paragraphs do not indicate that the  Secretary  of  State  considers
       that the benefit of the Surinder Singh principle should be conferred
       on anyone other than a spouse or civil partner. There is  no  policy
       on the part of the Secretary of State as contended for on behalf  of
       the appellant.

   38. That is all aside from  whether  there  is  an  arguable  basis  for
       suggesting that the ECI's do represent any form of policy which  the
       Secretary of State is required to follow.

   39. Having said that, in the  light  of  our  earlier  analysis,  we  do
       consider that the Surinder Singh principle does  extend  to  persons
       such as the appellant who are in durable relationship,  albeit  that
       the ECI's are no guide to that conclusion.

   40. We consider that Judge Powell  was  correct  to  conclude  that  the
       appellant  is  entitled  to  the  benefit  of  the  Surinder   Singh
       principle, although wrong to base his  conclusion  in  part  on  the
       ECI's. Similarly, we conclude that that he erred in law  in  seeming
       to allow the appeal outright, for reasons which we now come to.

   41. Having concluded that the appellant is entitled to  the  benefit  of
       the principle in Surinder Singh, we  must  next  consider  what  the
       effect of that conclusion is.

   42. In Ihemedu it was  pointed  out  that  regulation  17(4)  makes  the
       issuing of a residence card to an extended family member a matter of
       discretion. It was decided that where the Secretary of State has not
       yet exercised that discretion the most the Tribunal is  entitled  to
       do is to allow the appeal as being not in accordance with  the  law,
       leaving to the Secretary of State the matter of whether  or  not  to
       exercise this discretion in the appellant's favour.

   43.  In  the  appellant's  further  written  submissions  received  post
       hearing, it is contended, essentially, that the decision in  Ihemedu
       does not apply to the circumstances of this appeal because  it  only
       applies if it is first established that the appellant is an extended
       family member as defined in regulation 8 of the EEA Regulations.  At
       [20] of the further submissions it is asserted that it has been  the
       Respondent's position and that of the appellant that  the  appellant
       does not fall within regulation 8, given that the sponsor  is  a  UK
       national exercising Treaty rights, hence regulation 17(4)  does  not
       arise.

   44. However, we note that the  appellant's  original  skeleton  argument
       itself contends that the appellant is in  a  'durable  relationship'
       and early on quotes regulation 8 (in  relation  to  extended  family
       members).

   45. Further, the submission to the effect that Ihemedu  does  not  apply
       fails to take into account the terms of regulation 9, which we  have
       set out above and which we repeat, viz:


         "9.-(1) If the conditions in paragraph (2) are satisfied, these
        Regulations apply to a person who is the family member of a British
        citizen as if the United Kingdom national were an EEA national."


   46. The sponsor is a UK national exercising Treaty rights, but he is for
       those purposes treated as if he were an  EEA  national.  It  follows
       that the appellant is to be regarded as the extended  family  member
       of an EEA national.

   47. In addition, contrary to what is said in the further submissions  at
       [22], we do not agree that, in so far  as  First-tier  judge  Powell
       purported to allow the appeal under the Directive, he was correct to
       do so. There is no provision in the Directive which is equivalent to
       the Surinder Singh principle,  that  principle  being  founded  upon
       Community law in general.

   48. We cannot see that there is any basis  for  the  contention  in  the
       further written submissions that the Secretary of State has in  some
       way already exercised the discretion inherent in regulation 17,  not
       least because the Secretary of State has  never  accepted  that  the
       appellant is an extended family  member.  Contrary  to  the  written
       submissions, we do not see in the determination of First-tier  judge
       Powell an agreement to the effect that, if the  appellant  succeeded
       in her argument in terms of the application of  the  Surinder  Singh
       principle, she would be granted a residence card  outright,  without
       the further enquiry required by regulation 17(5). Indeed,  there  is
       no mention of regulation 17 in the determination,  no  reference  to
       any discretion, and the decision in Ihemedu is not cited.

   49. The reliance on unreported decisions of the Upper  Tribunal  in  the
       further written submissions is of no assistance at all and the other
       reported  cases  cited  do  not  bear  directly  on  the  discretion
       contained within regulation 17, and in relation to which Ihemedu  is
       clear. We simply do not accept that it is for  us  to  exercise  the
       discretion that is plainly within the province of the  Secretary  of
       State under regulation 17.

   50. So far as the appellant relies on the decision in Case C-34/09  Ruiz
       Zambrano, we do not consider that  such  reliance  can  achieve  the
       result of the appellant's appeal being allowed  outright,  which  is
       what is in effect contended. Zambrano decided that:

             "Article 20 TFEU is  to  be  interpreted  as  meaning  that  it
             precludes a Member State from refusing a third country national
             upon whom his minor children, who are European Union  citizens,
             are dependent, a right of residence  in  the  Member  State  of
             residence and nationality of those children, and from  refusing
             to grant a work permit to that third country  national,  in  so
             far as such decisions deprive those  children  of  the  genuine
             enjoyment of the substance  of  the  rights  attaching  to  the
             status of European Union citizen." (our emphasis)

   51. The removal of the appellant would not have the effect described  in
       the words in italics. The appellant's children are British citizens,
       and the children in Zambrano were Belgian  nationals.  However,  the
       difference between that case and the one of this appellant  is  that
       the parents in Zambrano were  not  Belgian  citizens  but  Colombian
       citizens. Their removal would have, effectively, meant  the  removal
       of the children, thus depriving  them  of  the  enjoyment  of  their
       rights as Belgian citizens. In the appeal before us, the  children's
       father is a British citizen, and thus there is no question  of  him,
       or them, being removed.

   52. More widely in terms of Article 8, we do not accept that  Article  8
       is engaged in the circumstances of this appeal. In the first  place,
       the refusal letter expressly states that "a decision not to issue  a
       residence card/permanent residence card  does  not  require  you  to
       leave the United Kingdom if you can otherwise demonstrate  that  you
       have a right to reside under the Regulations". In  other  words,  in
       this case, there would be no "removal  of  the  appellant  from  the
       United Kingdom in consequence  of  the  immigration  decision"  that
       would breach her Article 8 rights (see the  permissible  grounds  of
       appeal as set out in section 84 of the Nationality, Immigration  and
       Asylum Act 2002, specifically s.84(1)(g)).

   53. Secondly, as the refusal  letter  also  points  out,  it  is  now  a
       requirement of the immigration rules that an application  for  leave
       to remain on Article 8 grounds must be made (see Appendix  FM),  and
       no such initial application has  been  made  in  the  case  of  this
       appellant.

   54. Drawing all these threads together, we are satisfied that First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Powell was correct  to  conclude  that  the  Surinder
       Singh principle applies to this appellant, albeit not for  precisely
       the reasons that he gave. The principle does  not  derive  from  the
       Directive which has no equivalent provision, but from Community law.
       We are nevertheless satisfied that regulation 9 is inconsistent with
       the principle in Surinder Singh in its application to this appellant
       as a durable partner, being an extended family member.

   55. We are  however,  satisfied  that  Judge  Powell  erred  in  law  in
       purporting to allow the appeal outright.  Accordingly,  we  set  the
       decision aside, and re-make it. The appropriate course was  and  is,
       for the appeal to be allowed as being not in accordance with the law
       on the basis that it remains for the Secretary of State to  exercise
       her discretion in relation to whether or not to issue the  appellant
       with a residence card, as an extended family member.

Decision

   56. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  an
       error on a point of law. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is
       set aside and the  decision  re-made  allowing  the  appeal  to  the
       limited extent that  the  decision  of  the  Respondent  is  not  in
       accordance with the law, and for the Respondent to consider  in  the
       exercise of her discretion whether to issue a residence card to  the
       appellant.







Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek
                                                 13/10/14
