
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40723/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 June 2015                                |On 19 June 2015               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                                dinna shaibu
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr W Ehimika of David & Vine, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery of the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Malawi born  on  8  June  1987.   She  is
    married to Eddie who is also a citizen of Malawi  born  on  26  October
    1973.  The Appellant's leave as a Tier 1 (General) partner  expired  on
    19 July 2014.  She together with her husband applied for further leave,
    he as a Tier 4 (General) Student and she  as  his  dependant.   He  was
    granted leave but on 26 September 2014 the Respondent refused leave  as
    a partner dependant to the Appellant because she  failed  to  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 319C(i) of the Immigration Rules.

The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 2. The Appellant appealed under section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 as amended (the 2002 Act). The appeal was dismissed
    by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Monson in any decision  promulgated
    on 26 February 2015.

 3. At paragraph 13  of  his  decision  the  Judge  set  out  the  relevant
    requirements parts of paragraph 319C(i) and found on the evidence  that
    she did not meet these requirements.

 4. On 30 April 2015 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Frankish granted  the
    Appellant permission to appeal on grounds  that  it  was  arguable  the
    Respondent had failed to  follow  her  policy  about  changes  made  to
    paragraph 319C of the Immigration Rules in a Ministerial Statement made
    on 6 September 2013.  Additionally, he considered it was arguable  that
    the Appellant having arrived as a spouse dependant, should have had her
    claim  under  Article  8  of  the  European  Convention   outside   the
    Immigration Rules considered by way of reference  to  the  judgment  in
    Beoku-Betts v SSHD [2008] UKHL 39.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 5. The Appellant and her  husband  attended  the  hearing.   I  noted  the
    husband's current leave for studies leading to an  MBA  expires  on  31
    August 2015.  I was informed that he was considering  applying  in  due
    course for further leave for doctoral studies.

 6. Mr Ehimika for the Appellant referred to the Ministerial Statement of 6
    September 2013 and submitted that the Statement  of  Changes  of  Rules
    laid before the House of Commons on 6 September 2013  did  not  reflect
    the penultimate paragraph of the statement in which the Minister said:-

         "I am making changes to the Rules for  dependants  in  the  Points-
         Based System and  other  work  routes,  following  the  High  Court
         judgment  in  R  (oao  Zhang)  v  SSHD.   The  changes  will  allow
         dependants to apply from within the UK, providing they are not here
         illegally, as visitors, or  on  temporary  admission  or  temporary
         release.  They will  still  need  to  satisfy  all  other  existing
         requirements."

    I remarked to Mr Ehimika that the reference  to  "dependants"  did  not
    mean "all dependants".

6.   Mr Ehimika then referred me to a document to be found at pages  11  and
    12 of his original bundle.  This is an extract from the website of  the
    London School of Economics  (LSE)  and  is  entitled  "Rules  for  your
    dependants in the UK".  There was no information of the  date  of  this
    document.  He referred me  to  the  section  entitled  "Who  can  bring
    dependants?" but this has no relevance to the Appellant and his  family
    since they are already in the United Kingdom.

    He also referred me to the section entitled "Family members already  in
    the UK" in which it states:

         'If you meet the Tier 4 Rules to bring dependants:

             You are studying at postgraduate level for  twelve  months  or
             more, or

             You are fully sponsored by your government for a programme  of
             study longer than six months;

             And your  family  are  already  in  the  UK  as  your  Tier  4
             dependants, they can apply to continue to stay in the UK  with
             you.'

 7. I also noted that the guidance refers to a situation  in  which  family
    are already in the UK as Tier 4 dependants.  The  Appellant's  previous
    leave was as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant  dependant,  not  as  a
    Tier 4 dependant.  What is of note and to which  I  was  not  expressly
    referred is the paragraph immediately under the heading  which  informs
    the reader that the Rules are complex and that he or  she  should  seek
    advice before  making  any  decisions  about  travelling  or  switching
    immigration categories.

 8. I indicated that I was reluctant to place  reliance  on  this  type  of
    advice rather than on statements and guidance issued by  the  Secretary
    of State.

 9. For the Respondent Mr Avery submitted the Appellant  had  misunderstood
    the effect of the Ministerial Statement of 6 September  2013.   It  was
    simply an introduction to the detailed Statements  of  Changes  to  the
    Immigration Rules which were laid before the House of  Commons.   There
    were no  changes  to  paragraph  319C  except  for  those  affected  by
    paragraph 131 of the new Statement of Changes which substituted  a  new
    paragraph  319C(h)  which  has  no  application  to   the   Appellant's
    circumstances.  He also produced the relevant guidance notes as amended
    at 24 April 2015.   Page 24 of the guidance merely reiterated the Rules
    and the Appellant had not shown that the Immigration  Rules  failed  to
    reflect the Ministerial Statement.  The Appellant had not made out  her
    case and the appeal should be dismissed.

10. In response Mr Ehimika referred  again  to  the  Ministerial  Statement
    submitting that it was misleading and that the Statement of Changes  of
    the Immigration Rules did  not  accurately  reflect  what  was  in  the
    Ministerial Statement.  He referred generically to the  judgment  in  R
    (oao Zhang) v SSHD [2013]  EWHC  891  (Admin)  which  I  note  was  the
    catalyst for the changes  to  paragraph  319C(h)  referred  to  in  the
    preceding paragraph.

11. He continued that each appeal had to be considered on  its  own  merits
    and that the Appellant  had  complied  with  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules before and throughout her stay in the United  Kingdom
    and it was not fair that in the light of the judgment in R (oao  Zhang)
    the Appellant was now denied further leave to remain.  The  Immigration
    Rules were extremely  complex  and  it  was  difficult  for  anyone  to
    understand them.

Findings and Consideration

12. For the reasons given by Mr Avery, I do not find that  the  Ministerial
    Statement  is  in  conflict  with  the  Statement  of  the  Changes  to
    Immigration Rules which it introduced.  The Respondent's  own  guidance
    reflects the Rules and does not indicate that  case  workers  have  any
    area of discretion in the application of these particular Rules.   This
    approach  would  be  consistent  with  the  general  approach  of   the
    Respondent to the application of  the  Rules  for  Points-Based  System
    Migrants.

13. For the reasons again already  given,  I  find  little  weight  can  be
    attached to the guidance prepared by or for the LSE.  Additionally, for
    the reasons given the LSE guidance does  not  cover  the  situation  in
    which the Appellant finds herself as the leave  of  both  her  and  her
    husband prior to their application for further  leave  leading  to  the
    decision under appeal was under Tier 1 and not Tier 4  of  the  Points-
    Based System.

14. There was  no  allegation  that  the  Respondent  had  dealt  with  the
    Appellant's application in a manner which was procedurally unfair.  The
    complaint simply was that the Immigration Rules themselves operated  in
    an unfair manner in the particular circumstances of the  Appellant.   I
    accept the submission that the Immigration Rules are complex and indeed
    they have been criticised by the Court of Appeal for their rebarbartive
    drafting: see para.59 of Singh and Khaled v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 74.

15. I find that the Appellant has not shown that  there  was  any  material
    error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  and  therefore  it
    shall stand.

Anonymity

16. There was no request for an anonymity direction and  having  heard  the
    appeal considered none is warranted.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain an error of law
    and shall stand.  The effect is:-

    The appeal of the Appellant is dismissed.



Signed/Official Crest  Date 16. vi. 2015

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

