
[pic]
Upper Tribunal                                                     Appeal
Number:  IA/40395/2014
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

                                                           Decision Sent on
                              25 September 2017

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                               Efosa Imafidon
                                                                  Respondent
                            NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL
   1. On 1 September 2017, the Secretary of State was granted permission  to
      appeal to the Upper Tribunal against a decision of Judge of the First-
      tier Tribunal D H Clapham who, by a decision promulgated  on  21  June
      2016, allowed the appeal of Efosa Imafidon  on  human  rights  grounds
      (Article 8) against the Secretary of State's decision of 19  September
      2014 refusing his application for settlement as the dependent child of
      his British aunt.

   2. The Upper Tribunal received a letter 21 September 2017  from  a  Mr  P
      Duffy, of UK Visas and Immigration, on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
      State, explaining the issue of timeliness in this  case  and  that  he
      unintentionally misled the Tribunal into  thinking  that  the  grounds
      were in time. It is  clear  that  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Simpson who  extended  time  and  granted  permission  was  under  the
      impression that the application was one day out of time whereas it was
      one year out of time.  Mr Duffy stated that in  the  circumstances  he
      requested permission under rule 17(1)(a)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
      (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (the "UT Rules") to withdraw the Secretary
      of State's case before the Upper Tribunal.

   3. In these circumstances, I am satisfied that it is appropriate for  the
      Upper Tribunal  to  grant  its  consent  to  the  Secretary  of  State
      withdrawing her case before the Upper Tribunal. I therefore grant such
      consent.

   4. Accordingly, with my consent, and pursuant to rule  17(5)  of  the  UT
      Rules, the Secretary of State's appeal is recorded as "Withdrawn  with
      the consent of the Upper Tribunal". This is a Notice pursuant to  rule
      17(5) to inform the parties that the  Secretary  of  State's  case  is
      withdrawn.

   5. The effect of the withdrawal of the Secretary of State's  case  before
      the Upper Tribunal is that the proceedings before the  Upper  Tribunal
      are at an end. There is no appeal before the Upper  Tribunal  and  the
      decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Clapham shall stand.




[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill               Date:  22 September 2017
