
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40960/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 March 2015                     |On 25 March 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              MR JUSTICE MALES
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM


                                   Between

                      ASVALON HADASSAH ARLENA ANDALCIO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Chinwuba, Phillip Priscilla solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Trinidad  and  Tobago  and  her  date  of
    birth is 21 January 1981.  She made an application for leave to  remain
    on 21 June 2013.  That application was  refused  by  the  Secretary  of
    State in a decision of  24  September  2013.   The  appellant  appealed
    against that decision and the appeal was  dismissed  by  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal A M Black in a decision that was promulgated on  11
    July 2014 following a hearing on 7 July 2014.

2.   The appeal was dismissed under the Immigration (EEA)  Regulations  2006
    ("the 2006 Regulations"), the Immigration Rules and Article 8.

3.   The relevant facts are that the appellant has a young daughter who  was
    born on 17 March 2012 and who like her father is a British citizen. The
    judge made extensive findings. She found that the there was no  contact
    been the daughter and the British  citizen  father  albeit  he  made  a
    financial contribution.  The judge found that  the  appellant  was  the
    child's primary carer and that it is in the child's best  interests  to
    remain with her mother.

4.   Judge of the Upper Tribunal Grubb granted  permission  on  16  December
    2014 on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal had not  considered  the
    appeal under regulation 15A (4A) of the 2006 Regulations which  applied
    to primary carers of British citizen children. She had  considered  the
    appeal under regulation 15 as it applied to EEA national children.  The
    grant of permission was on this EU point of law only.

5.   We heard oral submissions from Mr Clarke who conceded  that  the  judge
    had made an error of law for the reason  identified  in  the  grant  of
    permission, but he maintained that this was not material because (as he
    put it) the best interests of the child are, as found by the judge,  to
    return to Trinidad with her mother.  He made submissions in the context
    of the Rule 24 response and argued that in these circumstances the 2006
    Regulations can be deviated from.  He  relied  on  a  number  of  cases
    relating to the child's best interests and  the  Article  8  assessment
    generally.  Miss Chinwuba relied on her skeleton argument.

6.   We indicated at the hearing that that is our judgment  that  the  judge
    made a material error of law  and  we  indicated  that  this  would  be
    followed by an oral judgment later that day.

7.   The determinative issue in this case is whether or not the  appellant's
    daughter would be unable to reside in the UK or another  EEA  state  if
    the appellant is required to leave.  On the  unchallenged  findings  of
    fact made by the judge it is  obvious  that  the  consequences  of  the
    appellant's removal would be that her daughter would accompany  her  to
    Trinidad. There is no contact between the child and her British citizen
    father and no other relatives have been identified who can take care of
    her.   We have considered the decision of the Upper Tribunal in MA  and
    SM (Zambrano: EU children outside  EU)  Iran  [2013]  UKIAT  00380.  At
    paragraph 50 the Upper Tribunal found it is no answer to a claim  under
    the Zambrano principle that the child  could  exercise  his  rights  of
    residence in the EU by being adopted or placed in care.  It was not put
    forward by Mr Clarke that this would be an alternative in any event.

8.   Mr Clarke did not argue that the  appellant  was  unable  to  meet  the
    requirements of the 2006 Regulations. On the contrary he accepted  that
    she does. The argument, as we understand it, is that the Regulations do
    not apply to this case in the light of the judge's findings in relation
    to the child's best interests and Article 8.

9.   We reject Mr Clarke's submissions. Any assessment of the  child's  best
    interests and proportionality in  the  context  of  Article  8  is  not
    material to a finding under the 2006 Regulations. The appeal  is  under
    EU law.  The Regulation gives effect to the CJEU's decision in Zambrano
    and there is no legal authority to suggest that there is  a  discretion
    contained in the Regulations to refuse a right of residence to a person
    who fulfils all their requirements.  In  any  event,  the  judge  found
    nothing more than that if the appellant was to be removed to  Trinidad,
    it was in the child's best interests to  be  with  her.  There  was  no
    finding that it  was  in  the  child's  best  interests  to  return  to
    Trinidad.

10.   Pursuant  to  section  12  (2)  (a)  of  the  Tribunals,  Courts   and
    Enforcement Act 2007 ("the 2007 Act") we set aside the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal to dismiss the appeal under the  2006  Regulations.
    We remake the decision pursuant to section 12 (2) (b) (ii) of the  2007
    Act and allow the appeal under the 2006 Regulations.

Notice of Decision

11.  The appeal is allowed under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Joanna McWilliam       Date 23 March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

