
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40566/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 6th August 2014                              |On 21st August 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD



                                   Between

                               mrs IOANA GEANA
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Nicholson, Counsel, instructed by Ennon & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Romania who applied  for  a  registration
    certificate as a Romanian national  exercising  treaty  rights  in  the
    United Kingdom. Her application  was  refused,  her  subsequent  appeal
    dismissed and on 30th September 2013 removal directions were served  on
    her. Her further appeal  to  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hamilton  was
    dismissed under the 2006 Regulations and also under Article 8 ECHR in a
    determination promulgated on 13th May 2013.

 2. Grounds of application were lodged.  Firstly, it was  said  that  there
    was a period of more than three months  between  the  hearing  and  the
    promulgation of the determination and the case law indicated that given
    that time lapse the determination would normally  be  rendered  flawed.
    Secondly, it was said that the  judge had misdirected himself as to the
    burden and standard of proof as it was not for the  Appellant  to  show
    that she had a  right  to  reside  here  but  rather  it  was  for  the
    Respondent to prove that that she no such rights and  that   Regulation
    19(3)(a)applied.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by a First-tier Tribunal Judge on  the
    basis that there was arguable merit in both grounds.

 4. A Rule 24 notice was lodged whereby the Secretary  of  State  contended
    that the determination was sustainable on the basis  that  the  judge's
    findings were properly based on evidence and it was not contended  that
    any of the facts that he based his conclusions on were  erroneous.   As
    such it was said that the determination and the decision to dismiss the
    appeal should be maintained.

 5. Thus the matter came before me on the above date.

 6. I heard submissions from Mr Nicholson which contain a point not focused
    in the grounds seeking permission to appeal.  What is said is  that  in
    support of the latter ground of  appeal  (the  burden  resting  on  the
    Respondent to show that the removal was  lawful)  that  the  judge  had
    noted in paragraph 33 of his determination that the Appellant  had  re-
    entered the United Kingdom in August 2013.   As  such  the  Appellant's
    circumstances were covered by Regulation 13  of  the  2006  Regulations
    which say that under 13(1) an EEA national is entitled to reside in the
    United Kingdom for a period not exceeding three months beginning on the
    date on which she is admitted here.  It followed that the  Respondent's
    decision of 30 September 2013 which was taken within  this  period  was
    unlawful and must be set aide.

 7. Before me Mr Nicholson submitted that this was merely  a  part  of  the
    second ground of appeal whereas Mr Jarvis argued that this was a  fresh
    point for which permission would have to be sought.

 8. Adopting a perhaps rather generous view  I  concluded  that  the  point
    taken by Mr Nicholson did arise out of the second ground of  appeal  in
    that it goes to the lawfulness of the removal of the Appellant.

 9. If that was treating the second  ground  of  appeal  with  considerable
    elasticity I had  also  concluded  in  terms  of  my  discretion  under
    sections 2 and 5 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008
    that I should permit argument on this point to be made as  plainly  the
    Tribunal should not be acting unlawfully. Mr Jarvis requested  and  was
    granted a short adjournment to consider the position and  to  ascertain
    whether the Secretary of State agreed that the Appellant had - in  fact
    - re-entered the United Kingdom in August 2013.

10. When we resumed Mr Jarvis said that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  no
    evidence either way on whether the Appellant had departed  and  entered
    the United Kingdom in August 2013.  It was said that there had been  no
    cross-appeal  against  the  findings  on  that  point  which  was   not
    surprising given the decision of the judge to dismiss the  appeal.   It
    was said that the burden of proof was always on the Appellant  to  meet
    the requirements of the Regulations.

11. For the Appellant Mr Nicholson said that the removal of an EU  national
    was an unusual measure and in this case it would be unlawful to do  so.
     I was referred to the grounds of application under paragraph  5  which
    referred to the (admittedly old) case of Giangregorio v SSHD [1983] Imm
    AR 104 and paragraph 7.131 of MacDonald's Immigration Law  on  Practice
    8th Edition.  The judge had found that the Appellant did  re-enter  the
    UK in August 2013 and there was no challenge to that and  as  such  the
    decision to remove her was therefore unlawful and I should so find.

12. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

13. I should say that that judge apologised to both parties for  the  delay
    in promulgating the decision which he says was due to ill-health and an
    administrative error on his part.  While the issue  of  delay  was  not
    really canvassed before me I agree with what  the  Secretary  of  State
    says  in  her  Rule  24  notice  that  the  determination  can   remain
    sustainable on the basis that the findings were based on  evidence  and
    it is not contended that any of the facts that he based his conclusions
    on are erroneous.  There is a period of just over three months  between
    the hearing and the promulgation of the determination but it is only  a
    rule of thumb that the determination must  be  promulgated  within  the
    particular period.  Putting it shortly, it would  be  very  odd  indeed
    that  because  a  decision  was   fractionally   late   but   extremely
    comprehensive  in  its  terms  it  had  to   be   set   aside   whereas
    determinations very close to the end of the three months but which were
    not nearly so clear in their terms would survive.   I  therefore  doubt
    that there is any merit in this ground of appeal.

14. The general proposition is that the burden of proof is on the Appellant
    in a case under the 2006 Regulations even if it is up to the Respondent
    to prove particular facts which would mean that the Appellant ceases to
    be a qualified person under the regulations and which therefore  merits
    their removal.

15. However, it seems to me that the outcome of the appeal turns on whether
    or not the Secretary of State's decision of 30th September  2013  which
    was taken within the three month period of the apparent re-entry of the
    Appellant was unlawful.

16. The judge found that the Appellant came to the United Kingdom  on  18th
    August 2010 (paragraph 15). In paragraph 36 he says that the  Appellant
    claimed she visited  Romania  in  August  2013.   It  appears  that  he
    accepted that evidence as he goes on in paragraph 33 to say that it  is
    not clear whether she was claiming as a job seeker "when she re-entered
    the UK in August 2013".  While the dates are not precise it seems to be
    accepted that the Appellant came here in August 2010 and went  back  to
    Romania in August 2013 and then came back to the United Kingdom in  the
    same month.

17. It was not suggested to me that the judge was wrong to  find  that  the
    Appellant had re-entered the United Kingdom in August 2013 nor  was  it
    suggested that this  re-entry   did  anything  else  than  trigger  the
    Appellant's entitlement under Regulation 13 of the 2006 Regulations  to
    a three month initial right of residence.

18. Given that the Appellant had a three  month  entitlement  of  residence
    commencing from her date of entry in August 2013 it is clear  that  the
    decision taken in September  2013  to  remove  her  was  unlawful.   It
    follows from this that the judge materially erred in law in  concluding
    that there was no merit in the Appellant's appeal under the Regulations
    and that the decision must be set aside and the appeal allowed.

Decision

19. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

20. I set aside the decision.

21. I remake the decision in the appeal  by  allowing  it  under  the  2006
    Regulations.








Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald


