
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/40375/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 7 March 2016                    |On 25th April 2016                 |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD

                                   Between


                             Mr MUHAMMAD SULMAN
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A. Hashmi of Mamoon Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This matter  comes  before  me  pursuant  to  permission  having  been
    granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini dated 3 August  2015.  The
    appeal relates  to  a  decision  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Foudy
    promulgated on 28 March 2015.  The Judge at the First-tier Tribunal had
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal whereby he had applied for a residence
    card as the spouse of an EEA national who was exercising treaty  rights
    in the United Kingdom.

2.    The Appellant's grounds of appeal can be summarised as follows:

    1) The Judge has heavily relied on the Respondent's decision instead of
       making an independent assessment of the oral  and  written  evidence
       presented to her;
    2) There was extensive personal information such as  where  there  were
       tattoos on the body but the Judge had not taken these  factors  into
       account; and
    3) In respect of information relating to the  Sponsor's  income,  there
       were further documents from the Appellant at the hearing such  as  a
       letter from the employer, yet the same was not  dealt  with  by  the
       Judge;




3.    At the hearing before me  Ms  Hashmi  said  that  she  relied  on  the
    renewal  grounds  seeking  permission  to   appeal.   She   highlighted
    paragraphs 6 and 8 of the Judge's decision. At paragraph  6  the  Judge
    said the burden of proof rests on the Appellant.  In  the  Reasons  for
    Refusal Letter there was nothing from the Respondent to say  that  this
    was a marriage of convenience. The hearing had lasted over three hours.
    The reasoning given only relates to one issue. If one was  to  look  at
    the evidence in its entirety it was clear  that  there  were  only  two
    minor discrepancies despite this extensive questioning.

4.    Interpreters were used but both the  Appellant  and  the  Sponsor  had
    tried  to  give  evidence  in  English  but  instead  they   used   the
    interpreters. There was an error of law and I was urged  to  allow  the
    appeal.

5.    Ms Johnstone made brief  submissions.  She  said  that  the  grant  of
    permission to appeal was prefaced with reference at paragraph 5 to that
    any alleged error being academic. Even if there was an error of law  it
    was not material. The Judge's findings were open  to  her.  There  were
    reasons given by the Respondent. There were incompatible and the  like.
    The Judge had considered both sides. The Judge's decision ought  to  be
    upheld.

6.    In reply Ms Hashmi said that as she had  pointed  out  initially,  the
    Judge had merely given one reason yet there were extensive details from
    this  couple  during  their  evidence.  If  this  was  a  marriage   of
    convenience then how did the couple get the majority of  the  questions
    right?

7.    In so far as the financial aspects  were  concerned,  Ms  Hashmi  said
    that there were indeed payslips at pages 49, 50 and 52  of  the  bundle
    before the Judge. If I concluded that there was an error  of  law  then
    that would be in respect of  Regulation  6.  There  has  been  detailed
    evidence before the Judge.

8.    I invited Ms Johnstone to respond and she  said  that  her  submission
    was that if there was a claim to exercising treaty  rights,  yet  there
    were said to be bogus transactions and therefore it was not a  case  in
    which the Sponsor was exercising treaty rights.

9.    Ms Hashmi had the final word and said that the  Judge  had  not  given
    her reasons. Page 57 of the bundle refers to the BACS payment and  this
    contradicts paragraph 10 of the Judge's  decision  that  there  was  no
    evidence. As can be seen, there was.

10.   I had reserved my decision.

11.   Having reflected on the matter and having  considered  the  Record  of
    Proceedings it  is  clear  to  me  that  there  was  indeed  relatively
    extensive evidence before the Judge. Additionally the bundle before the
    Judge does contain numerous bank statements, payslips and the  like.  I
    note that Ms  Hashmi  had  appeared  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    therefore her assertion that the hearing had lasted  some  three  hours
    may well be correct. The decision of the Judge is less than three pages
    long. The first page is, in reality, just the heading of the case.

12.   I have reminded myself that a short decision does not  equate  to  one
    that discloses errors of law. Indeed in  some  cases  writing  a  short
    decision can show that it has been written with more care  rather  than
    less.

13.   At the hearing I had asked many questions of Ms Hashmi as to  why  the
    length of the decision and an apparent failure to deal with every point
    of itself was enough to show an error  of  law.  I  was  not  initially
    inclined towards accepting Ms Hashmi's submissions.

14.   Having considered the matter in  full  though,  I  have  come  to  the
    conclusion that it is plain  to  see,  when  considering  the  original
    bundle of documents before the Judge and the evidence that  the  Judge,
    that there is a material error of law. The Judge has  materially  erred
    in her assessment of the evidence  because  she  has  not  set  out  or
    balanced the very many questions that the  Appellant  and  Sponsor  got
    right as against the one  thing  that  they  did  not.  Similarly,  the
    Judge's findings in respect of the bank statements, payslips  and  BACS
    payments appears to be wrong. The bundle of documents before the  Judge
    shows that these aspects were dealt with by the Appellant. At the  very
    least, in his written evidence.

15.   I therefore conclude that there is a material error of  law  for  lack
    of reasoning and because even those limited findings,  go  against  the
    evidence submitted to the Judge.

16.   There will be a rehearing at the  First-tier  Tribunal.  None  of  the
    findings of the Judge shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First tier Tribunal Judge contains a material  error  of
law and is therefore set aside.

An anonymity direction is not made.


Signed                                       Date: 21 March 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood

