
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: ia/40827/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29 August 2014                             |On 10 September 2014         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between

                               MR Samuel KUSI
                       (anonmnity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the appellants:    Mr D Adma Adaw, Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1.      The appellant is the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
      and the appellant is, a citizen of Ghana born  on  10  March  1974.  I
      shall however for the sake of convenience referred to Mr Kusi  as  the
      appellant and the Secretary of State of the respondent which were  the
      designations they had Before the First-tier Tribunal.




   2.      The appellant appeals against  the  decision  of  the  respondent
      dated 13 August 2013 refusing to  issue  him  with  a  residence  card
      pursuant to regulation 8 of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)
      Regulations 2006 (the '2006 Regulations').




   3.      Permission to appeal was granted to the respondent by First- tier
      Tribunal Judge Cruthers stating that it is  arguable  that  the  judge
      fell into error by not making reference to the case of  Kareem  (Proxy
      Marriages - EU Law) [2014] UKUT (IAC) and has not explained  why  this
      appeal fell to be allowed.




   4.      In his determination  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  made  the
      following findings.




   a. The appellant and her husband, a German national were  married  on  24
      December 2012 in Ghana by proxy.




   b. The respondent asserts that the marriage between the appellant  and  a
      sponsor was one of marriage of  convenience.  He  has  considered  the
      answers given by the appellant and the sponsor in  an  interview  upon
      which the respondent made  a  positive  assertion  that  the  marriage
      between them was one of convenience.



   c. He is satisfied that the discrepancies identified in the answers given
      by the couple not individually or cumulatively go to the root  of  the
      matter and did not undermine the appellant's case.



   d. The only reason  given  by  the  respondent  for  asserting  that  the
      marriage was one of convenience was because the sponsor was  described
      as a spinster on the marriage certificate whereas she was  in  fact  a
      divorcee. The appellant claims that it was a mistake on  the  part  of
      the authorities which was corrected. The sponsor did not seek to  hide
      from the respondent that he was a divorcee.



   e. Registration of the appellant's proxy marriage was not compulsory  and
      it was not the registration that validated the marriage but  the  fact
      of the marriage having taken place.



   f. The appellant provided a letter from the Guinean High Commission which
      stated that  the  appellant's  marriage  was  properly  registered  in
      accordance with customary marriage laws of Ghana.



   g. On the basis of the evidence, the  appellant's  marriage  is  a  valid
      marriage  contracted  by  proxy  even  though  it  was  not   properly
      registered since registration was not compulsory.



   h. The respondent was not satisfied that the appellant's relationship was
      durable in accordance with rule 8 (5) of the 2006 regulations. Even if
      the marriage between the appellant and  sponsor  was  not  valid,  the
      appellant and her EEA sponsor  were  in  a  durable  relationship  and
      therefore satisfied the requirements of the 2006 Regulations. There is
      no reason to doubt the credibility of the appellant and  her  sponsor.
      They met each other in June 2010  and  started  living  together  soon
      after. They were married on 24 December 2012. By the time  the  appeal
      came before me they were living together in a relationship for  nearly
      2 years.



   i. On the evidence the appellant has  satisfied  that  on  a  balance  of
      probabilities that he and the sponsor were married to each  other  and
      in her durable relationship and  the  appellant  was  entitled  to  be
      granted a residence card according to the 2006 Regulations.



   5. At the hearing, Mr Adama conceded that in light of the case of Kareem,
      the Judge materially erred in law on this point. He asked however that
      the appeal should succeed on the basis that the appellant and his  EEA
      national are in a durable relationship and therefore the appellant  is
      entitled  to  a  residence  card  as  an  extended  family  member  in
      accordance with regulation 17 of the 2006 regulations. He  asked  that
      the appeal be remitted to the Secretary of State awaiting their lawful
      decision.




   6. Mr Tarlow on behalf of the respondent accepted that the  determination
      reflects that there was no cross-examination by the respondent or  the
      appellant or his EEA national at the hearing.  He  said  that  in  the
      circumstances the Judge was entitled to find that there was a  durable
      relationship between the appellant and her  EEA  national  sponsor  in
      accordance with regulation 8 (5) of the 2006 regulations.



   7. In the circumstances and given Mr Tarlow's submissions,  I  find  that
      The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law by not  applying
      the principles in the case of Kareem in order for a proxy marriage  to
      be recognised in the United Kingdom.




   8. I therefore set aside the determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge. The Judge did not make a  decision  on  whether  the  appellant
      should succeed pursuant to regulation 8 (5) of the  2006  regulations,
      in the circumstances, I remit the appeal to  the  Secretary  of  State
      awaiting their lawful decision.

   Conclusions

9. I allow the Secretary of State's appeal to the limited extent that it  be
   sent  back  to  her  awaiting  her  lawful  decision.  This  appeal  must
   accordingly be allowed

Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed.
                                              This 8th day of September 2014
Signed by,

..........................................

Mrs S Chana
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

