
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/40051/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th July 2016                      |On 18th July 2016               |
|                                      |                                |


                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                 RIZWAN ALI
                        (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms J Victor-Mazeli (counsel) Instructed by Law Lane,
solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS


1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Cary promulgated on 16 November  2015,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal.
 Background


3. The Appellant was born on 25 October 1980 and is a national of Pakistan.

4. On  25  October  2014  the  Appellant  arrived  at  Heathrow  Airport  in
possession of a residence permit conferring leave  to  remain  as  a  spouse
until 3  March  2016.  After  interviewing  the  appellant,  an  Immigration
Officer cancelled the  grant  of  leave  to  remain  (relying  on  paragraph
321A(2) of the Immigration Rules) and refused entry to the UK.


The Judge's Decision

5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Cary ("the Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision.  Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 25 May 2016 Judge  Nicholson
gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

      "6. This was a thorough decision by the Judge. Nonetheless,  paragraph
      321A(2)  specifically  includes  the  words  "in   relation   to   the
      application for leave" and implicitly refers to the leave that  is  to
      be cancelled. Although the appellant might not have been in a position
      to make an application for leave as a spouse if he had not  previously
      secured further leave as a student, it is arguable  that,  unless  the
      false document was submitted in relation to the application for  leave
      as a spouse, paragraph 321A(2) did not apply.


      7. Permission to appeal is accordingly granted on this  ground.  I  do
      not refuse permission on the  remaining  grounds  although  some  have
      relatively little merit."

The Hearing

6. (a) Ms Victor-Mazeli moved the three grounds of appeal. He told  me  that
the Judge relied on paragraph 321A of the immigration rules and reminded  me
of the precise terms of 321A(2) of the rules. She referred to  the  case  of
Khaliq (entry clearance - para 321)  Pakistan  [2011]  UKUT  00350(IAC)  and
told me that the Judge had failed to  correctly  apply  the  ratio  of  that
case.

(b) Ms Victor-Mazeli moved to the second ground of appeal and told  me  that
even if the Judge was  correct  in  his  interpretation  of  paragraph  321A
rules, the Judge should not have  reached  the  conclusion  he  has  reached
because no evidence of deception was placed before the Judge.  She  reminded
me of the burden and standard of proof relied on the cases of  In  R(on  the
application of Gazi) v SSHD (ETS-JR) 2015 UKUT 00327  and  SM  and  Qadir  v
Secretary of State for the Home Department  (ETS  -  Evidence  -  Burden  of
Proof) [2016] UKUAT .

(c) Ms Victor-Mazeli came to the third ground of appeal, and  told  me  that
the Judge's proportionality assessment of the  article  8  ECHR  grounds  is
fatally flawed. She told me that the appellant's wife is a  British  Citizen
who has never been to Pakistan, and has family in the UK, and  plans  for  a
future career in the UK. She told me that  the  Judge  had  failed  to  take
account of factors which (she told me) amount to  exceptional  circumstances
when considering article 8 ECHR grounds of appeal. She urged me to  set  the
Judge's decision aside and  to  substitute  my  own  decision  allowing  the
appeal.

7. Mr Walker, for the respondent, told me that he could see strength in  the
submissions made in relation to paragraph 321A of the immigration rules.  He
reminded me that SM and Qadir v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
(ETS - Evidence - Burden of  Proof)  [2016]  UKUAT  was  decided  after  the
Judge's decision was promulgated.  He  told  me  that  there  is  sufficient
evidence before this tribunal to enable me to substitute my own decision  if
I am persuaded that the Judge's decision contains a material error of law.

Analysis

8. In Khaliq (entry clearance - para 321) Pakistan [2011]  UKUT  00350(IAC)
the Tribunal held that for a person who has entry clearance that, under the
provisions of the Immigration (Leave to Enter and Remain) Order 2000, takes
effect as leave to enter, does not on arrival in the United Kingdom  "seek"
leave to enter,  and  paragraph  321  therefore  does  not  apply  to  him.
Paragraph 321A does,  but  only  if  the  circumstances  set  out  in  that
paragraph can be shown to exist in his case. In Khaliq  the  Appellant  was
found on arrival to have poor English and a  purchased  qualification.  The
Immigration Officer decided that the appellant should not  be  admitted  on
the strength of his visa.  The  Tribunal  held  that,  because,  under  the
structure of section 3A of the 1971 Act, and article 4 of  the  Immigration
(Leave to Enter and Remain) Order, entry clearance takes effect as leave to
enter, the application for entry clearance is the application for leave  to
enter.  The respondent's decision in that case was  clearly  based  on  his
examination of the appellant at Gatwick.  As that was  not  an  application
for leave to enter, the facts he discovered could not of themselves justify
refusal under paragraph 321A(2). If the appellant could be  shown  to  have
produced to the Entry Clearance Officer a false document in connection with
his application for entry clearance,  there  might  be  little  doubt  that
paragraph 321A applied.  But,  as  the  printout  of  the  Entry  Clearance
Officer's log shows, the English certificate was not produced to the  Entry
Clearance Officer: indeed, the Entry Clearance Officer  apparently  had  no
interest in it.

9. In SM and Qadir v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  (ETS  -
Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUAT  the Tribunal identified  "multiple
frailties and shortcomings" in the generic evidence of  the  Respondent  but
added "we have substantial reservations about the strength  and  quality  of
the Secretary of State's evidence.  Its shortcomings are  manifest.  On  the
other hand, while bearing in  mind  that  the  context  is  one  of  alleged
deception, we must be mindful of the comparatively  modest  threshold  which
an evidential burden entails. The calls for an evaluative assessment on  the
part of the tribunal. By an admittedly narrow margin we are  satisfied  that
the Secretary of State has discharged this burden.  The effect  of  this  is
that there is a burden, again  an  evidential  one,  on  the  Appellants  of
raising an innocent  explanation".  The  Tribunal  added  that  "every  case
belonging to the ETS/TOEIC stable will invariably  be  fact  sensitive.   To
this we add that every appeal  will  be  determined  on  the  basis  of  the
evidence adduced by the parties".

10. It is common ground that  the  respondent's  decision  is  based  on  an
allegation that the appellant's original grant of  leave  to  enter  may  be
tainted by dishonesty. (That dishonesty is denied by the appellant).  It  is
also common ground that there was no dishonesty employed in the  application
which lead to the grant of leave to  remain  as  the  spouse  of  a  British
Citizen.

11. The decision against which the appellant  appeals  is  the  respondent's
decision to cancel leave to remain as the spouse of a British Citizen.  That
decision relies entirely on paragraph 321A of the rules.  Paragraph  321A(2)
of  the  rules  specifically  includes  the  words  "in  relation   to   the
application  for  leave"  and  implicitly  refers  to  the  leave  that   is
cancelled.  Even if the appellant's English-language  certificate  had  been
fraudulently obtained, it is not a document submitted  in  relation  to  the
application. It is a document which was submitted in 2012 in relation  to  a
separate application. The  leave  which  was  cancelled  was  granted  on  3
December 2013.

12. At [29] the Judge sets out the provisions of paragraphs 321  &  321A  of
the Immigration Rules. At [32] the Judge correctly identifies the  grant  of
leave to remain made on 3 December 2013 as the leave which was cancelled  by
the decision under appeal. Between [31] &  [34],  the  Judge  clearly  finds
that because, in her view, the appellant's grant of leave  to  remain  as  a
student is tainted by dishonesty, then his in country application for  leave
to remain, granted on 3 December 2013 is equally tainted.

13. In the first sentence of [33] the Judge says

      It  is  my  view  that  the  respondent  is  entitled  to  cancel  the
      Appellant's leave to remain as a spouse on  25  October  2014  if  the
      appellant had submitted false documents  in  respect  of  his  earlier
      application for leave to remain.....

14. That finding is clearly a material error of law. That finding  flies  in
the face of the Dicta in Khaliq, and misinterprets the wording  of  321A  of
the rules.

15. Because the decision contains a material error of law,  I  must  set  it
aside.  There  is  sufficient  material  before  me  to  substitute  my  own
decision.

16. The relevant facts in this case are that the appellant  entered  the  UK
as a student. In 2012 the appellant submitted an application  for  leave  to
remain in the UK as a student. In July 2012 the appellant  obtained  an  ETS
test certificate which he relied on to support that application.

17. The respondent granted the appellant leave to remain  in  the  UK  as  a
student until 16 December 2013. The respondent now  believes  that  the  ETS
certificate relied on by the appellant dated 15 July 201 2 cannot be  relied
on.

18. On 3 December 2013 the respondent granted the appellant leave to  remain
in the UK as the spouse of a British citizen. Leave to  remain  was  granted
until 3 March 2016.

19. On 25 October 2014 the appellant arrived at Heathrow airport  and  tried
to re-enter the UK relying on his leave to remain until 3  March  2016.  The
respondent cancelled leave to remain because  the  respondent  believed  the
appellant had employed dishonesty in his 2012 application.

My Decision

20. In line with the  decision  in  Khaliq  (entry  clearance  -  para  321)
Pakistan [2011] UKUT 00350(IAC),  on  the  undisputed  facts  in  this  case
paragraph 321A of the Immigration rules does not apply to the appellant.

21. The appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision of  25  October
2014 to cancel leave to remain in the UK is allowed.

Decision

22. The decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cary  promulgated  on  16
November 2015 is tainted by  a  material  error  of  law.  I  must  set  the
decision aside.

23. I substitute the following decision.

24. The appeal against the Respondent's decision dated 25  October  2014  is
allowed.

Signed                                                              Date
18th July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

