
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40137/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 14th July 2014                    |On 05th August 2014                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                     SI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 1st August 1973 and is a citizen of the Union
    of the Comoro Islands and is female.  She appealed against the  refusal
    of her application for a residence card as confirmation of the right to
    reside in the UK as the family member of  an  EEA  national  exercising
    treaty rights in the United Kingdom.  The respondent's decision  letter
    of 15th July 2013.

 2. The Refusal from the respondent explained that the appellant's partner,
    AM, a French national was at  that  time  working  in  Switzerland  for
    Societe Generale and  providing  support  for  the  appellant  and  his
    children whilst he lived and worked there.  The appellant's EEA sponsor
    had not therefore provided evidence  he  was  employed  in  the  United
    Kingdom and thus exercising treaty rights in accordance with Regulation
    6 of the 2006 Regulations.

 3. The respondent also considered the judgment and  ruling  given  by  the
    Court of Justice in the European Union (ECJ) in the case  of  Chen  ECJ
    C200/02 where it was decided  that  an  EEA  national  child  who  held
    sickness insurance would have a right to reside  in  the  UK  with  the
    primary carer provided there was sufficient resources  to  ensure  that
    the child did not become a burden on public funds.  The ruling did  not
    state that the EEA national child's primary carer would have a right to
    reside as a family member defined in Article 2 of Directive 2004/38/EC.

 4.  The  respondent  considered  the  terms  of  Regulation  15A  of   the
    Immigration (European Economic Area)  Amendment  Regulations  2012  and
    decided the appellant  had  failed  to  show  evidence  that  she  held
    sufficient funds to avoid becoming a burden upon public  funds  or  any
    funds derived from her partner's employment and had failed  to  provide
    fully comprehensive medical insurance cover which is  required  for  an
    application made under the Chen ruling.

 5. The appellant provided that in her  grounds  of  appeal  that  her  two
    children were French nationals and her son M suffered from  autism  and
    she was here to support her child so that  he  could  attend  a  school
    which dealt with his medical condition because there were no facilities
    available in France.

 6. The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Traynor, who heard the
    appeal on 13th February 2014, dismissed the appeal  in  a  promulgation
    dated 10th March 2014 under the EEA Regulations  and  on  human  rights
    grounds.

Application for Permission to Appeal

 7. The appellant made an application for permission to appeal referring to
    the case of  Zambrano  C-34/09  whereupon  she  stated  that  they  had
    healthcare insurance in France and that "I did not know that  I  should
    take out a contract in the United Kingdom and since 18th February  2014
    I can confirm that we have for my two  children  and  me  an  insurance
    cover from AXA PPP Healthcare".  She stated that the children could not
    be separated from the mother and  the  children  did  not  wish  to  be
    removed from their school because daughter "feels good here".

 8. The appellant stated that she was in the UK for the  education  of  her
    children particularly her autistic son because there  were  not  enough
    schools for autistic children in France.  M  had  evolved  considerable
    psychologically,  physically  and  on  language  because  he  was  well
    supported by qualified staff.  They could not return to France.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Astle on 12th May 2014 on the
    basis that it was arguable that the judge erred in his consideration of
    requirement for medical insurance.

The Hearing

10. At the hearing the appellant confirmed that at the time of the  hearing
    before the First Tier Tribunal, and as it was recorded by the judge  at
    paragraph 19 of his determination, she and her children  did  not  have
    any private  medical  insurance  and  had  not  taken  out  any  health
    insurance policy whilst in the United Kingdom.  She  only  held  health
    insurance in France under the French Mutuelle Healthcare Cover and  she
    was unaware whether this would provide healthcare cover in the UK.

11. Mr Whitwell submitted that the appellant could not succeed  under  Chen
    and in particular the partner continued to work in Switzerland.

Conclusions

12. The judge outlined the appellant's case in detail between paragraphs 17
    and 26 of his determination and considered whether she was entitled  to
    a residence card either in accordance with her partner's qualifications
    as a worker under the terms of Regulation 6 or upon a derivative  basis
    in accordance with her children's treaty rights.   The  judge  recorded
    that in his oral testimony Mr AM the EEA national accepted he  was  not
    working in the United Kingdom and that he continued to live  in  France
    and worked in Switzerland.  The judge accurately found that he was  not
    a person who was present in the United Kingdom either as a worker or as
    a self-employed person exercising treaty rights and  that  he  has  not
    registered as a jobseeker.  This is a requirement of Regulation  6  and
    he was found not to be exercising treaty rights.

13. Indeed Regulation 15A  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006  which  commenced  on  16th  July  2012  includes  the
    provision within the Regulations for Chen cases and a child will have a
    right of residence in a Member State where that child is

      a) an EEA national which the children in  this  case  were  as  French
         nationals;

      b) hold sufficient resources to prevent them and their  primary  carer
         becoming a burden on the  social  assistance  system  of  the  host
         Member State which  presupposing  the  father  supplies  them  with
         income is the case, but

      c) hold comprehensive sickness insurance.

14. As indicated by the judge and recorded at paragraph 19 and 24 there was
    no actual evidence before the judge  that  there  was  private  medical
    insurance and indeed the a contradiction between the appellant and  her
    husband's evidence was recoded at paragraphs  19  and  24  whereby  the
    appellant stated that she did  not  have  private  healthcare  and  the
    husband stated that he did.  The matter of health insurance was  raised
    in the Reasons for Refusal letter from  the  respondent  and  thus  the
    judge was entitled to take this matter into account and did so fairly.

15. Ahmad v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 988 recites Sullivan LJ in  Kamau  (Kenya)
    [2010] EWCA Civ 1302  'the  requirement  that  there  be  comprehensive
    sickness insurance cover is  not  a  mere  formality'  ...  'it  is  an
    integral part of the concept of self sufficiency under the Regulations'
    and 'a person who has to rely on the United Kingdom's  National  Health
    Service is no more self-sufficient than a person  whose  resourced  are
    inadequate so that he may become  a  burden  on  the  United  Kingdom's
    social assistance'.

16. There was no indication that the father had ever worked in the  UK  and
    thus exercised treaty rights  and  thus  that  the  children  had  even
    established their education in the United Kingdom whilst the father was
    exercising his rights in the UK.

17. In the circumstances I find that there can be no error of  law  by  the
    judge in relation to the finding on the medical health insurance.

18. The judge cited  MF  (Article  8  new  Rules)  Nigeria  and  Gulshan  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKUT 00640 whereby if
    there are arguably good grounds for granting leave  to  remain  outside
    the Rules is it necessary for Article 8 purposes  to  consider  whether
    there were compelling circumstances not sufficiently  recognised  under
    the Rules.  Even if Gulshan does not apply to EEA cases the judge  also
    considered Razgar v SSHD (2004) UKHL and  assessed  the  case  on  that
    basis with reference to Huang v SSHD (2005) EWCA Civ 105.

19. The judge recorded at paragraph 33 that the respondent's  decision  did
    not amount to one which sought to enforce removal and although referred
    to briefly he  did  consider  the  appellant's  human  rights  and  the
    children's best interests in substance at  paragraph  33  and  34.   He
    confirmed that the children would not be separated  from  their  parent
    and that there was nothing to prevent the appellant from  returning  to
    France  with  her  children  and  establishing  her  son  in  a  school
    equivalent to that which he was presently enrolled.  The judge recorded
    specifically

         "She has  provided  no  evidence  to  show  that  such  educational
         facilities are  not  available  in  France  and  I  would  be  very
         surprised if there none.   Where  the  education  of  the  children
         appears  to  be  the  only  issue  that  would  be  affected  as  a
         consequence of the decision then  I  find  that  where  educational
         facilities are available in France it would be neither unreasonable
         nor disproportionate to  expect  the  appellant  to  return  there.
         There is no reason where her children speak French as  their  first
         language  and  her  son  has  made  significant  progress  in   his
         development  why  they  cannot  be  reintegrated  into  the  French
         education system."

20. I find that the judge has made no finding that there are arguably  good
    grounds to consider this matter outside the Immigration Rules  and  has
    considered the matter of proportionality in respect of  Article  8.   I
    therefore find there is no error of law and the decision shall stand.


Signed   Date 4th August 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
