
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40496/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  22nd August 2014                          |On 27th August 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before


                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MRS HOMERA AHMED
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr J Walsh, Counsel, instructed by Bindmans LLP


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State but I will refer to  the
       parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

    2. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 18th June 1933. She
       is therefore 81 years old. She arrived in the UK on  12th  May  2012
       with a visit visa. On 30th October 2012 she applied  for  indefinite
       leave to remain to stay in the UK as the dependent of  her  son,  Mr
       Afzal Ahmed, who is a British citizen. She said that  there  was  no
       one to care for her in Bangladesh. The application  was  refused  on
       13th September 2013. Her  appeal  against  the  decision  to  refuse
       indefinite leave to remain as an adult dependent  was  dismissed  by
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Callow under  the  Immigration  Rules  but
       allowed in accordance with the UK's obligations under Article 8 ECHR
       in a determination promulgated on the 5th June 2014.

    3. Permission to appeal was granted to the Secretary of State by  Judge
       of the First-tier Tribunal Chambers on 2nd July 2014  on  the  basis
       that it was arguable that the First-tier judge had erred in  law  in
       failing to apply Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct  approach)
       [2013] UKUT 00640 as  he  did  not  adequately  identify  compelling
       factors  which  made  the  outcome  under  the   Immigration   Rules
       unjustifiably harsh.

    4. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law. Mr Duffy had not received Mr Walsh's Rule
       24 response so he was given an opportunity  to  read  this  document
       before the hearing started.

Submissions

    5. Mr Duffy relied upon the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal.  In
       these grounds it is noted that  Judge  Callow  had  found  that  the
       appellant could not meet the requirements  of  Appendix  FM  to  the
       Immigration Rules for an adult dependent relative. The Secretary  of
       State  submits  that  there  are  no  compelling  circumstances  not
       sufficiently recognised by the Immigration Rules  and  that  as  the
       appellant's circumstances are not exceptional  the  refusal  is  not
       unjustifiably  harsh.  The  appellant  had  lived  on  her  own   in
       Bangladesh until May 2012 and the sponsor could care for her in that
       country, and/or she could apply for  entry  clearance  as  an  adult
       dependent. Further the appellant was receiving NHS care in  the  UK.
       The appellant's return to Bangladesh to obtain entry clearance would
       not be a mere formality as she might be refused  a  visa  under  the
       Immigration Rules as the sponsor had not shown he could not maintain
       and pay for her care in Bangladesh. It was not therefore correct, in
       these circumstances, to rely upon Chikwamba v SSHD 2008 UKHL 40.   I
       asked Mr Duffy to point to errors in the determination under Article
       8 ECHR by the First-tier Tribunal. He said that  in  this  case  the
       factors which had led her to succeed had  not  been  different  from
       those looked at under the Immigration Rules. This  was  not  a  case
       where there were a multiplicity of factors not  given  weight  under
       the Rules.

    6. Mr  Walsh  relied  upon  his  Rule  24  reply.  He  noted  that  the
       appellant's daughter, Rehana, with whom she had previously lived  in
       Bangladesh had now gone to live with her daughters in  the  USA.  He
       noted that she suffers from arthritis, glaucoma  and  deafness.  The
       First-tier Tribunal had concluded at paragraph 17 that it  would  be
       "unjustifiably harsh" for the appellant to return to Bangladesh  as:
       "an 80 year old widow enduring the effects  of  the  ageing  process
       without a home and family in Bangladesh,"  It  was  also  considered
       unreasonable to make  her  return  to  Bangladesh  to  obtain  entry
       clearance to re-enter the UK at paragraph 18 of the determination.

    7. Judge Callow had  followed  a  legally  correct  approach  in  first
       establishing that the case could not succeed under  the  Immigration
       Rules; secondly establishing that there were arguable grounds  under
       Article  8  and  thirdly  finding   that   there   were   compelling
       circumstances in this case. The approach in Gulshan and R (Nagre)  v
       SSHD  [2013]  EWHC  70  (Admin)  is  that  there  is  no   test   of
       exceptionality but that particular features of the  case  should  be
       identified to show that that removal would be unjustifiably harsh.

    8. In this determination Judge Callow sets out the respondent's refusal
       in detail at paragraph 5 of his determination.  He  then  identifies
       that "family life" exists at paragraph 8 of his determination.  This
       is important as it would not always be that Article 8 "family  life"
       exists in every adult dependency case. At paragraphs 9, 16 and 17 he
       considers the public interest in maintaining immigration control. At
       paragraphs  10  and  11  Judge  Callow  summarises  Gulshan  and  MF
       (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013]  EWCA  1192.  He  notes  that  there  is  no
       exceptionality test, but there must be an assessment of all  factors
       relevant to proportionality, following the approach set out  in  MF.
       At paragraph 15 Judge Callow identifies the legitimate  aim  and  at
       paragraphs 16 and 17 he deals with proportionality whilst continuing
       to remind himself of the public interest in maintaining  immigration
       control. It was open to Judge Callow to make  the  comments  he  did
       regarding it not being appropriate for the appellant  to  return  to
       obtain entry clearance, at paragraph 18 of his determination,  given
       the facts of the case.

    9. The grounds of appeal contend that the facts  are  not  sufficiently
       compelling but this is a challenge to a finding of fact made by  the
       First-tier Tribunal and not an issue of law. In effect the Secretary
       of State is expressing a disagreement with  Judge  Callow's  factual
       assessment not identifying an error of law.  There  are  no  grounds
       here for saying that the factual  decision  is  perverse  given  the
       factual background that there is family life between  appellant  and
       sponsor and his family; that she is over  80  years  old;  that  she
       suffers from problems relating to the ageing process; and  that  she
       would be without a home and family in Bangladesh.

   10. At the end of the hearing I told the parties that I found  that  the
       First-tier Tribunal had not erred in law, but that I  would  put  my
       full reasons, as set out below, in writing.

Conclusions

   11. As contended by Mr Walsh I find that Judge Callow had  properly  and
       explicitly applied the approach set out in  Nagre  and  Gulshan.  He
       sets the  required  approach  from  these  cases  out  correctly  at
       paragraph 10 and 11 of his determination. He then follows  a  Razgar
       analysis of Article 8 ECHR with respect to the facts  of  this  case
       between  paragraphs  13  and  17,  having  already  identified,   at
       paragraph 8, that there is family life  between  the  appellant  and
       sponsor with reference to the correct  legal  test  as  set  out  in
       Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31.

   12. Judge Callow's approach is at all times legally correct, and  as  Mr
       Walsh has argued he identifies the  legitimate  aim  of  immigration
       control  and  gives  appropriate   weight   and   consideration   to
       maintaining immigration control through  consistent  application  of
       clear and fixed immigration rules. Ultimately  at  paragraph  17  he
       finds that it would however be a breach of Article 8  ECHR  in  this
       case for the appellant not to be allowed to remain in the  UK  given
       her age; the effects  of  the  ageing  process  and  her  return  to
       Bangladesh where  she  would  be  without  a  home  or  family.  The
       particulars relating to these factors  are  set  out  in  detail  at
       paragraph 4 of the determination, and thus I do not find that  there
       are inadequate reasons for his conclusions. In  paragraph  17  Judge
       Callow explicitly finds  that  the  facts  of  her  case  constitute
       "compelling circumstances" and  that  to  return  the  appellant  to
       Bangladesh would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for her.

   13. At paragraph 18 Judge Callow finds it would not be right to  require
       the appellant to return to obtain entry clearance. Whilst the  facts
       of this case are not the same as  in  Chikwamba  Judge  Callow  does
       assess whether it would be reasonable for the appellant to return to
       obtain entry clearance, which it was appropriate for him to do,  and
       finds that it would not  as  she  would  inevitably  be  allowed  to
       return. He was entitled to reach  that  conclusion  given  his  firm
       conclusions set out at paragraph 17 of his determination in relation
       to her entitlement to remain in the UK in accordance with Article  8
       ECHR and given the vulnerabilities he identifies  in  the  appellant
       which are central to his Article 8 ECHR decision.

   14. The grounds of appeal by the Secretary of State and the  submissions
       by Mr Duffy do not contend that the factual reasons found  by  Judge
       Callow to show compelling circumstances and that  removal  would  be
       unjustifiably harsh were perverse, and I do not find them to be  so.
       I agree with Mr Walsh that the Secretary  of  State's  challenge  is
       essentially a disagreement over the weight the  First-tier  Tribunal
       gave to the facts of the case, and that is  not  a  challenge  which
       identifies an error of law.

Decision

   15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making
       of an error on a point of law.

   16.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the  appeal  under
       Article 8 ECHR is upheld.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley
26th August 2014
