
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/40230/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 01 June 2015                               |On 04 June 2015              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM


                                   Between

                          DOMINIKA ROMERO GONSALES
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal  Holt  who,  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  12/01/2015,
         dismissed the appeal of Ms Dominika Romero Gonsales, a national  of
         Georgia, against a decision of the respondent to  refuse  to  issue
         her a residence card pursuant to the Immigration (European Economic
         Area) Regulations 2006 (the 2006 Regulations).



Error of law

      2. The appellant claimed in her application for a residence card to be
         married to Mr  Den  Nem,  a  Lithuanian  national  exercising  free
         movement rights in the UK as an employed person, and that they were
         in a  genuine  relationship.  On  13/09/2014  Immigration  Officers
         conducted a visit to the address given  by  the  appellant  as  her
         residence and that of her husband. A man answered the door and,  in
         response to questions asked by the immigration  officers,  said  he
         did not know the appellant or Mr Nem. Believing the marriage to  be
         one of convenience the application was refused under  regulation  2
         of the 2006 Regulations.

      3. Aggrieved with this decision the appellant appealed to  the  First-
         tier Tribunal, opting for a 'paper' appeal. Her Grounds  of  Appeal
         contended that the person with whom the Immigration Officers  spoke
         was their neighbour, Mr Andrejs Melders. It was claimed he had  not
         understood the Immigration  Officers  and  was  not  aware  of  the
         appellant's Spanish surname. Judge Holt rejected  this  explanation
         finding it 'inconceivable' that the appellant's account could be so
         different to that provided by the Immigration Officers. Judge  Holt
         also took into account  the  fact  that  an  oral  appeal  was  not
         requested, and observed, with respect to the  documentary  evidence
         provided by the appellant relating to co-habitation,  that  it  was
         common for fraudulent documents to be used in this jurisdiction.

      4. In granting permission to appeal Judge of  the  First-tier  Osborne
         noted that no consideration had been  given  by  Judge  Holt  to  a
         letter written by Andrejs Melders which accompanied the  Notice  of
         Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal. In this letter Mr  Melders  gave
         more details explaining that he only knew the appellant by the name
         'Donna' and had been confused about her  husband's  name  as  well.
         This letter was a material document as it was  purportedly  written
         by the person who spoke to the Immigration Officers  and  contained
         an  explanation   that   was   not   inherently   implausible.   In
         circumstances where the respondent  failed  to  provide  any  other
         documents relating to the visit on 13/09/2014 other than  the  bare
         assertions contained in the Reasons  For  Refusal  letter,  it  was
         incumbent on the First-tier Judge  to  engage  with  this  material
         evidence. Mr Walker helpfully accepted that the  failure  of  Judge
         Holt to take account of or make any findings  in  respect  of  this
         letter constituted a material error of law.

Re-making the decision

      5. Having identified a material error on a point of  law  we  decided,
         pursuant to section 12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and  Enforcement
         Act 2007, to set aside the decision of Judge Holt  and  remake  the
         decision ourselves.

      6. The appellant produced further evidence including a new  employment
         contract relating to her husband and, significantly, a letter  from
         Whipps Cross  University  Hospital  NHS  Trust,  dated  15/04/2015,
         indicating that the appellant was 15 weeks pregnant. This  evidence
         was not challenged by Mr Walker. In light of this evidence, and the
         fact that the appellant, her husband and their neighbour Mr Andrejs
         Melders attended the hearing, and  in  the  absence  of  any  other
         record maintained by the  respondent  of  the  visit  conducted  on
         13/09/2014, Mr Walker conceded that there was cogent evidence  that
         the appellant's relationship with her husband was not a marriage of
         convenience.   We  therefore  allow  the  appeal  under  the   2006
         Regulations.

    Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    We set aside the decision and re-make the decision  in  the  appeal  by
    allowing it.



Signed:     Date:
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

