
IAC-YW-LM-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40560/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27th November 2014                        |On 29th December 2014         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                           DESIGNATED JUDGE MURRAY


                                   Between

                                   A.G.A.
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ateku, Iras & Co., London
For the Respondent:    Ms Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of the Ivory  Coast  born  on  3rd  February
    1970.  She appealed against the decision of the Respondent  dated  24th
    September 2013 refusing to grant her an EEA residence card pursuant  to
    Regulations 8 and 17(4) of the EEA Regulations.   Her  application  was
    made on the basis that she is the partner of ZM who is a Polish citizen
    who lives and works in London.  She claimed she is an  extended  family
    member and she and ZM are in a durable relationship.   Her  appeal  was
    heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Widdup on 2nd September 2014
    and dismissed in a determination promulgated on 9th September 2014.

 2. An application for permission to appeal  was  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant and permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Page on 22nd October 2014.  The permission  states  that
    the grounds of application largely amount to a  disagreement  with  the
    judge's findings on the facts but at paragraph 10 of the grounds it has
    been submitted that there is no provision in the Directive 2004/38 that
    unmarried partners have to be in a relationship  for  two  years,  only
    that they have to be in a durable relationship.  (Article 3(b)  of  the
    Directive 2004/38).  The grounds state that the judge erred in the  law
    because at paragraph 43 of the determination he states,  "I  find  that
    the Respondent is entitled to use a two year period as a rule of thumb.
     The evidence taken at  its  highest  shows  that  the  Appellant  only
    resumed cohabitation in June or July 2013."  At  paragraph  30  of  the
    determination the judge found as a fact  that  the  Appellant  and  her
    Sponsor lived together for  some  time  in  2006  until  October  2008.
    Positive credibility findings were made about periods of time when  the
    relationship was subsisting and the grounds argue that there  has  been
    an error of law because of said paragraph 43 and the judge's  reference
    to the two year period. This is why permission was granted.

The Hearing

 3. The Appellant's representative submitted that  he  is  relying  on  the
    terms of the permission to appeal.  He referred to  the  durability  of
    the relationship of the Appellant and the  Sponsor,  stating  that  two
    years is not specified in the Regulations.  He submitted that what  has
    to be considered is whether the couple is in a subsisting relationship.
      He  submitted  that  he  accepts  that  if  they  live  together  the
    relationship is more likely to be genuine but  he  submitted  that  the
    judge got it wrong in this case.

 4. He referred to paragraph 43 of the determination  in  which  the  judge
    states, "I find that the Respondent is  entitled  to  use  a  two  year
    period as 'a rule of thumb'.  The evidence taken at its  highest  shows
    that the Appellant only resumed cohabitation in June or July 2013."  He
    submitted that in the Regulations  there  is  nothing  about  a  couple
    having to stay together for two years before they are considered to  be
    in a durable relationship.  I was referred to paragraphs 25, 28 and  30
    of the determination and the representative submitted  that  the  judge
    accepts that prior to their separation this couple were together  in  a
    durable relationship for a  long  time  but  they  then  separated  and
    resumed their relationship in June/July 2013.  He  submitted  that  the
    judge did not take into account the period they  were  together  before
    they separated and he  submitted  that  that  cannot  be  correct.   He
    submitted  that  the  judge  accepted  that  they  were  in  a  genuine
    relationship until 2008.

 5. The representative submitted that if I do not accept that that  is  the
    case I have  to  consider  the  time  they  have  been  together  since
    cohabitation resumed in June/July 2013.  He submitted  that  they  have
    now been together for around fifteen months and it is clear  that  they
    are in a durable relationship.

 6. The representative asked me to set aside the  First-tier  determination
    and allow the appeal.

 7. I put to the Appellant's  representative  that  there  are  credibility
    issues in this claim.  I asked him to note that  the  letter  from  the
    landlord states that the Appellant and the Sponsor have been living  at
    114 L[ - ] Road together for the last two years.  That is  not  correct
    based on the evidence before the First-tier Judge.  He  submitted  that
    for a subsisting relationship a couple do not require to  live  in  the
    same household and before the Appellant went  back  to  stay  with  the
    Sponsor she stayed with him overnight  at  L[  -  ]  Road  a  lot.   He
    submitted that  the  landlord's  letter  does  not  therefore  raise  a
    credibility issue.  He referred me to paragraph 25 of the determination
    in which the judge accepts that  the  Appellant  and  the  Sponsor  are
    cohabiting.

 8. The Presenting Officer made her submissions, referring to the  case  of
    YB (Ivory Coast) [2008] UKAIT 00062.  This case is referred to  in  the
    First-tier determination and I was referred to paragraph 29 of the case
    of YB:

         "One of the requirements of the unmarried partners Rule is for  the
         couple to have been living  together  in  a  relationship  akin  to
         marriage which has subsisted for two years or more, but there is no
         definition given by the Directive or the Regulations  of  the  term
         'durable relationship'.  So the policy instructions are helpful  in
         indicating  the  general  approach  but  should  not  be  taken  as
         necessarily correct in every particular."

    She submitted that this case is guidance on the  proper  approach  when
    dealing with EEA Regulation 17(4).  In the case of YB at  paragraph  28
    the Immigration Directorate Instructions  are  quoted.   She  submitted
    that although there is  no  definition  in  the  Directive  of  durable
    relationship the policy instructions are helpful.  She  submitted  that
    they can be said to give a yardstick  for  the  definition  of  durable
    relationship and so she submitted for the judge to mention two years is
    not an error.

 9. The Presenting Officer submitted that if I am  not  with  her  in  this
    regard the judge found the  relationship  was  not  durable  for  other
    reasons.  She submitted that the judge accepted that  the  parties  are
    cohabiting but she submitted this does  not  mean  that  he  found  the
    relationship to be  durable.   She  submitted  that  the  rest  of  the
    determination sets out his reasons for finding there to be  no  durable
    relationship.

10. She referred to the letter from the  landlord  which  states  that  the
    couple have been living together for two years  at  the  same  address.
    The judge found this  to  be  a  credibility  issue.   The  judge  also
    referred to the Sponsor being charged with domestic violence, resulting
    in the couple splitting  up.   He  refers  to  the  Appellant  in  this
    incident suffering significant injuries from ZM and he  refers  to  the
    medical report from the Appellant's general practitioner  which  refers
    to the significant effect the assault had on the  Appellant  physically
    and mentally in 2008 and 2009.  The judge notes that this incident  was
    not the only incident and at paragraph 33 the judge  goes  through  the
    history of the relationship.  He notes that there was  no  cohabitation
    for five years after the final assault and that there is  a  difference
    in what the Appellant has given as evidence when it  is  compared  with
    the medical report.

11. The Presenting Officer submitted that the judge has been  very  careful
    in  his  decision  and  he  refers  to  the  Appellant  minimising  the
    difficulties  she  experienced  in  2008  which  were  because  of  the
    Sponsor's drinking and physical violence.  She submitted that the judge
    was entitled to deal with the matter in the way he did.   At  paragraph
    34  the  judge  states  that  the  Appellant's  credibility   and   the
    reliability of her evidence is  damaged  because  of  her  attempts  to
    minimise the difficulties she experienced in 2008.  He also found there
    to be a credibility issue in that the Appellant and ZM did not  produce
    a tenancy agreement.

12. The Presenting Officer submitted that this relationship broke down  for
    more than five years and  what  there  is  now  is  akin  to  a  second
    marriage.  She submitted that it was open to the judge to  find  as  he
    did in his determination, after carefully considering the evidence.

13. The Presenting Officer submitted that based on the  Sponsor's  evidence
    he still drinks and this has to be taken into account.   She  submitted
    that it is not just the length of time they have been together which is
    important.  The judge has considered all of the evidence in the  round,
    not just the last two years.  She submitted that  the  judge  has  done
    everything he can to be fair and has found, when taking the evidence in
    the round, that there is no durable relationship.  She  submitted  that
    he was entitled to find this.  She submitted that there is no error  of
    law in the judge's determination.

14. The Appellant's representative submitted that the Appellant and Sponsor
    were in a relationship for a long time and although that ended  it  has
    now resumed.  He submitted that the two year period  is  irrelevant  as
    the  Appellant's  and  Sponsor's  previous  time  together  cannot   be
    disregarded.  He submitted that the judge got the question  of  durable
    relationship wrong in his determination and on the facts of  this  case
    he was not entitled to come to the finding that he did.   In  spite  of
    previous violence the Appellant has gone back to stay with the  Sponsor
    and when it comes to deciding how long the Appellant and  Sponsor  have
    been together, their previous time together must be considered.

15. He submitted that if I do not accept this the couple have been together
    the second time, for fifteen months and that in itself shows that  this
    is a durable relationship.

16. The representative referred to paragraph 7 of the said case of YB which
    deals with the provisions of the Citizens Directive.  He submitted that
    this is clearly a  durable  relationship  and  the  Appellant  and  the
    Sponsor wish to resume their family life as it was  in  the  past.   He
    submitted that the judge made an error of law in his determination  and
    I was asked to overturn the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

Determination

17. I have to decide whether there is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    judge's decision.

18. First of all I shall deal with the two year period referred to  by  the
    judge. The Appellant's representative states this must be an error,  as
    two years is not mentioned in the Directive.  I have noted that that is
    the case but when the case of YB is considered it is  stated  that  the
    policy instructions are helpful in  indicating  the  general  approach,
    although they should not be  taken  as  necessarily  correct  in  every
    particular.  I therefore find that this is not an error on the part  of
    the judge.

19. The judge has carefully considered all the evidence before him.  He set
    this out  in  the  determination  and  he  has  found  that  there  are
    credibility issues.

20. The judge found that the fact that there is no tenancy  agreement  goes
    against the Appellant's appeal.  He states  that  a  tenancy  agreement
    would have been dated and the absence of evidence of the  date  of  the
    agreement is an  important  omission.   He  refers  to  the  Appellant,
    instead of producing the tenancy agreement, producing a letter from the
    landlord.  That letter is inconsistent with  the  Appellant's  evidence
    about when cohabitation started.  The Appellant's representative stated
    that the Appellant visited the Sponsor a lot before she actually  moved
    in with him. I do not know if that was put to the judge.  There  is  no
    mention of this in the determination.  This clearly  is  a  credibility
    issue.

21. The judge was aware of the Appellant and ZM living  together  for  some
    time, the first time.  He refers to the relationship ending because  of
    a serious assault by ZM on the Appellant, when he was drunk.  He  notes
    that ZM's evidence is that he still drinks alcohol and he refers to the
    doctor's report on the Appellant's injuries when ZM  assaulted  her  in
    2008.  When this happened the Appellant left.  The judge refers to  the
    evidence showing that this was a serious assault, not only damaging the
    Appellant physically but also mentally.  He refers  to  ZM  telephoning
    the Appellant every day to say he is sorry but  he  notes  that  before
    this incident happened  he  had  been  violent  towards  the  Appellant
    before.  He refers to the Appellant minimising these incidents and  the
    difference in the doctor's letter to  the  Appellant's  evidence.   The
    judge finds that she has  minimised  these  incidents  because  of  her
    desire to have a residence card.   All  of  this  is  detailed  in  the
    determination.

22. The Appellant's representative has suggested that the judge should have
    aggregated the periods of cohabitation in 2006 to 2008 with the  period
    since June 2013.  At paragraph 37 the judge considers  this  but  finds
    that he cannot do this.  He considers whether the  Appellant  is  in  a
    durable relationship with ZM and he finds that she is  not.   He  finds
    that they were in a durable relationship from 2006 until  October  2008
    but they were then apart for five years.  He clearly believes that this
    relationship has started again because of the residence card issue.  He
    also refers to ZM not accepting that he had ever had  a  drink  problem
    (paragraph 38).

23. The judge goes on to consider the case of YB, noting that  a  two  year
    period can be used as a rule of  thumb.   He  has  looked  at  all  the
    Appellant's personal circumstances and finds that there is  no  durable
    relationship,  based  on  the  history  of  the  relationship  and  the
    credibility issues.  At paragraph 42 he finds  that  ZM  would  not  be
    deterred from exercising treaty rights if the appeal is  dismissed  and
    he goes on to find that it would not be appropriate for the  Respondent
    to issue the Appellant with a residence card.



Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the judge's determination.

The First-tier determination promulgated on 9th September 2014 must stand.



Direction regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed        Date 29th December 2014

Designated Judge Murray
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
