
[pic]
IAC-YW-LM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40086/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd September 2014                        |On 22nd October 2014          |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              ASWATHY ANILKUMAR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance or representation


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Fox) who, in a determination promulgated  on
    28th January 2014, allowed the appeal of  the  Respondent  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State to refuse to vary leave to remain in
    the United Kingdom.  Whilst this is  an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of
    State, for convenience I will refer to the parties in the determination
    as they appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The history of the appeal is as follows.  The Appellant is a citizen of
    India, born on 31st May 1982.  She is now 31 years  of  age.   On  19th
    October 2010 she entered the United Kingdom with a spouse's visa  valid
    from 23rd September 2010  until  23rd December  2012.   Her  son,  her
    dependant, entered the United Kingdom on the same day with  a  visa  to
    accompany  his  mother.   Before  her  leave  expired,  she   made   an
    application on 19th November 2012 for leave to remain.  The Appellant's
    son also made an  application  as  a  dependant  of  his  mother.   The
    applications were refused on 21st June 2013.

 3. The reasons given for refusing  the  Appellant's  application  were  as
    follows; her extension of stay as the spouse of a  person  present  and
    settled in the United Kingdom was refused under paragraph  284  and  in
    particular (ix)(a) the applicant was required  to  provide  an  English
    language test certificate in speaking and  listening  from  an  English
    language test provider approved by the Secretary of  State  which  must
    meet or exceed level A1 of the CEFR.  The  Appellant,  it  was  stated,
    only submitted evidence to show that she had passed the life in the  UK
    test but that was only acceptable for a settlement application and  not
    for leave to remain, therefore the Secretary of State was not satisfied
    that she had provided an English language test certificate and that she
    was exempt from such a requirement.  Thus her application  was  refused
    under paragraph 286 with reference to paragraph 284(ix)(a)  of  HC 395
    (as amended).

 4.  The refusal letter  also  gave  consideration  to  family  life  under
    Article 8 under Appendix FM and EX.1 of the Rules.  It  was  recognised
    that the Appellant and her spouse, who was a British citizen, had a son
    together but that he had only resided in the UK since 2010 and that  it
    was not unreasonable to expect him to leave the UK as he had spent  the
    majority of his life in India.  In respect of their relationship it was
    noted  that  he  was  previously  an  Indian  national  until  he   was
    naturalised on 25th September 2012 and had spent the  majority  of  his
    life in India before he entered in 2005.   It  made  reference  to  his
    employment and therefore it was  noted  that  whilst  relocation  would
    cause a degree of  hardship  there  were  no  insurmountable  obstacles
    preventing them from continuing their relationship in India.  Thus  the
    application was refused.  In respect of her son he was refused in  line
    with her as she did not meet  the  English  language  requirement.   No
    reference was made in the refusal letter to  any  issues  raised  under
    Article 8.

 5. The Appellant issued Grounds of Appeal against that decision and to  it
    attached a statement in which it was said that there had been a genuine
    mistake when she had submitted  evidence  to  satisfy  the  Immigration
    Rules under paragraph 284 and that she had undertaken an examination in
    English language after the date of the decision and provided a copy  of
    that certificate dated 8th July 2013 from the Elizabeth College  London
    confirming that she had been awarded the ESOL Skills for Life  Speaking
    and  Listening/National  Qualifications  Unit  in   ESOL   by   English
    Management Direct (EMD) Board.  She accepted that she  was  not  in  an
    exempt category but that she had made a genuine  mistake.   There  were
    other  matters  set  out  in  her  grounds  relating  to  her  personal
    circumstances, those of her husband who was a British citizen  and  her
    child who was in education in the United Kingdom since he  had  arrived
    in 2010.

 6. The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox  on  17th  January
    2014  who  decided  the  case  on  the  papers.   He  set  out  in  his
    determination the issues between the parties and it is  plain  at  [12]
    that she could not meet  the  Immigration  Rules  under  paragraph  284
    because at the date of decision she had not demonstrated that  she  had
    met  the  English  language  requirement  by  providing  the  requisite
    qualification  at  [12].   However,  it  is   also   clear   from   the
    determination that the Appellant's account was that it  was  a  genuine
    mistake to provide the Life in the UK test and that since she  received
    the refusal she had provided confirmation that she did meet the English
    language requirement, albeit after the decision.

 7. The judge considered the reasons why the application did not  meet  the
    requirements of Appendix FM and considered  it  on  the  basis  of  the
    material provided by the Appellant.  The judge accepted that there  was
    merit in the Respondent's argument under Appendix FM  but  reached  the
    conclusion that that was not the end of the examination  of  the  facts
    (see [14]).  The judge  therefore  considered  the  case  "outside  the
    Rules" under Article 8 and took into  account  at  [16]  and  [17]  the
    factual circumstances demonstrated by the evidence before him which  he
    found were the "relevant factors" at [16], including the steps that the
    Appellant would have to take to re-establish  a  fresh  application  to
    join her husband and the success of that, the fact that her husband was
    a British national who had been residing in the UK for ten years,  that
    he was in gainful employment, that the Appellant had lost ties  to  her
    home country since her arrival and that her family were her husband and
    her  child.   She  had  established  herself  in  the  United   Kingdom
    culturally, socially and economically, demonstrated by her  proficiency
    as established now in her English language and passing the Life in  the
    UK test, her son had been attending school in the UK and has integrated
    well and excelling in his studies and that removal from studies and the
    environment in which he had previously lived would have  a  detrimental
    effect upon him.  The  judge  also  found  at  [17]  that  if  a  fresh
    application was made she would meet the  relevant  criteria  and  would
    succeed in an application to join her husband but that  the  additional
    consideration such as the short-term breakup  of  the  family  and  the
    disruption to the child's life were matters that were also relevant.

 8.  At [18], it is clear that he weighed those identified factors  against
    the public interest but found that on  the  facts  as  established  and
    balancing all the material factors that return was not proportionate to
    the legitimate aim to be  achieved,  thus  he  allowed  the  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds.  At [22] he also was satisfied that leave should  be
    issued to the Appellant and as a consequence to her son.

 9. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal  that  decision  and
    permission was granted on 7th April 2014.

10. The Appellant did not appear nor was she represented before  the  Upper
    Tribunal at the hearing on 3rd September.  However, a letter  from  her
    representatives had been sent requesting that the appeal be  considered
    on the papers and that the Appellant could not attend the hearing.  The
    file demonstrated that this was a case that  had  been  transferred  to
    Field House, it  previously  having  been  listed  at  Glasgow  as  the
    Appellant lives in Scotland.  The appeal came before the Upper Tribunal
    sitting at Glasgow in July but it was recorded at that time that whilst
    the Appellant, her husband and  son  had  attended  the  hearing  their
    solicitor was unable to act on their behalf as he was a  solicitor  who
    qualified in England and it appears that an  application  was  made  to
    transfer to Field House.  It is not clear to me why such an application
    was made when they live in Glasgow but nonetheless the application  was
    made.

11. I am therefore satisfied from the letter that  had  been  sent  by  her
    solicitors that they were content for the matter to  be  considered  by
    the Tribunal on the basis of what had been set out,  the  determination
    of the judge and the grounds that had been produced on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State.

12. Mr Tarlow appeared on behalf of the Secretary of State and relied  upon
    the grounds as drafted.  He submitted  that  the  judge  did  not  give
    consideration to Article 8 under the Rules as to why  her  husband  and
    child could not return with her to India and re-establish  family  life
    there.  He reiterated that the child concerned had not been in  the  UK
    for more than seven years and that he would look to the  family  rather
    than to any private life that he had established outside of that  unit.
    He turned to ground 3 in which it was asserted that  the  Tribunal  had
    failed to apply the income  threshold  in  its  Article  8  assessment.
    However, that was not the basis of any original  refusal  made  by  the
    Secretary of State; the only refusal related to the failure to  provide
    an English language certificate.  In those  circumstances  he  did  not
    seek to rely on paragraph 3.

13. The skeleton argument that had been attached to the solicitors'  letter
    had been provided to Mr Tarlow.  In that document, it made reference to
    "transitional provisions" that might  lead  to  the  Appellant  falling
    within the small range of individuals as those who had entered lawfully
    prior to the Rule change.   However,  the  skeleton  argument  did  not
    provide  any  transitional  provisions  or  any  properly   articulated
    argument in respect of this matter.  He recognised that Part 8  of  the
    IDIs could possibly apply to this Appellant given that she had  entered
    the UK on 19th October 2010, having entered lawfully as the spouse of a
    person present and settled in the United Kingdom and that  that  was  a
    time shortly before the entry requirement included the need to pass  an
    approved English language test to the appropriate  standard  which  was
    introduced in November 2010.  Thus, whilst the  skeleton  argument  did
    not properly identify any IDI that was relevant to this  Appellant  but
    merely made reference to "transitional route", he was aware of such  an
    IDI relevant to this Appellant.

14. I reserved my determination.

15. The grounds of the Secretary of State submit at  [1  and  2]  that  the
    judge failed to give any or any adequate consideration to the issue  of
    insurmountable obstacles to  family  life  continuing  outside  of  the
    United Kingdom and that this was a key factor  in  the  proportionality
    assessment, albeit not a determinative one.   At  paragraph  2  of  the
    grounds it is submitted that the Tribunal  in  finding  that  the  best
    interests of the child demonstrated that removal was  disproportionate,
    the evidence before the Tribunal was that he had spent less than  seven
    years of continuous residence and the judge had given no  consideration
    to this.  Whilst the grounds at [3] submitted  that  the  Tribunal  had
    failed to apply the income threshold in his Article 8 assessment, it is
    plain from reading the refusal letter that that had not been  an  issue
    raised, this being a case which was refused solely on  the  basis  that
    the  Appellant  had  not  produced  the  requisite   English   language
    certificate and Mr Tarlow recognised in those circumstances that he did
    not seek to rely on paragraph 3.

16. I therefore considered those grounds.  The grounds  do  not  articulate
    any challenge to the decision on the basis that he had not followed the
    approach set out in Gulshan  [2013]  UKUT  640  that  the  question  of
    proportionality must be looked at in the  context  of  the  Immigration
    Rules with no need to go on to a specific assessment under Article 8 if
    it is clear from the facts that there are no particular  compelling  or
    exceptional circumstances requiring that course to be taken.  The issue
    raised relates to his  consideration  of  insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family life which he considered under Article 8.  At  paragraph  14  of
    the determination the judge recited that he proposed  to  consider  the
    Appellant's claim "independent of the Rules and Appendix FM"  but  also
    recorded "I accept that  there  is  merit  in  the  argument  vis-�-vis
    Appendix FM but that is not the end of the examination of  the  facts".
    He then went on to consider all the relevant  factors  demonstrated  by
    the particular factual matrix  in  relation  to  this  Appellant  under
    Article 8 "outside the Rules" and it is plain that within this  context
    he considered  the  issue  of  insurmountable  obstacles.   Whilst  the
    Secretary of State has not articulated in the grounds any criticism  in
    the sense that the judge did not follow the structured approach that  I
    have identified earlier in accordance with Nagre [2013] EWHC 720,  thus
    under the present law the starting point was to look at the  Rules,  to
    see if the  Appellant  met  the  requirements  and  before  considering
    Article 8 "outside the Rules".  However, it can be reasonably  inferred
    from [14] that  the  judge  recognised  that  the  Respondent  did  not
    consider that the Appellant could meet those Rules.  Whilst I  consider
    that it was incumbent  on  the  judge  to  consider  the  appeal  under
    Appendix FM, I have considered the determination in the  light  of  the
    grounds raised by the Secretary of State and whether any error in  that
    respect was material in the light of the findings of fact made  by  the
    judge on the evidence before him and his  decision  on  proportionality
    under Article 8, whether made inside or outside the Rules.

17. There were a number of factual matters relevant to the decision made by
    the judge.  Those findings can be summarised as follows; the  Appellant
    and her son had entered the United Kingdom lawfully as the spouse of  a
    settled person.  He was a British citizen and had lived in  the  United
    Kingdom since 2005.   Her  son  also  entered  the  UK  lawfully  as  a
    dependant of a settled person.  Both the Appellant and her husband were
    in gainful employment and the evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    was that both were employed at  the  Station  Hotel  in  Aberdeen  (see
    [16]).  The parties were in a genuine and subsisting marriage.  She had
    erroneously provided the certificate demonstrating that she had  passed
    the Life in the UK test which did not meet the Rules but  on  7th  July
    2013 had passed the English language requirement and therefore  shortly
    after the decision made on 13th June and at the date of the hearing  in
    January 2014 she had passed the English language requirement which  had
    been the only matter raised in the decision letter which gave  rise  to
    her refusal under paragraph 284.  The Appellant's Sponsor was a British
    national and had resided in the  UK  for  ten  years  although  he  had
    previously lived in India prior to that time.

18. Whilst the grounds make  reference  to  the  judge  being  required  to
    consider  the  issue  of  insurmountable  obstacles  to   family   life
    continuing outside of the UK, the judge did consider that issue, albeit
    outside  of  the  Rules,  finding  that  in   the   context   of    the
    proportionality of the decision that it would  be  disproportionate  to
    break up the family and that the Appellant and her son  would  have  to
    live apart from their father and Sponsor respectively  and  that  there
    would be disruption to their child, who had been attending school,  had
    integrated well and had excelled in his studies.  It was further  found
    that if a further application was made  she  would  meet  the  relevant
    criteria as she had already obtained the English  language  certificate
    and there was no issue raised concerning the income threshold criteria.
     Therefore the judge identified the relevant factors in favour  of  the
    balance  struck  on  the  Appellant's  side,  including  the  issue  of
    insurmountable obstacles.  In the light of those factual  findings,  it
    is not submitted on behalf of the Secretary of State that it would  not
    be unjustifiably harsh for the family to return.  Indeed, there are  no
    countervailing circumstances identified by the Secretary of State.   It
    is not being suggested that the Appellant  was  not  in  a  genuine  or
    subsisting relationship with her husband nor that she had been  in  the
    UK unlawfully.  Nor is it stated that the English language  certificate
    which she provided shortly after the decision did not meet the  correct
    requirements.

19.  The judge considered the factual matters outlined  above  and  weighed
    them against what he described as those "against the rights  and  needs
    of the UK to control the entry of non-nationals  into  its  territory".
    It is plain from reading the determination  at  [18]  that  he  weighed
    those identifiable factors, including whether there were insurmountable
    obstacles, against the public interest but reached the conclusion  that
    to remove the Appellant and  her  son  was  not  proportionate  to  the
    legitimate aim to be achieved.

20.   I have therefore concluded  that  any  error,  although  not  clearly
    articulated in the grounds, is not a material one and in the  light  of
    the specific factual matrix of this Appellant  and  her  son  that  the
    findings made by the judge on  Article  8  were  within  the  range  of
    permissible decisions.  He considered on the evidence  before  him  and
    concluded that while she could not meet the requirements of the  Rules,
    the decision to  refuse  leave  to  remain  was  disproportionate  when
    considering it in the  context  of  the  public  interest  but  on  the
    particular factual matrix presented.

21. I have outlined earlier the  alternative  submission  set  out  in  the
    Appellant's  skeleton  argument   and   the   failure   to   adequately
    particularise that  issue.   Nonetheless  it  may  be  said  that  this
    Appellant falls within what may  be  a  small  category  of  Appellants
    having entered the UK lawfully as the spouse of a  person  present  and
    settled in the UK in October 2010 shortly before the entry  requirement
    included the need to pass an approved  English  language  test  to  the
    appropriate standard which was introduced in November 2010.  Mr  Tarlow
    was aware of the Home Office IDI of April 2013 Chapter  8  which  could
    apply to this Appellant in terms of the second category in the  heading
    namely, "Applications made by persons who were granted entry  clearance
    or limited leave to remain under Part 8 of the Rules  before  9th  July
    2012 and that leave is still extant where there  is  a  requirement  at
    Part 8."  Thus it is arguable on the factual matrix that the  Appellant
    fell within Part 3 of Chapter 8 of the IDI as her application was leave
    to remain as a spouse of a person present and  settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom and had been granted entry clearance before 9th July 2012.  The
    IDI goes on to consider at 3.1 "Key points" and a number of key  points
    dealt with a number of circumstances including granting leave to remain
    at 3.7, "If there is no reason to doubt that the  marriage  is  genuine
    then, provided the key points are satisfied, leave to remain should  be
    granted for two years on Code 1."

22. Thus there was in existence an IDI that was relevant to this  Appellant
    when considering paragraph 284 and when exercising  discretion  as  her
    circumstances fell within them and arguably she  would  have  benefited
    from those published provisions.  However, it is not necessary  for  me
    to decide this issue further as I have reached the conclusion that  any
    error of law made by the judge was not material and would  not  justify
    the setting  aside  of  the  decision  for  the  reasons  set  out.  He
    considered  the  best  interests  of  the  child  and  the   issue   of
    insurmountable obstacles but also in  the  context  of  what  were  the
    factual circumstances of this Appellant;  the  Appellant  and  her  son
    having lawfully entered the United Kingdom and having been  in  the  UK
    lawfully, the fact that both parties were in gainful employment,  which
    would have entailed the choice of her husband giving up his  employment
    or being separated from his wife, she could meet the Immigration  Rules
    if she  made  a  fresh  application  having  demonstrated  her  English
    language proficiency to the required standard and that  the  child  was
    settled in the United  Kingdom  at  school  and  that  there  would  be
    disruption to that family life.  In those circumstances, the balance on
    proportionality was found to weigh in favour of  the  Appellant  and  I
    have found that that was within the range of permissible decisions  and
    thus I do not set aside the decision.

Notice of Decision

The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed; the decision stands.


No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 21st October 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

