
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/40777/2014
     IA/40779/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 March 2016                        |On 18 March 2016                     |
|EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [M W]
                                    [R M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                 Respondents
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Karim, counsel, instructed by Law Lane
solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Secretary of State was granted permission to appeal  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Holmes on 12 January 2016.  I shall  refer  to  the  two
    respondents as appellants, as  they  were  called  in  the  First  tier
    Tribunal. The grounds  relied  upon  by  the  Secretary  of  State  are
    essentially  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in  his   decision
    following a hearing on 24 July 2015 failed to  take  into  account  the
    features of the case, in particular that the minor appellant is  not  a
    British citizen. The Secretary of State relies on Zoumbas  [2013]  UKSC
    74 and EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA  Civ  874  and  that  there  is  no
    universal right to education to non-British citizens. The Secretary  of
    State submits that the judge afforded undue weight to the education  of
    the second appellant who is now 16 and was nearly  16,  coming  towards
    the end of his secondary education at the date of the hearing.

2.   The second ground relied upon by the Secretary of State is  that  there
    has been an  inaccurate  focus  on  the  private  life  of  the  second
    appellant. He would be returning to Jamaica with his mother and he does
    not meet Appendix  FM;  nor  does  he  meet  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules and the judge has failed to attach little  weight  to
    any  private  life  established  as  required  by   s117B   Nationality
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

3.   The Secretary of State makes reference to what he has characterised  as
    a speculative basis that the first appellant would be able  to  support
    herself and her son.  They were not financially independent at the date
    of the hearing, the judge failed to have regard to the education  costs
    and the financial burden on the State. The  SSHD  refers  to  what  she
    submits is trite law that Section 117A-D should be taken  into  account
    in every case where human rights are considered.

4.   The appellant's submissions in response are that the weight  placed  by
    the judge on the issues was in accordance with guidance in Zoumbas  and
    EV (Philippines).  Mr Karim refers to the self-directions given by  the
    judge to EV (Philippines) to Article 8, to SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA  387,
    and to Sections 117A-D in coming to his conclusions. He submitted  that
    the appeal was not allowed solely on the basis of the child's education
    but included the relationships that the child has formed, the stability
    that has been offered to the child and the progress that has been  made
    by the child whilst in the UK. In response to a question from me to  be
    referred to the evidence that as before the First tier Tribunal on that
    issue he referred to the child's statement that he likes his school and
    has friends here and to the mother's evidence that he has  two  friends
    here.

5.   Mr Karim also referred to the learning  disabilities  suffered  by  the
    second appellant, that the first Tribunal refers to the various reports
    that were submitted including the fact that the child is of  particular
    vulnerability.  The judge sets out in his determination  paragraphs  35
    and 36 of EV (Philippines) and in particular in  paragraph  35  to  the
    number of factors. This is of  course  a  non-exhaustive  list  of  the
    factors that should be taken into account and includes age,  length  of
    time they have been here, how long they have  been  in  education,  the
    stage the  education  has  reached,  to  what  extent  they  have  been
    distanced from the country to which it is proposed  that  they  return,
    how renewable their connection with it may be, to what extent they will
    have linguistic, medical or other difficulties in adapting to  life  in
    that country, the extent to which the course  proposed  will  interfere
    with their rights if they have any as British citizens.

6.   Paragraph 36 refers to the longer the child has been in the country  in
    question and the more deleterious the consequences of return, then  the
    greater the weight that falls into one side of the scales.   If  it  is
    overwhelmingly in the child's best interests that he should not return,
    the need to maintain immigration control may well not tip the  balance.
    By contrast if it is in the child's best interests to remain  but  only
    on balance then the result maybe the opposite.

7.   Mr Karim quite correctly said that the  First  tier  Tribunal  decision
    should only be overturned if the conclusions reached by the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge could be characterised as perverse.

8.   The second appellant has learning difficulties.  He  has  two  friends,
    Joshua and Justin, and according to the evidence the system in  the  UK
    is meeting his educational needs.  He can  read,  he  has  developed  a
    routine, has stability and the teachers in the school  in  the  UK  are
    excellent. It was submitted he had no potential in Jamaica.

9.   The judge in his conclusions refers to not having  been  provided  with
    evidence as to the special educational needs provision in Jamaica.  The
    evidence that was before him was the appellants have  referred  to  him
    being fact that he was bullied because of  his  condition  in  Jamaica.
    There was some information about a School of Hope in Jamaica but  there
    was no indication as to whether the second appellant would be  admitted
    there, not least because of his age and  whether  the  first  appellant
    could afford for him to go there.

10.  In paragraph 28 the judge states:

         "Thus there are real issues about whether the  appellant  would  be
         able to afford appropriate education for the second appellant, even
         if it is available, which is also unclear.   The  second  appellant
         would certainly miss out on the stability  which  he  has  achieved
         here  particularly  through  his  educational  provision  with  his
         mother.  I find on the balance of  probabilities  that  the  second
         appellant's prospect of living an independent life  in  the  future
         will be considerably diminished if he is returned to Jamaica."

11.  A problem with that finding by the judge is that  in  EV  (Philippines)
    paragraph 60 the Court of Appeal say:

         "That is a long way from the facts of our case.  In our  case  none
         of the family is a British citizen. None has the right to remain in
         this  country.  If  the  mother  is  removed,  the  father  has  no
         independent right to remain. If the parents are removed, then it is
         entirely reasonable to expect the children to go with them. As  the
         immigration judge found it is obviously in their best interests  to
         remain with their parents. Although it is, of course a question  of
         fact for the tribunal, I cannot see that the desirability of  being
         educated at public expense in the UK can outweigh  the  benefit  to
         the children of remaining with their parents.  Just  as  we  cannot
         provide medical treatment for the world, so we cannot  educate  the
         world."


12.  The judge in this appeal commenced his conclusions on  the  basis  that
    it was unlikely that the second appellant would be able to  attend  the
    sort of school that he needed even if it  was  available.  Although  Mr
    Karim relies on the fact that the  child  has  expressed  a  desire  to
    remain in the educational system in the UK and has friends in  the  UK,
    it is plain given the paucity of evidence of other factors that make up
    the second appellant's private life, the basis of the decision by  this
    judge is the second appellant's learning difficulties.

13.  Although the judge has identified the matters that he should take  into
    account he has not done what paragraph  35  of  EV  (Philippines)  says
    which is to  go  through  all  those  various  factors.   There  is  no
    indication about the stage of education that this  child  has  reached.
    There is no assessment of the extent to  which  the  child  has  become
    distanced from the country to which it was  proposed  that  he  return.
    There is no assessment of how renewable the connection  with  that  may
    be, given that he has been living with his  mother  for  the  last  six
    years.  And there is no indication other than the  very  brief  finding
    that there was little evidence as to whether or not they would be  able
    to afford appropriate education for him.

14.  Therefore although the judge referred  himself  to  these  issues  upon
    which he had to take a decision, he has actually not applied that  fact
    finding to his own decision making.

15.  It is correct, as Mr Karim says, that this appeal by the  Secretary  of
    State would only apply if it could be said that  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Judge was perverse.  The judge looked at the  provisions  of
    Section 117, confirmed that they speak English and made a finding which
    was open to him that the first  appellant  would  be  able  to  support
    herself and her son if she was allowed to work, given the history  that
    is reported. He then says that the potentially negative factors do  not
    apply.

16.  He then directs himself to say that he is required  by  s117B  to  give
    little weight to private life that is established at  a  time  when  an
    applicant's private life is precarious and although he says  that  this
    applies in fact he has not given  any  weight  at  all  to  that  self-
    direction.  It may be that the stricture as regards the  weight  to  be
    attached to private life acquired by a minor should not have  the  same
    resonance as for an adult given that the development of private life of
    a minor may be out of his control. Similarly where the applicant  is  a
    vulnerable adult. But in this case the judge simply said he had to take
    account of this but then manifestly failed to do so.

17.  This decision is based upon a  16  year  old  young  man  with  special
    needs. It is simply not overwhelmingly in the  child's  best  interests
    that he should not return.  There has been  no  adequate  evidence  put
    forward as to the effective or suitable educational facilities for  him
    in Jamaica. To conclude that  the  fact  that  he  has  made  excellent
    progress here renders removal disproportionate  is  perverse.   It  may
    well be  that  there  are  no  effective  and/or  suitable  educational
    facilities for him in Jamaica but the judge has failed to identify  why
    it is on the basis of the evidence that was before him that this  minor
    could not return to Jamaica with  his mother as part  of  that  family.
    The simple basis upon which the judge reached his decision was no  more
    than that the second appellant's educational needs were  being  met  in
    the UK and he would continue to thrive if he  remained  here.  That  is
    simply  inadequate   and   perverse.   There   has   been   no   proper
    proportionality assessment undertaken.

18.  I am therefore satisfied that in this particular case the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge to  allow  the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds was perverse.


Notice of Decision

19.  As a result of that I set aside the  decision  for  it  to  be  remade.
    Given the lack of findings by the judge on the matters  that  would  be
    required and in particular the facilities that would  be  available  to
    him in Jamaica and the impact that that would have upon  him  on  being
    sent back to Jamaica it is appropriate for this case to be sent back to
    the First-tier for a fresh decision to be taken.

20.  No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]


Signed                                  Date 9th March 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker


