

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/40254/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 25 May 2016                           |On 28 October 2016                |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN

                                   Between

                                PAIK LEE HOR
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Saifolahi instructed by McKenzie Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Kotas Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1    This is an appeal  brought  by  the  Secretary  of  State  against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Gibbs) dated 25 September 2015, allowing the appeal brought by Ms  Paik
    Lee Hor against the Secretary of State's decision of 24 September  2014
    to refuse her leave to remain, and to remove her under  section  10  of
    the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999. As will become apparent  below,  I
    have found that the Secretary of State succeeds  in  establishing  that
    there were material errors of law in the judge's decision, such that it
    becomes necessary for this Tribunal to  re-decide  the  case,   Ms  Hor
    therefore reverting to the status of Appellant. I shall therefore refer
    to the parties as they were before the First tier.

2    The Appellant is a national of Malaysia, born on 24 October  1956,  and
    was therefore 58 years old at the time of her appeal before the  judge.
    The Appellant had appealed against the  Respondent's  decision  on  the
    grounds that her removal  from  the  United  Kingdom  was  contrary  to
    Immigration Rule 276ADE (1) (iii) and/or (vi), on the  grounds  of  her
    long residence in  the  United  Kingdom,  and/or,  would  amount  to  a
    disproportionate interference with  her  private  and  family  life  as
    protected by Article 8 ECHR.

3    The Appellant's immigration history is that she arrived in  the  United
    Kingdom on 1 November 1995 as a visitor. She would therefore  have  had
    leave to enter until  approximately  May  1996.  It  was  her  admitted
    evidence that she overstayed that leave to enter. Her witness statement
    dated 3 October 2014 refers to her having assisted her  younger  sister
    to look after her children for  a  number  of  years.  The  Appellant's
    evidence was that she departed the United Kingdom on 31 March 2003, and
    re-entered on 7 May 2003 as part  of  a  tour  group  arriving  on  the
    Eurostar train from Brussels. Her passport was not stamped on  arrival.
    The Respondent disputed in her decision of 24 September 2014  that  the
    Appellant had entered lawfully on that occasion.

4    The Appellant made an application, which she believed  to  be  and  in-
    time application to vary her leave to remain, on 4  November  2003,  to
    remain in the UK as a student. Her evidence in  her  witness  statement
    was that she engaged in studies between  2003  and  2006.  No  decision
    appears to have been made on that application until  20  October  2010.
    She unsuccessfully sought reconsideration of  that  decision.  In  July
    2013 the Respondent made written enquiries to the Appellant as  to  her
    method of entry. She replied that month. On 22 July 2014 the  Appellant
    was served with a notice advising her that she had no leave  to  remain
    in the UK and provided her  with  IS.75  and  IS.76  one  stop  letters
    requesting that she provide any  additional  evidence  as  to  why  she
    should be permitted to remain in the UK.

5    The Appellant made further representations through her solicitors on  4
    August 2014, requesting limited leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom
    on the basis of her long residence. It was argued (see Annex H3 of  the
    Respondent's bundle) that the Appellant had provided detailed  evidence
    of the means by which she had entered the United Kingdom on 7 May 2003,
    and the representations pointed to the relevant legal provision,  found
    in the Immigration  Act  1971,  Schedule  2,  Paragraph  6  (4),  which
    permitted leave to enter  to  be  granted  collectively  to  groups  of
    travellers, to a responsible third-party in charge of the group.

6    Ultimately, a decision was taken by  the  Respondent  on  24  September
    2014 to remove the Appellant, attracting a right of appeal to the First-
    tier Tribunal.

7    In the Appellant's appeal, heard on 8 September  2015,  the  Appellant,
    and her brother and sister gave oral evidence  to  the  judge.  Written
    evidence was also provided by a Mr [N] (78 years old),  who  the  judge
    ultimately held had a 'very close friendship' with the  Appellant.  The
    Appellant is joint owner of a property with Mr [N], albeit that this is
    not used as residential accommodation for either of them; it is used as
    staff accommodation for a restaurant business owned by the  Appellant's
    brother, and Mr [N].

8    The judge made the following findings:

    (i)  The Appellant was present in the UK unlawfully from the end of her
         initial period of leave to enter as a visitor, i.e. from  1996,  to
         2003 [14].


    (ii) The Appellant entered the UK on 7 May 2003  using  the  method  of
         entry that she detailed [13]; she was lawfully present from  7  May
         2003 [14]. (This necessarily amounts to a finding that she  entered
         with leave to enter as a visitor on 7 May 2003.)


    (iii)    The Appellant applied in time for further leave to remain on 4
         November 2003 [2], [13], [14]. The Appellant was  lawfully  present
         from 7 May 2003 to the date her application for leave to remain  as
         a student, which was refused on  12  November  2010  [14].  (It  is
         unclear to me why the judge found that the Appellant  had  remained
         present until 12 November 2010, given that her application to  vary
         leave was refused on 9 September 2010,  but  I  do  not  find  this
         material).


    (iv) At the date of the judge's decision, the Appellant  had  therefore
         been present in the UK for 19 years and 10 months, with an  absence
         of only 37 days [14].


    (v)   The  Appellant  sought  to  exaggerate  her  lack   of   familial
         connections in Malaysia; she has five siblings  in  Malaysia  [16].
         The Appellant's brother in the United  Kingdom  would  be  able  to
         continue to support the Appellant financially if  she  returned  to
         Malaysia [17].


    (vi) The Appellant is a joint owner with Mr [N] of a  property  in  the
         United Kingdom which could be sold  and  her  half  share  used  to
         establish herself on return to Malaysia [17].


    (vii)    The Appellant had not established that  there  would  be  very
         significant obstacles to  her  integration  into  Malaysia  on  her
         return there [18].


    (viii)   With regard to the consideration  of  the  Appellant's  appeal
         under Article 8 ECHR, the judge noted the  Presenting  Officer  did
         not object to the judge proceeding,  after  having  considered  the
         Appellant's entitlement to leave to remain  under  the  immigration
         rules, to consider her case under Article 8 ECHR [19].


    (ix) The Appellant was 'extremely close to meeting' the requirements of
         paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii).


    (x)  The relationship between the Appellant and Mr [N] was one of 'very
         close friendship between family friends who  have  sought  to  help
         each other during difficult times' [25], and see also [26].  Family
         life did not exist between them [28].


    (xi) Family life did not exist between  the  Appellant  and  her  adult
         siblings [28].


    (xii)    The Appellant has established a significant  private  life  in
         the UK given the substantial period of time that she has  lived  in
         the UK [29].


    (xiii)   The first four steps  in  Razgar  could  be  answered  in  the
         affirmative [29].


    (xiv)    The Appellant does not  present  a  financial  burden  on  the
         taxpayer [30].


    (xv) The Appellant speaks English and is integrated into society [30].


    (xvi)    Some of the Appellant's  private  life  had  been  established
         whilst she was in the United Kingdom unlawfully,  and  some  whilst
         here precariously [30].


9    The judge concluded his deliberations as follows at paragraph 30-31:

         "30. ... Whilst s.117B(4) and  (5)  requires  that  I  give  little
         weight to private life established whilst a  person  is  here  both
         unlawfully and precariously I find there  was  a  significant  Home
         Office delay in processing the Appellant's case (7 years)  which  I
         find is a material factor in assessing proportionality (EB (Kosovo)
         [2008] UK HL 41).


         31.   In  the  balancing  exercise  before  me  I  am  aware   that
         significant weight must be given to the public interest in  removal
         where a person does not meet the requirements  of  the  immigration
         rules. However, the facts of this appeal are  that  on  7  November
         2015  the  appellant  would  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
         276ADE(iii) and I find that this reduces the public interest in her
         removal,  particularly  when  taking  into  account  her  financial
         independence and integration in the UK. I am  also  satisfied  that
         she has established a significant private life in the  UK,  and  in
         reaching this conclusion I do place weight on her relationship with
         Mr [N]. I find that these factors, taken  with  the  7  years  Home
         Office delay in this case,  tip  the  balance  in  the  appellant's
         favour. I am not persuaded that on the facts  of  this  appeal  the
         public  interest  in  the   appellant's   removal   outweighs   the
         interference in her article 8 ECHR  rights  and  I  find  that  the
         decision is disproportionate."


10   The Respondent sought permission to appeal  against  that  decision  on
    grounds, in summary, that the judge erred in law in:

    (i)  proceeding to consider the Appellant's case under Article  8  ECHR
         at all (para 2);


    (ii) failing to direct himself that compelling circumstances needed  to
         be established by the Appellant (SS(Congo) v SSHD [2015]  EWCA  Civ
         387) (para 2);


    (iii)    misdirecting himself in law in  appearing  to  find  that  the
         Appellant was 'extremely close to' satisfying the  requirements  of
         276ADE(1)(iii), on the grounds that para 276A,  defining  the  term
         'continuous residence',  required under 276A(a)  the  Appellant  to
         have had lawful leave to  enter  or  remain  at  the  time  of  her
         departure of 31.3.03 as well as  at  the  time  of  her  return  of
         7.5.03; she did not have  any  valid  leave  at  the  time  of  her
         departure and she "re-entered again (presumably without any leave)"
         (para 5); therefore she  had  not  been  continuously  present,  as
         defined under the rules,  for 19 years  and  10  months;  this  was
         material to the weight given to the public interest at [30];


    (iv)  treating  at  [30]  the  Respondent's  delay  in  processing  the
         Appellant's  application  for  leave  to  remain  of   4.11.03   as
         determinative of the proportionality assessment (para 6);


    (v)  failing to give the Appellant's private life little weight, as per
         s.117B(4) and (5) NIAA 2002;


    (vi) failing to direct himself in law that the Appellant's private life
         could be reconstituted and replicated in  her  country  of  origin,
         with reference to MM (tier 1 PSW; Art 8; 'private  life')  Zimbabwe
         [2009] UKAIT 00037).


11   Permission to appeal on those grounds  was  granted  by  Judge  of  the
    First Tier Tribunal Zucker on 7.4.16, in the following terms:

         "3.  It seems clear that the Judge actually was of  the  view  that
         there  was  more  to  the  relationship  between  the  Sponsor  and
         Appellant than either felt comfortable to admit. However the  Judge
         was required to make  findings  based  upon  the  evidence.  Whilst
         arguably the closer an appellant comes to meeting the  requirements
         of a rule the less that may additionally (need to) be  demonstrated
         to  demonstrate  any  interference  by  the  Appellant   would   be
         disproportionate: Patel [2013] UKSC 782, it is  arguable  that  the
         judge's  calculation  of  continuous  residence  was  fundamentally
         flawed. It is arguable that this affects the entire approach  taken
         by the judge to the appeal. Permission is granted on all grounds."


12   In submissions before me, Mr  Kotas  adopted  the  grounds  of  appeal.
    During his oral submissions he sought to challenge the judge's  finding
    that the Appellant had entered lawfully on 7.5.03. I indicated  that  I
    was of the view that the use  of  the  expression  'presumably  without
    leave' at paragraph 5 of the Respondent's grounds  of  appeal  did  not
    amount to a discreet challenge against the judge's clear  finding  that
    the Appellant entered lawfully on that date.  There  is  also  relevant
    legal authority, referred to  in  the  Appellant's  representations  of
    4.8.14, which amply supports the judge's conclusion on that issue.

13   For the Appellant, Ms Saifolahi sought to defend the judge's  decision.
    In discussion with her, I queried whether the judge  had  appropriately
    directed himself in law  by  identifying  that  there  were  compelling
    circumstances justifying the finding that the decision  to  remove  her
    was disproportionate.  Ms  Saifolahi  argued  that  the  decision  read
    holistically was sustainable and that the absence of such  a  direction
    was not material. Further, she argued that even if the judge  erred  in
    finding that the Appellant was  'extremely  close'  to  satisfying  the
    requirements of para 276ADE(1)(iii), this  was  not  a  material  error
    because  there  were  other  factors  supporting  the  judge's  overall
    conclusion.

    Discussion - error of law

14   At the hearing on 25.5.16  I  indicated  my  finding  that  there  were
    material errors of law in the judge's decision such that I intended  to
    set it aside. I now provide my  reasons,  addressing  the  Respondent's
    grounds of appeal as I have numbered them in paragraph 10 above.

    (i)  I find that there was no error in the judge proceeding to consider
         Article 8 outside the rules.  The  Presenting  Officer  before  the
         judge agreed that this should be done (see para 19). Further,  even
         if (see below) there was an error by the judge in his  approach  to
         assessing  'continuous  residence'  for   the   purpose   of   para
         276ADE(1)(iii), such that the Appellant was not  'extremely  close'
         to meeting that rule, and even if the Appellant could not meet  the
         requirement  of  276ADE(1)(vi)  (very  significant   obstacles   to
         integration), the Appellant had been in the United Kingdom  for  19
         years and 10 months, save for 37 days absence, and it  was  obvious
         that there were good grounds for considering the private life  that
         she had accrued here during that period under Article 8 ECHR,  even
         if it did not result in entitlement to leave to  remain  under  the
         rules.


    (ii) I find that the judge did err in law in failing  to  appropriately
         direct himself in  law  that  the  Appellant  needed  to  establish
         compelling circumstances to succeed in her appeal. The reference at
         [31] to the Appellant 'tipping the balance' is  not  sufficient  to
         assure a reader of the decision that the judge has directed himself
         appropriately in law.


    (iii)    I accept that the judge may have misdirected himself as to the
         meaning  of   'continuous   residence'   under   paras   276A   and
         276ADE(1)(iii) of the rules. The Appellant  would  have  needed  to
         have had leave to enter or remain at the point she left the  UK  on
         31.3.03 in order to be treated to have had continuous residence for
         19 years and 10 months. She was not extremely close  to  satisfying
         276ADE(1)(iii), nor would she have satisfied that rule  on  7.11.15
         (see  para  31).   The   earliest   the   Respondent   would   meet
         276ADE(1)(iii) would, I find, be 7.5.2023, 20 years after her  last
         entry. I find that this  matter  materially  affected  the  judge's
         assessment of the proportionality of the decision to remove her.


    (iv) I do not find that the judge treated  the  Respondent's  delay  as
         determinative of the appeal; this was one of a  number  of  factors
         which the judge took into account  at  [31],  and  I  find  he  was
         entitled to take it into account.


    (v) &


    (vi) As it is necessary for me to remake the decision in this appeal, I
         shall discuss the issues raised in these two grounds below, in  the
         remaking of the decision.


15   Upon indicating in the hearing  that  I  intended  to  set  the  matter
    aside, I invited submissions from the parties  as  to  how  the  matter
    should be re-decided. Ms Saifolahi asked that the matter be remitted to
    the First tier Tribunal so that Mr [N] could give evidence  by  way  of
    videolink. I indicated that I  could  find  nothing  to  undermine  the
    judge's findings of fact, which were not vitiated by error of  law  and
    would be retained. I could see no reason for any further oral evidence.
    Mr Kotas proposed that I hear submissions as to  the  remaking  of  the
    decision. I agreed that that was the appropriate course of action.

16   I heard submissions from the parties as to re-making the  decision.  Mr
    Kotas argued that there were no compelling circumstances in the appeal.
    There was no family life. The Appellant had been present in the  United
    Kingdom either unlawfully or on a precarious basis for the whole of the
    time that she had been present.  He accepted that  the  Respondent  had
    delayed an application for leave to remain made by  the  Appellant  for
    seven years, but queried whether this had prejudiced her, and  why  she
    had waited for seven years for an application for leave to remain as  a
    student to be decided. Mr Kotas pointed to the findings  of  the  judge
    that the Appellant had  sought  to  exaggerate  her  lack  of  ties  to
    Malaysia. She could return to Malaysia and visit the United Kingdom  if
    she wished. MM suggests that the Appellant could  replicate  a  private
    life for herself on return to Malaysia, and invited me to  dismiss  the
    appeal.

17   On behalf of the Appellant Ms Saifolahi  submitted  that  although  the
    Appellant's presence in United Kingdom did  not  amount  to  continuous
    residence for the purposes of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii),  she  had  been
    present in United Kingdom for now 20 years, save for the 37  days  when
    she returned to Malaysia (to see her elderly parents -  now  deceased).
    No explanation had been given by the Respondent as to  the  reason  for
    the delay from 2003 to 2010 in making a decision upon  the  Appellant's
    application for further leave to remain. The Appellant first met Mr [N]
    in 1980, but their very close friendship grew from 1995  onwards.  That
    relationship was further developed during the period 2003  to  2010  in
    which the Respondent delayed the Appellant's application.

18   As regards the decision in MM, that had been given in the context of  a
    person  having  entered  initially  as  a  student,  and  then  seeking
    (unsuccessfully) leave to remain on a post study work basis. It was  in
    that context in which the observations of the Upper Tribunal  had  been
    made. In relation to the application of section 117B it was to be noted
    that  the  Appellant  was  fluent  in  English,  and  was   financially
    independent. Further, even if section 117B (4)  and  (5)  required  the
    private life which the Appellant had developed in United Kingdom to  be
    given little weight, this did not require that no  weight  be  attached
    it. She asked me to allow the appeal

    Remaking

19   I proceed to determine the appeal on the basis of the findings of  fact
    made by the judge, which have not been vitiated by any error of law.  I
    note the Appellant does not meet the requirements  of  the  immigration
    rules, and this is a significant  factor  when  assessing  whether  the
    public interest  requires  the  Appellant's  removal  from  the  United
    Kingdom.  (s.117B (1), NIAA 2002).

20   I proceed to determine whether such removal will  be  disproportionate.
    The Appellant has now been present in the United Kingdom for  a  period
    of  over  20  years,  save  for  an  absence  of  37  days   in   2003.
    Notwithstanding that the rules on private life and long  residence  are
    not met in this case,  there  are  good  grounds  for  considering  the
    Appellant's private life in the United Kingdom outside  of  the  rules,
    given its significant duration.

21   I adopt the judge's  finding  that  the  Appellant  has  a  significant
    private  life  in  United  Kingdom,  which  includes  her  "very  close
    relationship" with Mr [N]. She has siblings in the UK and is the  joint
    owner of some property, which although  not  her  home,  represents  an
    element of her integration into  the  United  Kingdom.  She  is  not  a
    financial burden on the United Kingdom, and speaks English fluently.

22   I have regard to the fact that her private life in United  Kingdom  has
    been established during periods of time when she was here lawfully, but
    with precarious leave, or unlawfully. Section 117B (4) and (5)  of  the
    2002 Act provides that I must have regard  to  the  consideration  that
    little weight should be given to such private  life.  In  the  case  of
    Deelah and others (section 117B - ambit) [2015] UKUT  00515 (IAC),  the
    President considered the construction of these subsections  of  section
    117B. Headnote 2 provides:

         "Section 117B(4) and (5) of the 2002 Act, which instruct Judges  to
         attribute "little weight" to the considerations specified  therein,
         do not give rise to a constitutionally  impermissible  encroachment
         on the independent adjudicative function of the judiciary."


23   Accordingly, I do have regard to the consideration that  little  weight
    should be given to the  Appellant's  private  life.  I  note  that  the
    consideration is not that little weight must be given  such  a  private
    life. Further I find  that  having  regard  to  the  considerations  in
    s.117B(4) and (5) does  not  oblige  me  to  place  no  weight  on  the
    Appellant's private life.  Further, I find  that  there  will  be  many
    circumstances where little weight will indeed be  given  to  a  private
    life  developed  whilst  United  Kingdom  unlawfully  or  precariously.
    However common sense, and  my  obligation  to  perform  my  independent
    adjudicative function, result in my finding that there will  be  cases,
    which include the present, where  the  period  of  time  over  which  a
    private life has been developed, together with its extent, mean that it
    is proper that due weight be attached to that  private  life,  even  if
    developed whilst present unlawfully or with precarious leave. I  attach
    due weight  to the Appellant's private life developed  whilst  she  has
    been in United Kingdom.

24   In MM, headnote 3 provides:

         "3   When determining the issue of proportionality in  such  cases,
         it  will  always  be  important  to  evaluate  the  extent  of  the
         individual's social ties and relationships in the UK."


    I find that that must be right, and it is  important  to  look  at  the
    duration, and extent of the Appellant's social ties  and  relationships
    in this country. The headnote continues:

         "However, a student here on a temporary basis has no expectation of
         a right to remain in order to further these ties and  relationships
         if the criteria of the points-based system are not met.  Also,  the
         character  of  an  individual's  'private  life'  relied  upon   is
         ordinarily by its very  nature  of  a  type  which  can  be  formed
         elsewhere,  albeit  through  different  social  ties,   after   the
         individual is removed from the UK.  In that respect, 'private life'
         claims of this kind are likely to advance a less cogent  basis  for
         outweighing the public interest in proper and effective immigration
         control than are claims based upon 'family life'  (or  quasi-family
         life such as same-sex relationships) where  the  relationships  are
         more likely  to  be  unique  and  cannot  be  replicated  once  the
         individual leaves the UK.


25   I consider that guidance in relation to  the  relationships  which  the
    Appellant relies upon in United Kingdom. Principal amongst those is the
    friendship she has with Mr [N]. I find that this is a person she  first
    met in 1980 but their friendship developed from 1995 onwards. Mr [N] is
    a man of 78 years of age, and the  appellant  is  59.  This  is  not  a
    relationship falling into the category of those which  'ordinarily,  by
    its very nature' is of the type which can be formed elsewhere. I do not
    seek to elevate the relationship between the Appellant and Mr [N]  into
    one of family life or quasi family  life,  but  it  represents  a  very
    significant part of the Appellant's private life in United Kingdom  and
    I find it may be described as unique. I proceed on the basis  that  the
    nature of the Appellant's private life in the United Kingdom is not one
    which is capable  of  being  replicated  or  substituted  by  different
    private life after removal from the UK.

26   I also  make  reference  to  the  Respondent's  delay  of  7  years  in
    processing an application for leave to remain in the UK. In her Rule 24
    response dated 25 April 2016, the  Appellant  makes  reference  to  the
    Respondent's policy  in  Chapter  53  of  the  Enforcement  Instruction
    Guidance on exceptional circumstances  wherein  it  is  stated  that  a
    factor to take into account when deciding whether  to  enforce  removal
    would include the length of residence in the United Kingdom accrued  by
    an unreasonable delay not attributable to  the  migrant.  The  guidance
    provides that the following must be considered: "Any other  case  where
    the length of delay by the Home Office in deciding the application,  or
    where  there  were  factors  preventing  departure,  may  be   consider
    exceptionally on grounds of delay where the person has lived in the  UK
    for more than six years." I note that the delay in the present case was
    of 7 years.

27   That being the Respondent's own policy suggests that  weight  ought  to
    be  attached  to  such  matters.   The  guidance  also  provides   that
    considerations of Home Office delay may  not  assist  an  applicant  if
    there are adverse character issues in relation to that person.  I  note
    the following from paragraph 12 of  the  Respondent's  decision  of  24
    September 2014 in relation to the present Appellant:

         "12  Having reviewed your client's particular circumstances, it  is
         accepted that she meets the requirements detailed above. Therefore,
         it is accepted that your client meets the suitability  requirements
         for her eligibility to be considered."


    The  Respondent  therefore  takes  no  point  against  the  Appellant's
    character or conduct.

28   Taking all the above considerations into account,  I  find  that  there
    are in the present case sufficiently compelling circumstances such that
    I  find  the  Respondent's  decision  to  remove  her  amounts   to   a
    disproportionate  and  therefore   unlawful   interference   with   the
    Appellant's private life in United Kingdom.

29   I therefore allow her appeal on human rights grounds.




    Decision:

    The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision

    I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.


Signed:                             Date: 27.10.16

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan

