
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40949/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 July 2014                                |On 25 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE HADDON-CAVE
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                          Mrs Abidemi Olusola Dairo
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Oji
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant in this matter, Mrs Abidemi  Dairo,  seeks  to  appeal  a
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Oakley promulgated  on  25  April
    2014 in which he dismissed the appellant's appeal against the Secretary
    of State's decision dated 4 September 2013 to  refuse  her  application
    for leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a dependant of her husband
    who had applied for indefinite leave to remain under the long residence
    rules.
 2. The appeal, which is presented today by Ms Oji, is put  on  two  bases.
    The first is that the judge did not consider the case appropriately  on
    the basis of the relevant guidance which, it  was  submitted,  required
    the caseworker to look into the family and private circumstances of the
    applicant where Section 2 of  the  application  form  SET(O)  had  been
    filled in.  Section 2 of the  form  SET(O)  version  07/2012  reads  as
    follows:

         "Section 2 - Dependants who are also applying

         If you have a partner and/or any children under 18 who  are  living
         with you in the UK  and  who  are  ...  leave  to  remain  as  your
         dependants, this is where you their give details.  'Partner'  means
         your spouse ... or same-sex partner.  If more than two children are
         applying please give their details on a photocopy of  this  page...
         The immigration rules for the long residence category do not  allow
         dependants - see guidance..." [Emphasis added].

 3. Section 2 of the form then goes on to set out various boxes into  which
    are to be filled in giving partner's full name, including  nationality,
    date of birth and other details.  In this case,  it  appears  that  the
    boxes for partner's name, nationality, place of birth and date of birth
    etc. were filled in with the appellant's  details  by  the  appellant's
    husband. Ms Oji submits that it was  because  Section  2  of  the  form
    SET(O) was filled  in,  albeit  in  error,  it  was  therefore  somehow
    incumbent upon the caseworker to give effect to the guidance notes. The
    guidance notes provided:

         "However, if dependants have been  included  on  a  long  residence
         application on a SET(O) form in error, you [the caseworker] must:

        a. refuse the dependants under the long residence Rules, and

        b. consider  any  private  life  claim  raised  on  behalf  of  the
           dependant as well as the main applicant."

 4. It is plain that Section 2 was incorrectly filled in. The form makes it
    quite clear that Section 2 does not apply in  long  residence  category
    cases.  It is, therefore, curious that the guidance  appears  to  allow
    applicants who incorrectly fill in a form themselves to take  advantage
    of that in the manner suggested by Ms  Oji.  Nevertheless,  her  point,
    however, takes her nowhere in this case because the  first  and  second
    dot points quoted above are exactly what has been done  in  this  case.
    The caseworker refused the appellant's  application,  and  the  private
    life claim raised by the appellant  has  been  considered  through  the
    prism of Article 8 to which we now turn.

 5. Article 8 is Ms Oji's second point. She submits that the judge did  not
    consider the appellant's Article 8 rights adequately or at all and,  in
    particular, she submits he did not address the various stages of Razgar
    [2004] UKHL 27 in relation to the appellant's husband's rights. We  can
    deal with this aspect of the appeal shortly. Ms Oji has ignored Gulshan
    (Article 8-new Rules-correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC).


 6. In our judgment, it is clear that before considering the Razgar  steps,
    the judge was obliged  to  apply  Gulshan  (see  paragraph  24  of  his
    Determination  and  Reasons).  Gulshan  provides  that  compelling   or
    compassionate reasons must be  demonstrated  as  to  why  exceptionally
    recourse should be had to Article 8 when an applicant falls outside the
    Rules.

 7. The judge went on in paragraph 25 to say as follows:

         "In this particular case, there is no reason that  I  can  perceive
         for looking outside the Rules. The Appellant and her  husband  both
         come from Nigeria and there would be nothing to stop them returning
         as a family unit to live together and  I  therefore  conclude  that
         there is no reason for me to go on to consider the position of  the
         Appellant under the 1950 Convention."

 8. Earlier in his Determination and Reasons the judge had recorded various
    details about the appellant and her husband, namely, their  arrival  in
    the United Kingdom, the fact that the appellant had  qualifications  as
    did her husband and the fact that in his judgment "there should  be  no
    reason why they should not be able  to  establish  themselves  back  in
    Nigeria" (see paragraph 22). He also recorded in paragraph 21 that  the
    appellant had made no application for leave to  remain  in  respect  of
    their daughter. In our judgment, the judge had adequate material before
    him to take a view as to whether or not there were any "compelling"  or
    "compassionate"   reasons   such   as   to   amount   to   "exceptional
    circumstances" for resort to be had to Article 8.  He  dealt  with  the
    Gulshan question adequately, albeit briefly.

 9. It is material to note that in paragraph 19 of the judgment  the  judge
    said as follows:

         "She may have lived in the United Kingdom for nearly 6  years,  but
         the majority of her life has been spent in Nigeria and  I  conclude
         therefore that she would be unable to  satisfy  the  provisions  of
         paragraph 276ADE(i) (vi)."

10. It may be for that reason that it was that the appellant had not made a
    separate application for leave to remain and leave to have her stay  in
    the United Kingdom regularised.

11. In our view, no criticism can be made of the learned  judge's  approach
    or his decision on the Gulsham question which was entirely orthodox. It
    was not necessary and would not have been appropriate, for him to  have
    gone on to consider the Razgar  stages  because,  as  he  indicated  in
    paragraph 24, the  relevant  exceptional  circumstances  had  not  been
    demonstrated. We find it surprising that Ms Oji could seek to argue  on
    appeal in ignorance of such a basic point as Gulshan. Her second ground
    is rejected.

12. For those reasons, the appeal is dismissed. The decision of the  First-
    Tier Tribunal did not involve an error of law.

Signed ________________________________      Date 21st July 2014

                      Mr Justice  Haddon-Cave
