

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: ia 40163-13

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                            |Decision signed:   23.05.2014|
|on    23.05.2014                              |sent out:                    |
|                                              |28.05.2014                   |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN

Between:
                            Marie Toumany DIALLO
                                                                   appellant
                                     and



                                                                  respondent
Representation:

For the appellant:  Dwain Coward (counsel instructed by Thadvana
Consulting, Croydon)
For the respondent: Mrs R Patterson


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Guy Robson), sitting at Bradford on 3 February, to   on
    article 3 grounds an  EEA  appeal  by  a  citizen  of  Guinea,  born  2
    September 1987, and married to a French lady. The sole reason  why  his
    application for a residence card, made on 2 May 2012, had been  refused
    on 10 September 2013, was that, while his passport had  been  with  the
    Home Office for that, it had run out on 2 December 2012.

 2. Quite understandably, the judge did not see that as a state of  affairs
    which could be allowed to stand; but it is agreed that his mistake  was
    to deal with it by using article 8. There were no such 'exceptional' or
    'compelling' features in the appellant's private or  family  life  (see
    Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) Pakistan [2013] UKUT
    640 (IAC), and Shahzad (Art 8: legitimate aim) Pakistan [2014] UKUT  85
    (IAC)) as to require any free-standing consideration of  article  8  at
    all; and of course the appellant could make a fresh application, as the
    husband of an EEA citizen, at any time.

 3. What the judge should have done was simply to consider whether  it  was
    fair for the Home Office to make a decision against the appellant which
    was based on nothing  more  than  their  own  default  in  keeping  his
    passport from May 2012, when he made his  application,  past  December,
    when it ran out, till September 2013,  when  they  finally  made  their
    decision.

 4. The appellate authorities' jurisdiction to consider such  an  issue  is
    clearly set out in Naved  (Student  -  fairness  -  notice  of  points)
    Pakistan [2012] UKUT 14 (IAC), reviewing Sapkota & another [2011]  EWCA
    Civ 1320 and other authorities. This is what we said at  paragraph  19,
    on a different set of facts, but the same principle applies:

       The  Court  of  Appeal  has  accordingly  confirmed   our   appellate
       jurisdiction to conclude that a particular decision is unfair, and so
       not in accordance with the law. Applying that to the circumstances of
       the present case, the decision is not in accordance with the law, and
       accordingly a lawful decision has yet to be made ...

 5. It is agreed that the same result should apply here.  The  Home  Office
    must reconsider their decision,  either  on  the  assumption  that  the
    appellant will be able to get his passport renewed whenever  they  give
    it back to him, or by giving it back to him, so he can  do  it  himself
    before they reach their decision. Either way no further fee  should  be
    payable to this country's authorities.

Home Office appeal  - decision re-made
Appellant's appeal allowed: decision under appeal  remains  to  be  made  by
    Home Office



                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)



