
[pic]
IAC-HX-DML-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40514/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 October 2015                   |On 8 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge conway


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MR YAW YEBOAH
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Sreeraman
For the Respondent:    Mr Olawanle


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Mr Yeboah is a citizen of Ghana born in 1974.   He  appeals  against  a
    decision of the Secretary of State made on 25 September 2014 to  refuse
    further leave to remain under paragraph 322(1) of the Immigration Rules
    as leave was being sought for a purpose not covered by  the  Rules  and
    under paragraph 276CE with reference to paragraph 276ADE.

 2. Although in proceedings  before  me  the  Secretary  of  State  is  the
    Appellant, for convenience I maintain the  designations  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal, thus Mr Yeboah is the Appellant and the
    Secretary of State the Respondent.

 3. The history is that the Appellant was granted  discretionary  leave  to
    remain under Article 8 on the basis of his  relationship  with  Lordina
    Nyame.  Unfortunately, his spouse died on 1 June 2013.   The  Secretary
    of State concluded that the  grounds  under  which  he  was  previously
    granted  discretionary  leave  no  longer   persisted   therefore   the
    application was refused.

 4. He appealed.

 5. Following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 23 April 2015 Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Rees  allowed  the  appeal  on  Article  8  human  rights
    grounds.

 6. The judge notes that it was accepted that the Appellant could not  meet
    the requirements of the  Rules  (at  paragraph  [7]).   The  issue  was
    Article 8 and "can he reasonably be expected to go back to Ghana".

 7. Her findings are at [18]ff. She notes that at all times he  lived  with
    his wife in a genuine relationship.   Also  that  he  could  have  been
    granted indefinite leave but for a drink driving conviction in February
    2011.

 8. The judge accepted the Appellant's account.  Specifically that  he  has
    made friends in the UK and has family  here.   Also,  that  he  has  no
    family in Ghana and that any connection with Ghana is  limited  to  his
    late wife's family.  His family here have their own lives  and  "cannot
    be expected to manage his affairs here".  [20]

 9. The judge adds that  she  has  "taken  into  consideration  the  public
    interest considerations of Section 117B" and did not "think it fair  to
    call his status in the UK precarious given that he was lawfully here as
    a spouse who was then bereaved.  All  other  considerations  of  public
    interest are met."  [21]

10. The judge further found that he had not been imprisoned for  the  drink
    driving offence and that there had  been  no  further  offending  [22].
    Also that he is "integrated into  society"  and  that  there  would  be
    "significant obstacles" [23] to his returning to Ghana.   Further,  the
    "bereavement and consequent emotional  and  psychological  distress  is
    such as to amount to compelling circumstances" [26]. She concluded that
    removal would not be proportionate to the legitimate public end  sought
    to be achieved.

11. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal which was granted on
    17 August 2015.

12. At the error of law hearing before me Ms Sreeraman made  the  following
    brief points.  First, whilst the judge noted that the Appellant was not
    pursuing his case under the Rules she  was  required  to  consider  the
    Rules  as  they  are  the  starting  point  and  focus  of  Article   8
    assessments.

13. The failure to engage with  the  Rules  was  material  to  the  overall
    Article 8 assessment.  Indeed, the judge  should  not  have  considered
    Article 8 outside the Rules at all.

14. Further, even in her analysis outside the Rules the judge  erred.   She
    was wrong to find that  the  Appellant's  status  in  the  UK  was  not
    precarious.  Also, she failed to give reasons for concluding that there
    would be "significant obstacles" to the Appellant returning to Ghana.

15. Mr Olawanle's position was that there was no  error  of  law  merely  a
    disagreement with the decision.  The judge was correct  to  move  to  a
    second stage consideration.  As for finding that the Appellant's  leave
    was not precarious she was entitled to  reach  that  view  because  the
    Appellant had discretionary leave as a spouse who had come with a  view
    to settlement.

16. As for the submission that inadequate reasons had been  given  for  the
    conclusion that there would be "significant obstacles" to the Appellant
    returning to Ghana the judge had found him to be  a  truthful  witness,
    that his family and friends were in the UK and that he has no family in
    Ghana.  It was a conclusion she was entitled to reach.  In addition  he
    had lost everything.  It was difficult to see how he could  readapt  to
    life in Ghana.

17. In looking at this matter I consider that the judge materially erred.

18. The basis of the application was family life as a partner. It  appears,
    correctly, to have been  accepted  that  his  wife,  having  died,  the
    application clearly could not succeed on  that  basis.  Also,  that  it
    could not succeed under paragraph 276ADE in respect  of  private  life.
    However that is not the end of the matter.

19. In SSHD v SS (Congo) & Ors [2015] EWCA 387 it was explained that if the
    requirements of the rules cannot be met, and  a  judge  finds  that  an
    Article 8 assessment outside them is required, this  must  be  properly
    explained.   Paragraph   33   provides   guidance.   The    "compelling
    circumstances" justifying an assessment "need to  be  identified".  The
    test "not as strict as a test of exceptionality  or  a  requirement  of
    'very compelling reasons'... in the context of foreign  criminals,  but
    which gives appropriate weight to the focussed consideration of  public
    interest factors as  finds  expression  in  the  Secretary  of  State's
    formulation of the new rules in Appendix FM".

20. In failing to explain why she considered it appropriate to  proceed  to
    an Article 8 assessment outside the  Rules  she  committed  a  material
    error of law.

21. Further, in her assessment under Article 8 the judge erred  in  finding
    (at [21]) that the Appellant's status here was not "precarious" (see AM
    (S.117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260: "A  person's  immigration  status  is
    'precarious' if their continued presence in the UK  will  be  dependent
    upon their obtaining a further grant of leave").

22. Moreover, the judge failed to give adequate reasons for her  conclusion
    that there would be "significant obstacles" to the Appellant  returning
    to Ghana. She appears to have reached that view  simply  on  the  basis
    that she accepted the evidence that he has no family there.  The  judge
    failed to consider issues such as that the Appellant has only  been  in
    the UK since 2009, that he is an adult  in  good  health,  that  he  is
    familiar with the cultures and customs of Ghana and spent his formative
    years there.  Also, that he would have the  support  of  his  UK  based
    siblings.

23. It is noted that the judge at the end also took into account in  favour
    of the Appellant the  bereavement  and  his  consequent  emotional  and
    psychological distress. However, in light of the legal errors  and  the
    failure elsewhere to give adequate reasons the judge's assessment under
    Article 8 is fatally flawed.

24. I set aside the decision to be remade.  No further hearing was sought.

25. It is clear that the Appellant made the wrong application.  Instead  of
    applying on the basis of "Family/Private life of a Partner on a 10 year
    route to settlement" he should have applied for leave to  remain  as  a
    bereaved partner.

26. That such was his position is clear from the fact that he gave  details
    of his wife's death in the form.

27. In my judgment it should have been self-evident to the Respondent  that
    the Appellant had made a technical error in his application  about  the
    nature of the application and that consideration should have been given
    under BPILR of Appendix FM.

28. Ms Sreeraman, who lodged a copy of the relevant  guidance  appeared  to
    acknowledge that the Respondent had failed to consider the correct Rule
    and that it was appropriate that such be done.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows material error of law.  It  is
set aside and remade as follows:

    The appeal is allowed to the extent that it is not in  accordance  with
    the law.  The application awaits a lawful decision by the Respondent.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway

