
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40686/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |                     Decision & Reasons |
|                                      |Promulgated                             |
|On 11 February 2016                   |                     On 4 March 2016    |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before


                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR SHAID NAZIR
                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G Lee, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant in this case is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department.  However, for the sake of clarity, I shall use  the  titles
    by which the parties were known before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  with
    the Secretary of State referred to as "the respondent" and Mr Nazir  as
    "the appellant".

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  He appealed against a decision
    to refuse leave to enter and a cancellation of continuing  leave  under
    the Immigration Act 1971 and the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002.  The notice of decision was  undated  but  according  to  the
    explanatory notice it was issued on 26 October 2014.

 3. The nub of the respondent's decision can be summarised as follows:-

         "Refusal/Cancellation

         On 08.10.2013 you were given leave to remain  as  a  Spouse/Partner
         which conferred leave by means  of  a  Biometric  Residence  Permit
         valid until 08.04.2106,  but  I  am  satisfied  that  either  false
         representations were employed or material facts were not  disclosed
         for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  the  permit,  or  a   change   of
         circumstances since it was issued has removed  the  basis  of  your
         claim to admission.  The UK  Biometric  Residence  Permit  is  not,
         therefore, effective.  This is because:-

         On 15.10.2012  you  submitted  a  TOEIC  from  Educational  Testing
         Service ("ETS") to the Home Office in order to obtain further leave
         to remain as a student to study CIMA at Lea  Valley  College.   You
         then submitted the same TOEIC certificate on 23.09.2013 to the Home
         Office in order to obtain further leave to  remain  in  the  United
         Kingdom as a Spouse/Partner.

         ETS has a record of your speaking test.  Using  voice  verification
         software, ETS is able to detect when a single person is undertaking
         multiple tests.  ETS undertook a check of your test  and  confirmed
         to the Home Office that there was significant evidence to  conclude
         that your certificate was fraudulently obtained.  Your scores  from
         the test taken on 26.09.2012 at New College of  Finance  have  been
         cancelled by ETS.

         I am satisfied that you falsely represented yourself  in  obtaining
         your current leave (by producing to the Home Office a  fraudulently
         obtained TOEIC test certificate).  In these circumstances I  hereby
         cancel your continuing leave.

         You have  not  sought  entry  under  any  other  provision  of  the
         immigration rules."

 4. The appellant appealed that decision.  Following a  hearing  at  Taylor
    House Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  R  G  Walters,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 24 August 2015,  concluded  that  the  decision  of  the
    respondent was not in  accordance  with  the  law  and  the  applicable
    Immigration  Rules  and  accordingly  allowed  the  appeal  under   the
    Immigration Rules.

 5. The respondent sought permission to appeal and in a decision  dated  18
    December 2015 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  J  M  Holmes  gave  his
    reasons for granting permission.  They are:-

         "1.  In a Decision promulgated on  24  August  2015  Judge  Walters
             allowed under the Immigration  Rules  the  Appellant's  appeal
             against the decision to refuse leave to enter  and  to  cancel
             his leave.

         2.   The application is in time.

         3.   It is arguable that the Judge fell into error in his  approach
             to  the  decision  by  ETS  to  withdraw  the  language   test
             certificate that ETS had issued to  the  Appellant,  and  upon
             which he had relied when seeking leave  to  remain.   Arguably
             the Judge treated the Respondent as having the burden of proof
             in establishing deception on the  part  of  the  Appellant  in
             undertaking the language test that led to the  issue  of  that
             certificate.  Even if he was correct to do so, he was arguably
             wrong to dismiss the Respondent's evidence in the way that  he
             did [9] & [18].  Whilst  the  Judge  purported  to  apply  the
             guidance to be found in Gazi he arguably  failed  to  identify
             that the same evidence that was then described by McCloskey  J
             as being  "sufficient  to  warrant  the  assessment  that  the
             Appellant's TOEIC had been  procured  by  deception  and  thus
             provided an adequate foundation for the  decision  made  under
             s10" [35] was before him.  Thus arguably any decision  by  the
             Judge that the Respondent's evidence  was  not  sufficient  to
             discharge any burden of proof that lay upon the Respondent was
             either flawed, or, disclosed a departure on his part from  the
             applicable  civil  standard  of  proof  of  the   balance   of
             probabilities; Re B."

 6. Thus the appeal came before me.

 7. Mr Duffy argued that the judge had materially erred in  two  particular
    ways.  Firstly by failing to give adequate reasons for a finding  on  a
    material matter and secondly by making a material misdirection of law.

 8. So far as the first ground is concerned he said that the  judge  failed
    entirely  to  provide  adequate  reasons  for  his  finding  that   the
    respondent  had  not  proved  the  appellant's  TOEIC  certificate  was
    fraudulently obtained.  The Immigration Officer  had  provided  at  the
    appeal a bundle of documents in support of this allegation (in  respect
    of  paragraph  321A  of  the  Immigration  Rules)   including   witness
    statements from a Mr Peter Millington and Ms Rebecca Collings and an e-
    mail document from ETS Task Force dated 10 September 2014.  The witness
    statements from Mr Peter Millington and  Ms  Rebecca  Collings  clearly
    provide that tests are categorised as "invalid" where ETS  are  certain
    that there is evidence of  proxy  test  taking  or  impersonation.   He
    relied on the grounds which go on to state:-

         "ETS described that any tests categorised as cancelled (which later
         became known as invalid) had  the  same  voice  for  multiple  test
         takes.  On questioning they advised that they  were  certain  there
         was evidence of proxy test-taking or impersonation in those  cases"
         [paragraph 28, witness statement of Ms Rebecca Collings],

         "... Following comprehensive investigations ETS provided  the  Home
         Office  with  lists  of  candidates   whose   test   results   show
         'substantial evidence of invalidity'.  The Home Office was provided
         with the background to the  process  used  by  ETS  to  reach  that
         conclusion."  [paragraph  6,  witness   statement   of   Mr   Peter
         Millington], and

         "... Where a  match  has  been  identified  their  approach  is  to
         invalidate the test results.  As set out in the  witness  statement
         of Ms Rebecca Collings, ETS has informed the Home Office that there
         was evidence of invalidity in those areas" [paragraph  46,  witness
         statement of Mr Peter Millington];"

 9. Beyond that he said that taking into account this evidence it is  clear
    that in order  to  be  categorised  as  "invalid"  on  the  spreadsheet
    provided to the Home Office  the  case  has  to  have  gone  through  a
    computer programme analysing speech  and  then  two  independent  voice
    analysts.  If all three are in agreement that a  proxy  has  been  used
    then the test would be categorised as "invalid".   A  printout  of  the
    relevant section of the ETS spreadsheet was attached at Appendix  E  of
    the explanatory statement.  The spreadsheet identifies  this  appellant
    by name and records that the test that was taken on 25  September  2012
    was invalid.  It identifies  him  as  having  exercised  deception  and
    therefore it is clear that the judge has erred in his findings.  Had he
    properly taken into account the evidence he would have found  that  the
    documents point  to  the  invalidity.   The  judge  failed  to  provide
    adequate reasons for his findings to the contrary.

10. He also misdirected himself in law in applying  an  impermissibly  high
    standard of proof in determining the deception issue.

11. Mr Duffy did not accept the judge's finding  that  the  respondent  had
    failed to discharge the burden on her.  He asserted the burden of proof
    was on the respondent to show fraud to the required standard  and  this
    is what she did.

12. Mr Lee argued that the judge was "perfectly entitled" to  come  to  the
    conclusions that he did.  He had analysed the evidence and detailed its
    weaknesses.  He had considered it all and it was a matter for him as to
    what weight he attached to the different strands of evidence that  fell
    to be considered.  He  suggested  that  the  authority  of  R  (on  the
    application of Gazi) v SSHD (ETS judicial review) IJR [2015] UKUT 00327
    (IAC) was not particularly helpful to the  instant  appeal.   It  dealt
    with an out-of-country appeal with particular reference to the issue of
    "improper purpose" at paragraph 22.  The test  before  the  Immigration
    Judge in this instant  appeal  was  different  to  that  to  which  the
    President of the Upper Tribunal  was  looking  when  dealing  with  the
    judicial review decision in Gazi.

13. This is an appeal where  the  appellant  submitted  a  TOEIC  from  the
    Educational Testing Service to the Home Office to obtain further  leave
    to remain as a student on two occasions.  Firstly on 15 October 2012 to
    obtain further leave to remain and secondly on  23  September  2013  to
    obtain further leave to remain but this time as a spouse/partner.   ETS
    had  a  record  of  the  appellant's  speaking  test  and  using  voice
    verification software ETS was able to detect when a  single  person  is
    undertaking multiple tests.  ETS undertook a check on  the  appellant's
    tests and confirmed to the  Home  Office  that  there  was  significant
    evidence to conclude that his certificate  was  fraudulently  obtained.
    This satisfied the Immigration Officer that the appellant  had  falsely
    represented himself in obtaining his  current  leave  and  led  to  the
    cancellation of his continuing leave.

14. That coupled with the balance of the respondent's evidence should  have
    attracted  sufficient  weight  to  satisfy  the  requisite  burden  and
    standard of proof (balance of probabilities) to show that the appellant
    had falsely represented himself to secure his leave.  In short  by  the
    use of a fraudulently obtained TOEIC test certificate.

15. There  was  evidence  from  the  respondent  in  the  form  of  witness
    statements from Mr Peter Millington and Ms  Rebecca  Collings  showing
    that tests are categorised as "invalid"  where  ETS  are  certain  that
    there  is  evidence  of  proxy  test  taking  or  impersonation.    The
    appellant's test was considered to  be  "invalid"  on  the  spreadsheet
    provided to the Home Office by reason  of  it  having  gone  through  a
    computer programme analysing speech  and  then  two  independent  voice
    analysts.  The spreadsheet identified the appellant by name and records
    that the test he took on 25 September 2012 was invalid.

16. The judge has plainly not taken this evidence into account and attached
    to it the necessary weight.  Had he done so the appeal could  not  have
    succeeded.  The judge has failed to provide adequate  reasons  for  the
    findings that he made resulting in this appeal being allowed.

Conclusions

17. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

18. I set aside the decision.

19. I remake the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.

20. No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                              Date 16 February 2016.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard


