

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40898/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 29th July 2014                             |on 4th August 2014           |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  YILEI HUI
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Hibbs - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent: In person.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a determination
        of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Trevaskis,  promulgated  following  a
        hearing at Newport on 9th April 2014, in which he allowed Ms  Hui's
        appeal against the refusal of her application for leave  to  remain
        and associated direction for her removal to China.


     2. Having assessed the evidence Judge Trevaskis allowed the appeal  by
        reference to EX.1(b) of Appendix FM.


     3. I find the Judge erred in law for Ms Hui entered the United Kingdom
        as a visitor and so is unable to satisfy the mandatory  eligibility
        criteria as to immigration status to be found in  E-LTRP  2.1.   In
        Sabir (Appendix FM - EX.1 not free standing) [2014] UKUT  63  (IAC)
        it was held that the architecture of the Rules as regards  partners
        is such that EX.1  is  "parasitic"  on  the  relevant  Rule  within
        Appendix FM that otherwise grants leave  to  remain.  If  EX.1  was
        intended  to  be  a  free-  standing  element  some  mechanism   of
        identification would have been used. The structure of the Rules  as
        presently drafted requires it to be a component part of  the  leave
        granting Rule. This is now made plain by the respondent's  guidance
        dated October 2013.


     4. The grounds of appeal also raise Article 8 ECHR  issues  but  these
        were not considered by the Judge and so it cannot be found that any
        error is not material.


     5. I set the determination aside. As Ms Hui has not had the merits  of
        her appeal properly considered in full by the  First-tier  Tribunal
        it was agreed appropriate to remit the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
        Tribunal sitting at Newport for all issues to be considered afresh.
         There are no preserved findings. The date and  time  of  the  next
        hearing, and any additional case management  directions,  shall  be
        given by Resident Judge Poole upon receipt of the file  at  Newport




Decision

     6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set aside
        the decision of the original Judge. I remit the appeal.


   Anonymity.


     7. The First-tier Tribunal made contradictory findings in relation to
        the issue of anonymity in indicating in the header of the
        determination that no anonymity order was made but later in the
        determination stating that it is.  I make no such order, and revoke
        any order if the same was made (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal
        Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008), as no application for
        anonymity was made and it is not justified on the facts.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 30th July 2014







