
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40929/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|On the papers                             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|on 10 August 2016                         |On 11 August 2016                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                   SAAMEE
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS
      1. On 2 March 2016  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Coker  heard  the  Initial
         hearing of this matter to determine whether  the  First-tier  Judge
         had made an error of law material to the decision  to  dismiss  the
         appeal.
      2. In her decision dated 11 March 2016 Judge Coker made the  following
         finding:


            17.   The appellant meets 276B(i)(b). The consequent  dismissal
            of the  appellant's  appeal  without  proper  consideration  of
            paragraph 276B and the failure to take into account the  impact
            on the proportionality  of  the  decision  of  such  continuous
            residence as met 276B(i)(b) is an error of law  such  that  the
            decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  to  be  set  aside  and
            remade.


      3. At paragraph 18 the following directions were given:


            18.   That the appellant meets 276B(i)(b) does not  enable  him
            to succeed in his appeal without more.


            Consequential Directions


            It being agreed by the parties  that  if  the  appellant  meets
            paragraph  276B(ii)  then  the  appeal  is  allowed   and   any
            consideration under Article 8 is academic, I make the following
            directions,


             1.  The  respondent  have  leave  to  file  and  serve  written
                submissions after having made such checks as she  considered
                appropriate  on  whether  the  appellant   meets   paragraph
                276B(ii), such submission's to be filed and served within  4
                weeks of the promulgation of this decision.


             2. The appellant has leave to file and serve a  response,  such
                response to be filed  and  served  within  10  days  of  the
                service of the respondent's submissions.


             3. I shall proceed to re-make the appeal on the  basis  of  the
                material before me as soon as possible  6  weeks  after  the
                promulgation of this decision.


      4. On 21 April 2016 Judge Coker issued  further  directions  repeating
         the three numbered directions set out above with the following  two
         additions:


            2.    The respondent has not filed any submissions nor has  she
            requested  additional  time  within  which  to  undertake  such
            investigations as she  considered  necessary.   Accordingly  it
            appears that there are no adverse  factors  to  be  taken  into
            account.


            3.    In the absence of any indication to the contrary  and  in
            the absence of any submissions from the respondent I propose to
            allow the appeal without further consideration  of  the  merits
            and find that the  appellant  meets  the  requirements  of  the
            Immigration Rules -as pleaded- unless I receive submissions  to
            the contrary by 4pm on Tuesday 3rd May 2016.


      5. There has been no response from the respondent to either  direction
         and in accordance with the direction of  Judge  Coker  putting  the
         respondent on notice of the consequences of her  continued  silence
         in relation to  this  matter,  the  appeal  is  allowed  under  the
         Immigration Rules, rule 276B, on the basis of 14  years  continuous
         residence in the United kingdom and having  regard  to  the  public
         interest there being no reasons why it would be undesirable for the
         appellant to have indefinite leave to remain on the grounds of long
         residence.

Decision

    1. The First-tier Tribunal Judge has been found to have materially erred
       in law and that decision set aside. I remake the decision as follows.
       This appeal is allowed.

  Anonymity.

    2. The First-tier Tribunal not make an order pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)
       of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 10 August 2016












