
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40088/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham, Sheldon Court              |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 5th September 2014                           |On 12th September 2014     |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                              mr abdul khalique
                         (anonymity order not madE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Taj Shah (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Hawden-Beal promulgated on 4th March 2014, following a hearing at
    Birmingham on 17th February 2014.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of Abdul  Khalique.   The  appellant  subsequently
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Bangladesh, who was born on  20th
    January 1974.  He appealed  against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State dated 13th September 2013 to refuse his  application
    for leave to remain in the UK on the  basis  of  long  residence  under
    paragraph 276B, 276ADE, Appendix FM, and Article 8 of the Human  Rights
    Convention.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he has been living in the UK continuously
    for fourteen years such that he qualifies to  remain  in  this  country
    under the long residence Rule.  The Respondent  contests  this  on  the
    basis that he could not prove continuous  residence  for  a  period  of
    fourteen years.  He had no partner or child in  the  UK.   He  had  not
    lived here for twenty years.  He was not a minor who lived here for  at
    least seven years.  He was not aged between 18 and 25 years.   Finally,
    that his social, family  and  cultural  ties  remained  with  his  home
    country.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge observed how the Appellant had entered the UK on a visit visa
    in 1994, and he had leave to remain from  September  1994  until  March
    1995.  Since then he has been here without any valid leave.  The  judge
    heard evidence that the Appellant had not returned back  to  Bangladesh
    since he came to this country in 1994.  His only family  in  Bangladesh
    was his 70 year old mother and the wife of his brother who was  working
    in the Middle East (paragraph 14).   The  Appellant  could  not  recall
    where he lived in the UK when he first arrived.  But he did  stay  with
    his aunt in 2009 (paragraph 16).  He used to live at restaurants  where
    he worked.  His first job was in Somerset and he lived in  a  three  to
    four bedroom flat with other  restaurant  staff.   He  then  worked  in
    Taunton for two and a half years, and then Bristol, where he worked and
    lived until 1998.  He went to Illminster, where he stayed for  eighteen
    months and then to Dursley, before he moved to a  house  owned  by  his
    aunt in Birmingham.  He did not pay towards bills  in  Birmingham.   He
    said he had payslips and he had P60s.   He  did  not  have  a  national
    insurance number (paragraph 16).  He was always paid cash in hand.   He
    still does not have a bank account.

 5. The Appellant went on to explain that he moved  in  with  his  aunt  in
    2003, where she moved to her present address, and prior to this date he
    used to stay with her on his days off when he had  no  work.   Evidence
    from the Appellant's aunt, Shaheada Begum, also confirmed most of these
    facts, including that the Appellant had not been to Bangladesh since he
    came to the UK in 1994.  The judge recorded that, "She  said  that  she
    maintained contact with the Appellant when he had a day off or when  he
    had no work which is when he came to stay with her.  When he  did  work
    he lived at his place of work.  She confirmed  that  she  knew  he  was
    coming to the UK in 1994 and that he had been sponsored  by  a  man  in
    Bangladesh" (paragraph 19).  The aunt also confirmed that the Appellant
    had been working in Bristol and Somerset and at "other different places
    and that he lived down there for  as  long  as  he  had  a  job  there"
    (paragraph 20).

 6. The third witness giving evidence before the judge was Mr Shah  Kabili,
    who claimed he was distantly related to the  Appellant  and  that  they
    came from the same village.  This witness "said that after  he  arrived
    here in 2003 he used to contact the Appellant very often  and  see  him
    every three to four months in Birmingham city centre.  He did not  know
    where he lived when he was working" (paragraph 22).

 7. The fourth witness before the judge was Mr  Mohammed  Yesuf  Miah,  who
    confirmed that the  Appellant  was  his  father's  sister's  son.   His
    evidence was that,

         "He first saw him in 1995 and that he used to see the Appellant  at
         his aunt's house and that the Appellant came to his  house  on  his
         days off approximately twice a month.  He said  the  Appellant  had
         not been out of the UK since he had known him.  He  said  that  the
         Appellant's aunt had lived at her address for ten to fifteen  years
         and that she had been living there when he came to the UK in  1987.
         He said he knew that the Appellant had not left the UK since he had
         been here but then admitted that after the first visit he  did  not
         know where the Appellant had gone and he did  not  know  where  the
         Appellant was in between his regular visits" (paragraph 23).

 8. The final witness before the judge was Mr Tariq Akhter,  who  confirmed
    before the Tribunal that "he had known the Appellant  since  1999  when
    they had worked together for one and a half years to three years  at  a
    restaurant in Illminster called the  "Rajput  Indian  Restaurant".   He
    said that "they still keep in contact by telephone  at  least  twice  a
    week and they meet for coffee every two to four weeks" (paragraph 24).

 9. It was against this background that the judge applied the  law  to  the
    facts and properly concluded that the  Appellant  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276B(1)(a) because he had not  been  lawfully
    in the UK for ten years.  However the judge also found that  "there  is
    insufficient evidence to satisfy  me  that  he  has  been  here  for  a
    continuous  period  of  fourteen  years  as  required  under  paragraph
    276B(1)(b)".  This was because the Appellant

         "has only produced payslips and P60 for 1995  and  even  though  he
         claims to have worked as recently as November 2013 he has no  other
         documentary evidence to show that he has been in the UK since  that
         time.  I note that he submitted his passport and wageslips and  P60
         with his  original  application  but  it  now  appears  that  those
         documents had been lost by the Respondent" (paragraph 25).

10. The judge was careful to note that the fourteen year Rule, as  it  then
    was, "did not  encourage  overstayers  to  declare  themselves  to  the
    authorities and that as a result of their lack of status, it  would  be
    difficult for them to provide evidence of this  stay  in  the  UK"  but
    nevertheless held that,  "the  evidence  called  by  the  Appellant  in
    support of his claim is not consistent or credible".

11. The reasons that the judge gave for this conclusion was that there was,
    on the one hand,  "A  distant  relative  who  came  here  in  2003  and
    therefore has no knowledge of matters before that date and did not keep
    in touch until he came here but is sure he has not left the  UK".   The
    judge held that his evidence "is of little help because it only  covers
    the last ten years or so, when the Appellant himself acknowledges  that
    he cannot show ten years' lawful residence."  The judge also held that,
    on the other hand, "I  have  a  nephew  who  claims  that  he  saw  the
    Appellant regularly at his aunt's house, an address she  has  lived  at
    for at least ten to fifteen years and the address  she  was  living  at
    when he came to the UK in 1987".  Of this the judge concluded, "I place
    no weight on this evidence at all for the simple reason that  the  aunt
    herself did not come to the UK until 1987" (paragraph 26).

12. The judge's conclusions with respect to the  evidence  heard  from  the
    witnesses was that, "Although all of the witnesses  are  positive  that
    the Appellant has not left the UK since he came here in 1994,  none  of
    them have seen him every day or every week to be certain of that.  They
    only saw him when he was  not  working  or  when  he  had  a  day  off"
    (paragraph 27).

13. Finally, the judge then added  that,  "Even  if  I  am  wrong  and  the
    Appellant has been here continuously since 1994,  that  does  not  mean
    that a grant of leave to remain is automatic"  because  the  Respondent
    has to consider matters in relation to the public  interest  (paragraph
    28).   The  judge  also  held  that   there   were   no   compassionate
    circumstances put before the judge and that the Appellant was a fit and
    healthy man who came here deliberately to work and to remain in the  UK
    and had paid no tax or contributed  in  any  positive  way  to  the  UK
    economy (paragraph 29).

14. In relation to human rights issues, the judge held that  the  Appellant
    could not succeed under the Rules that came into effect in  July  2012,
    such that Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE have no application  to  the
    current state of affairs (paragraph 32).  The Appellant had established
    a private life, but this was only evidence as from  2010  onwards  when
    his application was submitted (paragraph 33).

Grounds of Application

15. The grounds of appeal suggest that the judge had fundamentally erred in
    the appreciation of the facts before  her,  especially  given  that  Mr
    Mohammed Yesuf Miah first came to the UK in 1987 on a  settlement  visa
    to join his parents, such that he would have  been  in  a  position  to
    vouch for the presence of the Appellant in the UK  (see  paragraph  6).
    The grounds also state that the judge had mixed up the arrival date  of
    the auntie with that of the Appellant.  They  further  state  that  the
    judge had erred in imposing a requirement that witnesses had  to  vouch
    for a person's presence in the UK for every day of the week in order to
    comply with the requirements of continuous residence.

16. On 20th May 2014,  permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the judge's conclusions at paragraph  26  of
    the determination are difficult to follow.  This  is  where  the  judge
    evaluates the evidence of the  respective  witnesses  as  against  each
    other, drawing attention to the distant relative who came here in  2003
    and the nephew who said that he saw  the  Appellant  regularly  at  his
    auntie's house.  In giving permission, the Tribunal held that the judge
    may have been suggesting that the distant relative and the auntie  have
    given contradictory evidence because the  distant  relative  claims  to
    have seen the Appellant at the home of the Appellant's  aunt  and  that
    this was the same home that the aunt was living  in  when  the  distant
    relative arrived in 1987.  The judge  had  stated  that,  "I  place  no
    weight on the evidence at all for  the  simple  reason  that  the  aunt
    herself did not come to the  UK  until  1987".   However,  in  granting
    permission,  the  Tribunal  said  that  "that  does  not  disclose  any
    inconsistency in the evidence and if there was an inconsistency, it  is
    unclear what it was".

17. On 5th June 2014, a Rule 24 response  was  entered  by  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State to the effect that the  finding  of  inconsistencies
    was a matter for the judge.

Submissions

18. At the hearing before me on 5th September 2014, Mr Taj  Shah,  who  had
    appeared as a representative at the hearing in the  Tribunal  of  Judge
    Hawden-Beal, also appeared now and submitted that the recording of  the
    evidence  by  the  judge  was  erroneous.   He  referred  to  his   own
    handwritten notes of the hearing and asked me to compare these with the
    judge's Record of Proceedings.  I have  done  so.   In  this  case  the
    Record of Proceedings by the judge is comprehensive  and  detailed  and
    had been much assisted by this.  Subject to this, Mr Shah  relied  upon
    the Grounds of Appeal.  Mr Shah did make two further submissions before
    the Tribunal.

19. First, the judge had made factual errors with respect to  the  evidence
    at paragraph 23 of  the  determination.   The  Appellant's  nephew,  Mr
    Mohammed Yesuf Miah, had come to the UK in 1987 when  he  was  9  years
    old, and he did not say that he had seen the Appellant's aunt living at
    her address for ten to fifteen years.  It was not the  evidence  before
    the Tribunal that the Appellant's auntie had come to the UK in 1987.  I
    have checked the Record of Proceedings and this indeed  appears  to  be
    so.  Mr Shah submitted that the judge  had  assumed  that,  because  Mr
    Mohammed Yesuf Miah had arrived in 1987, his aunt had also  arrived  at
    that date as well.  This was not the evidence.

20. Second, the judge failed to make specific findings of fact in  relation
    to the other witnesses who gave evidence, such as the Appellant's  work
    colleague, Mr Tariq Mohammed Akhter, who attended to give evidence, and
    stated that he knew the Appellant  since  1999  in  the  UK.   Mr  Shah
    submitted that this would cover the Appellant's residence in the UK for
    thirteen years until the date of  the  enforcement  decision.   It  was
    irrelevant that he had an employment contract and  that  the  Appellant
    did not.  Finally, Mr Shah submitted that the findings at paragraph  26
    were difficult to follow that no weight could be placed on the evidence
    because the aunt herself did not come to the UK until 1987.

21. For his part, Mr Mills submitted that he did not  have  the  Record  of
    Proceedings in himself, but in any event, the main question was whether
    such errors that there were, were material errors.

22. Second, the judge had evaluated  the  evidence  perfectly  properly  at
    paragraph 27 of the determination and was right to conclude  that  "the
    witnesses ... had to concede that they did not know where the Appellant
    was when he was not in Birmingham and even if they did talk to  him  on
    the telephone they only had his word for where he actually was at  that
    given time."  None of the  witnesses  could  say  for  sure  where  the
    Appellant was for fourteen years.  There were also long periods when he
    was not working.

23. In reply, Mr Shah submitted that the auntie had already been in the  UK
    in 1984 when she came as a spouse (see paragraph 27) and  she  had  not
    said that there was  a  long  gap  between  seeing  the  Appellant  and
    speaking to him next on the telephone.  What she had said was  that  he
    was working away and that on his day  off  would  come  to  visit  her.
    There was no evidence that the Appellant had actually left the UK.

Error of Law

24. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I  should  set  aside  this  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

25. First, there is the evidence of Mohammed Yesuf  Miah,  the  Appellant's
    nephew, who came to the UK in 1987 and gave evidence that he  had  seen
    the Appellant "regularly at his  aunt's  house"  (paragraph  27).   The
    judge was wrong to discount this evidence.  The evidence was discounted
    because the judge wrongly stated that the auntie had also come  to  the
    UK only in 1987.

26. Second, the judge referred  to  the  other  witnesses,  without  making
    findings of credibility with respect to each one of them,  and  broadly
    concluded that, "they only saw him when he was not working or  when  he
    had a day off" (paragraph 27) thereby implying that it was necessary to
    have detailed day-to-day knowledge on a regular basis of the  Appellant
    for the purposes of the fourteen year long residence Rule.  This is not
    so.  This elevates the standard  far  higher  than  is  required.   The
    standard is on a balance of probabilities.

27. Third, the judge's analysis at paragraphs  28  and  29  shows  how  the
    standard is raised unjustifiably.  It is not the  case  (see  paragraph
    28) that if the Appellant has been here continuously  since  1994  that
    still does not mean that he would have the right to remain here.  It is
    true that the public interest must be taken into account,  but  barring
    any criminality or anything that renders a person  to  be  unworthy  of
    leave in this country, the long residence Rule operates  by  way  of  a
    "concession" to confer the benefit of residence in the absence of prior
    leave having been granted.   It  is  equally  wrong  to  say  that  the
    consideration of "compassionate circumstances" or  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant came here "deliberately to work and remain  in  the  UK  even
    though he knew perfectly well after March 1995 he had no  right  to  be
    here" (paragraph 29) is a relevant consideration.

28. The case law is clear.  In 2001 Sullivan J held that "the fourteen year
    concession is by definition applicable to those who have been guilty of
    some breach of immigration controls" (see Popatia and Chew  [2001]  Imm
    AR 46).  It is unfortunate  that  the  long  residence  Rule  is  often
    misapplied because of the breach of immigration controls.  Second, Lord
    Justice Hooper has cautioned against the  literal  application  of  the
    long residence Rule in terms that, "if applied too literally [it] would
    automatically exclude in the public interest from  the  long  residence
    Rule many who, absent other factors, are intended to have  the  benefit
    of the Rule and who have (I believe)  in  the  past  enjoyed  it"  (see
    Aissaoui v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 37 at paragraph 33).  What is  said  by
    the judge at paragraphs 27 to 29 goes beyond  this.   This  is  to  say
    nothing of the factual mistake made at paragraph 26.

Remaking the Decision

29. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before her, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am allowing this appeal for the reasons I have set out above.



30. First, the evidence of Mohammed Yesuf Miah, who  was  nine  years  old,
    when he came to the UK in 1987 was that he had seen the Appellant  come
    and go from his auntie's house.  It was wrong to discount this evidence
    on the basis that the auntie herself did not come to the UK until 1987.



31. Second, there was other evidence from other witnesses,  and  the  judge
    held that, "all of the witnesses are positive that  the  appellant  has
    not left the UK since he came here  in  1994"  (paragraph  27)  and  it
    should reasonably be assumed from this, given that this test  is  on  a
    balance of probabilities, that the Appellant remained in the UK for the
    duration of the time from when  he  arrived  to  when  he  applied  for
    indefinite leave to remain.  The Appellant was, after all,  working  at
    various places in Somerset, in Bristol, and elsewhere.  However, he was
    consistently keeping in touch with his auntie, and even visiting her on
    his days off, and this evidence is entirely credible and not improbable
    in the least.  It is a stretch of imagination  to  assume  that  during
    this time he would have returned to Bangladesh only to  re-enter  again
    and make contact with his auntie.

32. Accordingly, I am satisfied that  paragraph  276B(1)(b)  is  met.   The
    Appellant has produced payslips and his P60 for 1995.  It is  also  not
    entirely insignificant that his wage slips and P60 were submitted  with
    the original application, "but it now appears that these documents have
    been lost by the Respondent" (paragraph 25).  As  against  this,  there
    were witnesses who confirmed that they had  seen  him  working  at  the
    Rajput Indian Restaurant.

33. Since I found that the Appellant complies with the  Immigration  Rules,
    it is unnecessary for me to decide whether he satisfies the requirement
    of freestanding Article 8 jurisprudence.  It is incorrect to  say  that
    because the Appellant has established a private life this is  "only  by
    virtue of the length of time he has been in the UK" (paragraph 33), and
    that for this reason alone has to be discounted.

34. The Appellant's relatives and friends in this country, who attended  in
    their numbers to give evidence  on  his  behalf  is  testament  to  his
    private life rights in this country, not to say of the work that he has
    done, the wage slips he has received, and the P60.  It  is  unnecessary
    for me to decide the issue of Article 8, however, since  the  Appellant
    succeeds under the Immigration Rules.

Decision

35. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    allowed.

36. No anonymity order is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 11th September 2014

