
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/40120/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10th July 2014                               |On 15th July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           PINKY BABYEN-ON ARROYO


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss R Pettersen, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Hussain, Counsel, instructed on behalf of
Hussain  Immigration Law Limited


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Ince) who in a determination promulgated
    on 9th April 2014 allowed the Appellant's appeal against  the  decision
    of the Respondent to refuse leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  on
    Article 8 grounds outside the Immigration Rules.

 2. Whilst it is the appeal of the Secretary of  State,  for  the  sake  of
    convenience I will refer to the parties as they were before the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 3. The history of the proceedings is  as  follows.   The  Appellant  is  a
    national of the Philippines born on 17th February  1981.   It  is  said
    that in or about 1985, the Appellant's  mother,  Teresita  began  going
    abroad from the Philippines to work as a nurse leaving  the  Appellant,
    then aged 4, with the Appellant's father and his family.  At the age of
    13, in or about 1994, her mother separated from her father, taking  the
    Appellant with her.  The Appellant remained in the Philippines and  her
    mother worked abroad.  In 2004, the Appellant's mother arrived  in  the
    UK and began work as a nurse.  At  all  material  times  when  she  was
    abroad, the Appellant's mother sent money back to the  Philippines  for
    her support  and  upkeep  and  would  return  to  the  Philippines  for
    holidays.  She also paid  for  the  Appellant  to  attend  a  practical
    nursing course in the Philippines.

 4. In June 2009 the Appellant's  mother  was  given  indefinite  leave  to
    remain in the UK.

 5. On 12th July 2009 the Appellant arrived in the UK to begin studying  as
    a nurse.  She had made three previous applications to come to the UK to
    study but had been refused.  Her educational history is as follows; she
    began attending Precision College doing a BTEC  in  Health  and  Social
    Care Level 2.  It appears the college closed without  warning  and  she
    transferred to another college.  She was given further leave to  remain
    on 8th September 2011 until 6th January 2004 to enable her to  continue
    her studies.

 6. Since her arrival in 2009, the Appellant lived with her mother and  the
    pair became very close catching up on the years lost  when  her  mother
    had been working overseas.  Her mother also supported her  financially.
    It appears that the Appellant stopped attending her course in or  about
    November 2011 but remained living with her  mother  in  Bradford.   She
    returned to the Philippines for a holiday, returning to  the  UK  on  a
    date that is not set out in the evidence and again remained living with
    her mother.  In or about September 2012 she went to London to stay with
    her aunt and lived rent-free in church accommodation and kept in  touch
    with her mother.

 7. In October 2012 she met her partner, Mr  Randall,  on  Facebook.   They
    established a relationship and on 12th January 2013  she  travelled  to
    his home to meet him and his family.  He has a disability following  an
    assault in 2012.  It is said the relationship blossomed  and  in  March
    2013 they began to live together at his home where he  lives  with  his
    daughters and grandson.  The Appellant is supported financially by  her
    mother; Mr Randall is not employed.

 8. The Appellant's leave to remain was set to be curtailed  as  from  14th
    July 2013.  The Appellant lodged an application for  further  leave  to
    remain prior to her leave ending on the  grounds  of  her  relationship
    with Mr Randall and on the grounds of her private life.

 9. The Respondent  refused  the  application  in  a  decision  dated  18th
    September 2013 stating that the Appellant did not meet the requirements
    of Appendix FM or the Article 8 requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE  by
    reason of her length of residence.  The refusal letter went on to state
    that even if the Appellant could satisfy the eligibility criteria,  she
    could not meet the additional requirements of EX1(a) as  the  partner's
    children were over the age of 18 and it was further considered that she
    could not benefit  from  paragraph  EX(b)  relating  to  insurmountable
    obstacles.  Reasons were given in the refusal  letter  as  to  why  she
    could not meet the paragraphs 276ADE dealing with private life.

10. The Appellant appealed that decision and the  matter  came  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Ince)  on  20th  February  2014.   In  his
    determination promulgated on 9th April, having heard  the  evidence  of
    both the Appellant and her partner and  having  considered  documentary
    evidence within the bundle and from the Appellant's mother,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules and also under Article 8
    of the ECHR (outside the Rules).

11. This application comes before the Upper Tribunal by reason of the grant
    of permission given on 14th May 2014 by the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge
    Ford) on application by the Secretary of State.  There are two  grounds
    set out in the application.  The first ground was that the judge made a
    material misdirection in law on the basis that he  allowed  the  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules on the basis that  she  could  satisfy  the
    requirements and in particular EX1.  It is  submitted  in  the  grounds
    that she could not meet the requirements as a partner and that was made
    plain at GEN1.2 and that the  judge  took  into  account  a  period  of
    cohabitation that was too short to allow the Appellant to  qualify  for
    leave to remain as a partner and then  proceeded  to  consider  EX1  in
    reliance of that finding.  In the alternative, it was submitted that by
    considering EX1 under the Immigration Rules as a  standalone  provision
    was also a material misdirection.   The  second  ground  was  that  the
    judge, in allowing the appeal outside of the Rules, misapplied the case
    of Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00640
    (IAC).

12.  At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal Miss  Pettersen  appeared  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State and Mr Hussain, who  appeared  at  the
    court below, on behalf of the Appellant.  Miss  Pettersen  relied  upon
    the grounds as drafted  and  submitted  that  the  judge  proceeded  to
    consider the Immigration Rules even though it was  apparently  conceded
    at [2] that she could not so meet the Rules.  Thus the judge could  not
    have concluded that the Appellant met the Rules.  Furthermore the judge
    allowed the case by misapplying the decision of Gulshan and that he had
    to find that there were "exceptional  circumstances"  but  the  factors
    identified were not so compelling to warrant a grant of  leave  outside
    of the Rules.

13. Mr Hussain, conceded from the  outset  that  the  case  was  not  being
    advanced on the basis of her being able to meet the  Immigration  Rules
    as set out at [2] and to that extent  the  grounds  at  (1)  was  right
    however, he submitted that the judge did  not  only  allow  the  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules but  also  under  Article  8  "outside  the
    Rules" and that  was  plain  from  reading  the  determination  and  in
    particular by having consideration to paragraph [54].  In this  context
    he submitted that the judge properly considered the law in relation  to
    whether there were "arguably good grounds" for  going  outside  of  the
    Rules and thereby did  not  misapply  Gulshan  and  gave  adequate  and
    sustainable reasons as  to  why  he  found  there  were  insurmountable
    obstacles for the couple to enjoy their family life in the  Philippines
    together.  It is plain from [61] that the judge in his  findings  under
    Article 8 also took into  account  the  finding  that  he  made  as  to
    insurmountable  obstacles  earlier  in  the  determination   and   that
    therefore when read together there were sufficient reasons given by the
    judge to support his decision.  He reminded the Tribunal of  the  Court
    of Appeal decision in Adedoyin [2012] EWCA Civ 939 at paragraph 30 when
    it is stated that there was a generous ambit  of  discretion  and  that
    there must be evidence capable of justifying the conclusion.   In  this
    case he said there was evidence to justify the conclusions  reached  by
    the judge and  the  grounds  were  simply  a  disagreement  with  those
    findings.

14. Miss Pettersen by way of reply submitted that he  had  not  dealt  with
    what the exceptional circumstances were and that was a misdirection.

15. As to the re-making of the decision, if an error of law was found, Miss
    Pettersen invited the court to satisfy the  decision  and  reverse  the
    decision made by the judge.  Mr Hussain submitted that there  would  be
    other evidence to take into  account  and  in  particular  most  recent
    evidence and a significant development relating to the grandchild of Mr
    Randall who lived with the parties who had recently been diagnosed with
    cancer.

16. I reserved my determination.

17. There are two grounds before the Tribunal advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State.  In respect of the first  ground  it  is  submitted
    that the judge made a  material  misdirection  in  law  in  regards  to
    Appendix FM and EX1.  It has been properly conceded by  Mr  Hussain  on
    behalf of the Appellant that the judge,  insofar  as  he  purported  to
    allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules at paragraph [53]  and  in
    the decision itself, that was an  error  of  law.   It  is  plain  from
    reading the determination as a whole and by considering the Immigration
    Rules that it was properly conceded before him that the Appellant could
    not succeed under the provisions of Appendix FM  (see  [2]  where  that
    concession was properly  made).   As  the  grounds  are  set  out,  the
    Appellant on the factual basis of this  claim  could  not  meet  GEN1.2
    where the definition of a partner is set out; the Appellant, whilst the
    judge found they were in a genuine and subsisting relationship had  not
    cohabited for a period of two years and therefore did not  fall  within
    the definition of GEN1.2 as a partner and therefore EX1  could  not  be
    considered  in  isolation.   As  the  grounds  submit,  EX1  is  not  a
    standalone provision but supplements the provisions of  the  Rules  and
    thus does not form an independent basis for an appeal to succeed.  Thus
    in those circumstances it is unarguable that the decision of the  judge
    that the Appellant could meet the Immigration Rules  was  an  error  of
    law.

18. However the issue that I have to  decide  is  whether  or  not  it  was
    material or to put it another way, whether that error should result  in
    the determination being set aside in the  light  of  the  judge  having
    found in the alternative that the appeal should be allowed on Article 8
    grounds  (outside  of  the  Rules).   It  is  plain  from  reading  the
    determination that whilst the judge was in error  allowing  the  appeal
    under the Rules, that he properly had regard to the decision in Gulshan
    (as cited) and at [35] and [36] properly set out the analysis  that  he
    should  adopt,  namely  that  he  should  first  of  all  consider  the
    Appellant's position "under the Immigration Rules" and then at [36] set
    out the decision of Gulshan and also at [38], [39] and [40].  The judge
    had regard in those paragraphs not only to the decision of Gulshan  but
    the guidance applied by the Secretary of State when dealing with  those
    cases that do not meet the  Rules.   In  particular  at  [38]  he  made
    reference to "insurmountable obstacles" and how they were dealt with at
    paragraph 3.2.7C of the  guidance  and  also  at  [39]  and  [40]  gave
    consideration to the  issue  of  "exceptional  circumstances"  and  the
    factors set out in the guidance.  In this respect the judge  considered
    the evidence that he had heard from all the parties.  It  is  right  to
    observe at this stage that at [31] the  judge  reached  the  conclusion
    that the Appellant and the witnesses before him had told him the  truth
    about their circumstances,  he  found  their  accounts  were  generally
    consistent and were corroborated by what he described as  "unchallenged
    documentation" and thus he saw no reason not to accept the evidence set
    out in the chronology in the determination.

19. It is further plain from the determination that having  considered  the
    evidence before him from all the parties he reached the conclusion that
    there were insurmountable obstacles to family life  continuing  in  the
    Philippines with Mr Randall and the Appellant.   Whilst  he  considered
    that in the context of the Immigration Rules, it is plain from  reading
    [61] that his consideration of insurmountable obstacles summarised what
    he described as "the relevant factors in this case" and thus whilst his
    determination lacked some clarity, it is plain that what the judge  was
    seeking to say was that when considering whether  there  were  arguably
    good grounds for granting leave to  remain  outside  of  the  Rules  he
    considered that  those  circumstances  were  compelling  and  therefore
    demonstrated that the decision to remove was disproportionate.

20. Whilst it is submitted  that  the  reasons  given  by  the  judge  were
    insufficient, I consider that that submission is simply a  disagreement
    with the reasons amply given by the judge as  to  why  he  reached  the
    conclusion on the evidence before him that  there  were  insurmountable
    obstacles to the parties establishing their family life outside of  the
    United Kingdom.  In this context it  cannot  be  said  that  the  judge
    failed to properly consider or  apply  the  concept  of  insurmountable
    obstacles.  At [41] he reminded himself of the guidance in this respect
    set out at [38] and at [42] he set out the test that he  should  apply.
    It cannot be said that the test he applied was in  any  way  improperly
    carried out or not in accordance with the guidance.  He then  proceeded
    to carry out a balance between the factors which he thought would  show
    that it was "practically possible" for the Appellant and Mr Randall  to
    go to the Philippines but at [44], [45], [46] and [47] put the  balance
    on the other side of the scales reaching the conclusion as a  whole  at
    [47] and [48] that those factors cumulatively would present a very high
    degree of hardship to Mr Randall and to his own  family  such  that  it
    amounted to an  "insurmountable  obstacle".   Those  factors  concerned
    issues of where they would reside, and  income;  the  Appellant  having
    never worked in her home country  which  she  believed  would  be  more
    difficult for her to obtain given  her  age  and  her  past  employment
    record and also in respect of Mr Randall who  had  a  disability  would
    also not be able to work.  There was a question as to where they  would
    live, there was no family home for them to go  to  [45]  but  also  the
    judge took into account the effect of Mr Randall leaving the  UK  as  a
    British citizen and upon other members of the family with whom  he  was
    concerned.  In this case the judge found that he was particularly close
    to his daughters and grandchild and not only would there be  disruption
    to him but also to their family life with him and  the  Appellant.   In
    particular, it was noted by the judge that should he leave  his  house,
    this would also affect his daughter  who  was  pregnant  who  would  in
    effect be homeless.

21.   In those circumstances, it has not been demonstrated that  there  was
    any misdirection in law as to the interpretation to  be  given  to  the
    term "insurmountable obstacles" and that it was open for  him  to  find
    the practical difficulties  with  the  Sponsor  relocating  as  he  had
    described  in  his  determination  as   amounting   to   insurmountable
    obstacles.  In his analysis  further  in  the  determination,  he  gave
    proper consideration to the public interest  but  having  balanced  the
    factors together he reached the conclusion  that  the  removal  of  the
    Appellant would not be proportionate and therefore allowed  the  appeal
    under Article 8.  Therefore any error that he made in relation  to  his
    conclusion that the Appellant could meet the Immigration Rules does not
    affect the outcome of the decision as it was open to the judge to allow
    the appeal for the reasons  that  he  properly  gave  under  Article  8
    outside of the Rules applying the requisite jurisprudence.

22. In those circumstances, I find no  error  of  law  in  respect  of  the
    judge's decision relating to Article 8 of the ECHR.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law, I do not set aside the  decision;  the
decision shall stand.






Signed                              Date 13/7/2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds


