
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40840/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 11th July 2014                               |On 21st July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                           mr angelo kwadwo adjei
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Vokes (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    A W Khan, promulgated on  23rd  April  2014,  following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham  on  8th  April  2014.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of Angelo Kwadwo  Adjei.   The  Appellant  applied
    for, and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  and
    thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Ghana, who was born on 14th  June
    1976.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent Secretary  of
    State dated 27th September 2013 refusing him leave to remain in the  UK
    on the basis of his family and private life rights.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he has been  married  now  to  a  British
    citizen, Kristen Caruana, and has two children from this  relationship,
    the first child being born on 20th September 2012 and the second  child
    born on 3rd February 2014, but there are also children from a  previous
    relationship who are living with the Appellant and his wife, such  that
    his removal would damage his right to exercise his  private  life  with
    his family members.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge's findings are that on the Appellant's behalf it was accepted
    that he  could  not  meet  the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules (paragraph 5) and  that  as  far  as  Article  8  was
    concerned, he could not succeed in any event, because, although he  has
    a child from another relationship who was born on 3rd October 2006, "he
    is not in contact with that child and therefore there is no  meaningful
    family life that has been established".  Of his own children, they  are
    young, the oldest being only 2 years of age (paragraph 15).

 5. The judge went on to consider the position under Article 8 and repeated
    the fact that the children were under 2 years of age and  therefore  no
    argument could be made that their welfare would be  prejudiced  by  the
    Appellant having to go back to Ghana (paragraph 17).

 6. The judge held that  the  Appellant  "has  not  supplied  any  credible
    evidence" in relation to the matters  before  the  Tribunal  (paragraph
    18).

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state broadly  that  the  judge  had  simply
    failed to recount the facts and the evidence accurately and that  there
    were a number of inaccuracies in what had been decided.

 8. On 22nd May 2014, permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me on 11th July  2014,  Mr  Vokes,  appearing  as
    Counsel on behalf of the Appellant, submitted that the  judge  in  this
    case had made errors both in respect of the facts  before  him  and  in
    respect of the applicable  law.   First,  as  far  as  the  facts  were
    concerned, there were five children of the family.

10. Three of these children were those of  the  Appellant's  wife,  Kristen
    Caruana.  They were aged 13, 9, and 5.  They all lived together in  the
    same household.  For the judge to accept that the children were under 2
    years of age and that therefore, there would be no  adverse  impact  on
    the children by his removal, was simply wrong if he had left out of the
    equation the existence of these other three children.  Yet,  the  judge
    had repeatedly referred to only two children (see paragraph 17).

11. Second, this was particularly material given that the  judge  had  also
    stated (at paragraph 17) that the position may well have been different
    with respect  to  the  Appellant,  if  his  children  had  been  older.
    Plainly, however, they were.  That being the case, what the  judge  had
    to say was a material error.  Thirdly, paragraph 5 of the determination
    was a matter of concern.

12. This is because the judge failed to consider the Immigration  Rules  on
    the basis that the Appellant could not avail himself of the Rules given
    that he had arrived as a visitor and then  overstayed.   The  fact  was
    that  Appendix  FM  was  specifically  geared  for  the  condition   of
    overstayers.

13. For his part, Mr Mills agreed.  He submitted that the judge referred to
    E-LTRP.2.1.  What he should have  done  was  to  have  referred  to  E-
    LTRP.3.1 which deals with  the  immigration  requirements.   The  judge
    recorded the fact that the Appellant entered  as  a  visitor  and  then
    overstayed, but Appendix FM specifically deals with this situation.

14. All of this was important because the judge could only then proceed  to
    deal with Article 8 ECHR as a  freestanding  issue,  if  he  had  first
    determined the legal position under the Immigration  Rules  beforehand.
    There was a two stage process.  The second stage could only be  tackled
    if the first stage had  properly  been  gone  through.   This  had  not
    happened.

15. Finally, the application had been made under the Immigration Rules  and
    the decision had been made under the Immigration Rules, and this  being
    so,  even  if  there  had  been  a  concession   by   the   Appellant's
    representative, this did not absolve the judge from  dealing  with  the
    position under the Immigration Rules in an accurate manner.

16. Mr Mills submitted that the proper course of action was for this matter
    to be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal.

Error of Law

17. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside this decision.  My reasons are quite
    simply that there is a consensus between what Mr Vokes submits and what
    Mr Mills submits, on behalf of the Respondent Secretary of State.

18. There is an error both of fact and of law in this  determination.   The
    factual errors are that the  full  family  unit,  consisting  of  three
    children from a previous relationship, together with the  two  youngest
    children now, have not been considered.  The legal error  is  that  the
    position under the Immigration Rules, and specifically under E-LTRP.3.1
    has not been considered.

19. Yet the application was made  on  this  basis.   The  decision  by  the
    Secretary of State was also on this basis.  It was therefore  necessary
    for the judge to consider the position under the Immigration Rules.

Decision

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the
    decision of the original judge.  This matter is remitted  back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal, to be heard by a judge other than Judge A W  Khan,
    under Practice Statement 7.2, so that the Appellant has the benefit  of
    a First-tier Tribunal hearing again.

21. No anonymity order is made.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 21st July 2014


