
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number IA/40992/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons promulgated       |
|On 2 October 2014                    |On 28 May 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis


                                   Between

                          Virika Tinaitamana Maloca
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr I Kumi of Counsel instructed by A K Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
         Morris promulgated on 23 May 2014 dismissing the Appellant's appeal
         against the decision of the Respondent dated 19 September  2013  to
         curtail leave to remain and to remove her from the UK  pursuant  to
         section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.







    Background

      2. The Appellant is a national of Fiji born on 1  February  1984.  The
         Appellant's immigration history is set out in the second  paragraph
         of the Respondent's 'reasons for refusal' letter  (RFRL)  dated  19
         September 2013: unfortunately this is not a well drafted  paragraph
         and does not disclose the history with any great clarity.  Be  that
         as it may, what is particularly germane, and  clear,  is  that  the
         Appellant was last granted leave to remain on 7 March 2013 until  7
         March 2017 as the dependent  partner  of  a  person  in  the  Armed
         Forces. In this context the Appellant was the spouse  of  Mr  Poasa
         Maloca (date of birth 9 January  1980),  who  was  serving  in  the
         British Army. (See further below  in  respect  of  the  Appellant's
         immigration status.)

      3. On 4 September 2013 the Appellant applied for indefinite  leave  to
         remain on the basis of being a victim of  domestic  violence,  such
         violence having caused the marital relationship to breakdown.

      4. The Respondent refused the Appellant's application for reasons  set
         out in the RFRL. The Respondent accepted that the Appellant  was  a
         victim of domestic violence and that this had been the cause of the
         marital breakdown. However the Respondent was  not  satisfied  that
         the Appellant met the requirements of section DVILR.1.1 of Appendix
         FM, essentially because she had not been the partner of  a  British
         citizen or  a  person  settled  in  the  UK.  The  Respondent  also
         considered the Appellant's  Article  8  rights  with  reference  to
         paragraph 276ADE and Appendix FM, determined that the Appellant did
         not satisfy any of the Rules,  and  also  considered  that  nothing
         exceptional had been shown in her case to justify allowing  her  to
         remain notwithstanding that she did not meet  the  requirements  of
         the Rules.

      5.  In  the  circumstances  a  decision  was  taken  to  curtail   the
         Appellant's leave, and a decision was  also  taken  to  remove  the
         Appellant pursuant to section 47 of the 2006 Act.

      6. The Appellant appealed to the IAC. At the appeal hearing before the
         First-tier  Tribunal,  amongst  other   things,   the   Appellant's
         representative  placed  reliance  upon  policy  applicable  to  the
         partners of those serving in the British armed forces.

      7. The First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal  for
         reasons set out in her determination.

      8. The Appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  which  was  initially
         refused on 12 June 2014 by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Heynes,  but
         granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt on 18 August 2014.

      9. The Respondent has filed a Rule 24 response dated  29  August  2014
         resisting the Appellant's challenge to the decision of  the  First-
         tier Tribunal.




    Consideration

     10. As the Respondent noted in the RFRL the Appellant did  not  qualify
         under the provisions of the Immigration Rules in respect of victims
         of domestic violence because she had  not  been  granted  leave  to
         enter or remain under Part 8 of the Rules. The Appellant's  partner
         was not a British citizen or a person settled in the UK: he  was  a
         foreign national member of the British Army, and as such was exempt
         from  immigration  control  pursuant  to  section   8(4)   of   the
         Immigration Act 1971. (The Respondent's representative  before  the
         First-tier Tribunal indicated as much - see  paragraph  7.)  Whilst
         the  Appellant  was  not  exempt  from  immigration  control,   her
         particular position was not covered by the  Immigration  Rules  and
         accordingly her previous leaves as a partner to  enter/remain  were
         granted outside the Rules.

     11. It was argued before the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  although  the
         Appellant's case was not covered by the Rules, it  was  covered  by
         published policy. A print-out  of  web  pages  at  www.gov.uk  were
         submitted in support. Those pages are on file and I have had regard
         to them. The Judge refers to these pages from paragraph 16  of  her
         decision.

     12. It seems to me plain beyond any doubt that  the  webpages  produced
         before the First-tier Tribunal  indicate  that  a  person  who  has
         "experienced domestic violence as the partner of a... member of  HM
         Forces who has served for at least 4 years" "can apply"  to  settle
         in the UK. His/her eligibility will depend upon his/her "last  visa
         (or permission) [having been] as the partner of... a member  of  HM
         Forces who served for at least 4 years",  and  the  applicant  must
         prove that the "relationship was genuine and ongoing  when...  last
         given permission as a partner", and that he/she was "the victim  of
         domestic violence from [his/her] partner... and this is  why  [the]
         relationship has broken down before the end of [his/her] visa".  In
         my judgement it really is impossible to read the  document  in  any
         other way. The document is clear  evidence  of  a  policy  existing
         outside the Immigration Rules in respect of the partners of members
         of HM forces are the victims of domestic violence.

     13. I pause to note that whilst it is not for the Tribunal  to  make  a
         substantive decision by applying policy outside the Rules,  on  the
         face of it the Appellant would appear to have been present  in  the
         UK as they partner of a person who has served at least 4  years  in
         the Forces; furthermore the Respondent acknowledges  that  she  was
         the victim of domestic  violence  and  that  her  relationship  had
         broken down before the end of her  visa  because  of  the  domestic
         violence.

     14. Be that as it may, the Judge erred  in  failing  to  recognise  the
         effect  of  the  www.gov.uk  document.  The  Judge's  reasoning  at
         paragraph 17 to 20 in this  context  is  unsustainable,  and  plain
         wrong.

     15. As much is acknowledged before me by Ms Isherwood, on behalf of the
         Respondent, who accepts that there had  indeed  been  a  policy  in
         respect of the partners of non-settled members of the armed forces.
         In fact it was once the proposal of the Respondent  in  a  document
         dated July 2013 headed 'Family members of HM Forces.  Statement  of
         Intent: changes to the Immigration Rules from December 2013',  (see
         in particular under the section  headed  'What  if  a  relationship
         breaks down?'), to incorporate such changes  into  the  Immigration
         Rules - although in the event it is not  apparent  that  there  has
         been such an amendment to the Rules.

     16. Further, Ms Isherwood does not dispute that on the face of the RFRL
         the Respondent's decision-maker had no regard to  the  Respondent's
         own policy.

     17. It follows that the Respondent's decision  was  not  in  accordance
         with the law, and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
         misconstruing the evidence before it in respect of the existence of
         a relevant policy was a material error of law. Such an error  meant
         that the First-tier Tribunal not only failed to recognise that  the
         Respondent's decision was not in accordance with the law, but  also
         meant that the Judge's  approach  to  the  Appellant's  case  under
         Article 8 of the ECHR was also in error. This is because the  Judge
         failed to recognise that the  Appellant's  circumstances  were  not
         adequately covered by the Rules (her leave to  enter/remain  having
         been granted outside the Rules, and such a circumstance  inevitably
         preventing  her  from  qualifying  under  the   domestic   violence
         provisions of Appendix FM), and her circumstances  otherwise  being
         the subject of  policy  considerations  rather  than  consideration
         under the Rules

     18. In all such circumstances the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
         is set aside.

     19. It was common ground between the parties that given  the  basis  of
         the finding of error of law the inevitable consequence was that the
         decision in the appeal was to be remade by allowing the  appeal  on
         the ground that the Respondent's decision  was  not  in  accordance
         with the law, and  that  accordingly  the  Appellant's  application
         required to be reconsidered by the Respondent  in  accordance  with
         the law.

    Notice of Decision

     20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error
         of law and is set aside.

     21. I re-make the decision in the appeal. The Respondent's decision was
         not in accordance with  the  law  and  accordingly  the  appeal  is
         allowed to the extent that the case is remitted to  the  Respondent
         to make a decision in accordance with the law.






    Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis 26 May 2015
