
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40994/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 11 November 2014 and on 7 January          |on 18 February 2015          |
|and 17 February 2015                          |                             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                               MOHAMMAD FAYAZ
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Ghafar, Ghafar & Co., Solicitors (on 7 January
                    2015 and 17 February 2015)
For the Respondent:    Mrs O'Brien, Senior Presenting Officer, Home Office


This case came before the President,  Mr  Justice  McCloskey,  on  2  and  3
September 2014, after which the following was issued in his name:

                            RULING AND DIRECTIONS

 1. By a decision dated 30 August 2013, the Secretary of State for the Home
    Department (the "Secretary of state"), the Respondent  herein,  refused
    the Appellant's fresh human rights claim.  It was not  certified  under
    paragraph  353  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The  Appellant  appealed
    unsuccessfully to the First-tier Tribunal (the "FtT").   Permission  to
    appeal to this Tribunal was granted on the basis that the FtT may  have
    erred in  law  in  its  application  of  section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2009 to the Appellant's grandchildren.


 2. The letter of decision refers  to  grandchildren  living  in  Pakistan,
    something which was duly confirmed by the evidence of  the  Appellant's
    son (identified above) to  the  FtT:  see  [13].   This  evidence  also
    asserts the existence of grandchildren in the United Kingdom.  In  [20]
    of the AIT determination promulgated on 06 March 2014, the Appellant is
    recorded  as  having  testified  that  he  had  "between   8   and   10
    grandchildren" in Pakistan.  It would appear that there is a bundle  of
    evidence (to which I do not have access at present).  This, presumably,
    contains some detail about the Appellant's grandchildren in the  United
    Kingdom.

 3. The Appellant did not attend  on  the  scheduled  day  of  hearing,  02
    September 2014.  The hearing was adjourned to enable his son,  Mr  Ali,
    to  obtain  written  evidence  corroborating  his  assertion  that  the
    Appellant has been an in-patient for the last three months.  I relisted
    the appeal this morning.  A letter/report, signed by Dr Monteith of the
    Victoria Infirmary, Glasgow, confirms that the Appellant  was  admitted
    on 29 May 2014 and continues to be admitted, albeit his discharge  from
    hospital is in prospect. I was also able to  ascertain  that  Mr  Ali's
    assertion that the solicitor who formerly represented the Appellant  is
    no longer available on account of disciplinary  reasons  is  apparently
    correct.

 4. In these circumstances, I adjourned the hearing of the appeal.   I  did
    so with some reluctance, having regard to the protracted history, which
    now spans almost ten years. I directed that Mr Ali take immediate steps
    to secure alternative legal representation for the Appellant.

 5. The appeal will be relisted for hearing on the first available date.

                        FURTHER RULING AND DIRECTIONS

 6. The case was listed before me  on  11  November  2014.   There  was  no
    appearance by or for the appellant.  Nothing had been heard  from  him,
    his son or any representative in the meantime.   I  observed  that  the
    foregoing ruling and directions and the notice of hearing had been sent
    to the last address provided by the appellant,  which  was  the  office
    address of  his  previous  representatives.   The  respondent's  Senior
    Presenting Officer, Mrs O'Brien, provided the home  address  which  the
    appellant last made known to the respondent.  This corresponds with his
    address shown on documents produced  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   I
    adjourned the hearing again.  The ruling and directions were  re-issued
    to that home address along with notice of  the  hearing  on  7  January
    2015.

 7. On 7 January 2015 Ms Ghafar of Ghafar & Co,  Solicitors,  appeared  for
    the appellant.  She had received instructions through  the  appellant's
    son on 24 December 2014.  She had been provided with only a few  papers
    (which included the ruling and directions above).   The  appellant  has
    been  discharged  from  hospital.   She  sought  time   to   take   his
    instructions directly, to obtain further papers, and to prepare  fully.
    It seemed  unlikely  that  a  file  could  be  obtained  from  previous
    representatives.  She had contacted the respondent's office  after  the
    holiday period, but not in time for copy papers to be made available to
    her.  A short further adjournment would suffice.

 8. Mrs O'Brien observed that while no criticism was made of Ms Ghafar,  it
    had been made clear  on  2  and  3  September  2014  that  any  further
    representation was to be arranged  without  delay.   The  circumstances
    suggested that the appellant and his family were only too  willing  for
    further time to go by.  The underlying facts were not complicated.  The
    first  question  as  to  error  of  law  was  not  the  whereabouts  of
    grandchildren and other family members, but what  evidence  was  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. I granted a further adjournment, and issued  this  further  ruling  and
    directions.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

10. On 17 February 2015 the appellant was again represented  by  Ms  Ghafar
    and the respondent by Mrs O'Brien.

11. Ms Ghafar submitted evidence that the appellant has seven children  and
    twelve grandchildren in the United Kingdom.  Four of his sons and seven
    grandchildren live in Glasgow.  He lives with one of his sons and  four
    of the grandchildren.  Two daughters and  five  grandchildren  live  in
    Walsall.  One son and five grandchildren live in Pakistan.

12. Referring to the determination by Judge Clough, Ms Ghafar  pointed  out
    that the appellant is recorded at paragraph 5 as  saying  that  he  had
    fifteen grandchildren in the UK, which reflects an error either by  the
    appellant or by the judge.  From paragraph 17 it is  evident  that  the
    appellant lives with four of the grandchildren.  It can be  worked  out
    from paragraph 24 that five of the grandchildren live in Pakistan.   Ms
    Ghafar accepted that there is no  principle  that  Article  8  entitles
    someone to live in the UK simply because the greater part of his family
    is here.  However, she said that the evidence  disclosed  a  number  of
    children and there should have  been  further  consideration  of  their
    circumstances and best interests.  There is plainly a  very  close  tie
    with the grandchildren in this country particularly the ones with  whom
    the appellant lives.  It was to be expected that his removal would have
    an undesirable effect on those children.  Ms Ghafar accepted that there
    did not appear to have been any  substantial  evidence  or  submissions
    about that aspect of the case.  She submitted that due to a rift in the
    family the  appellant  did  not  have  the  same  connection  with  the
    grandchildren in Pakistan, whom he has never met, and that there was an
    error such that the case required a fresh hearing.

13. Mrs O'Brien submitted that although the family  background  emerged  in
    evidence, no case based on the best interests of grandchildren  in  the
    UK figured in the appellant's Article 8 grounds or submissions  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  His case had centred  on  health  issues  and  on
    matters more of a private life rather than a family life nature.    The
    judge had made an adverse credibility finding about the alleged  family
    rift.

14. I indicated that no error of law was disclosed and the determination of
    the First-tier Tribunal would stand.

15. The appellant has made his extensive family in the  UK,  including  his
    grandchildren, part of his case over a long  period  including  earlier
    appeals.  However, no meaningful case based on any potentially  adverse
    effects of his removal on his grandchildren was put to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The fact that he has grandchildren here  was  no  more  than
    part of the background, noted by the judge.

16. The judge reached adverse conclusions  on  credibility,  in  particular
    regarding the alleged  rift  with  family  members  in  Pakistan.   The
    grounds directed against those findings did  not  attract  a  grant  of
    permission from the First-tier Tribunal, and the appellant did not seek
    to advance them further with  the  Upper  Tribunal.   On  the  evidence
    before her and her legitimate conclusions from it there  was  no  issue
    about the best interests of any  children  which  could  have  had  any
    bearing on the outcome.

17. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

18. No anonymity order has been requested or made.



         [pic]


         Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
         17 February 2015

