
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA 40355 2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17 April 2014                              |On 24 June 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             samuel frimpong fei
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Aslam, of Counsel instructed by Makanda Bart &
Co.
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of a citizen of  Ghana  against
    the decision of the Secretary of State refusing him  a  certificate  of
    residence as the husband of an  EEA  national.   In  simple  terms  the
    respondent, herein after "the claimant", relied on his  proxy  marriage
    to a woman who is a  Dutch  citizen  who,  like  the  claimant,  is  of
    Ghanaian origin. Evidence was produced that  there  had  been  a  proxy
    marriage in Ghana in February 2012.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Russell applied himself very carefully to the
    law about proxy marriages as he understood it and  concluded,  probably
    rightly,  that  proxy  marriages  are  recognised  in  Ghana  and  that
    previously under English law marriages by EEA nationals  by  proxy  had
    been thought to satisfy the Rules.   It is a  great  pity  that  nobody
    bothered to tell the judge about  the  decision  of  this  Tribunal  in
    Kareem (proxy marriages: EU law) [2014] UKUT 00024 (IAC).  It is always
    easy to be critical after the event and I  suspect  we  have  all  been
    caught but the hearing was on 26 February 2014 and the determination in
    Kareem was promulgated more than a month before on 16 January 2014.  It
    is  particularly  disappointing  to  see  that  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal both parties were represented by Counsel  who  ought  to  have
    known about Kareem and to have drawn it to the attention of the judge.

 3. The decision Kareem is intended to deal with  precisely  the  situation
    here.  It was a decision  of  what  might  be  thought  a  particularly
    experienced division of this Tribunal. It was presided over by the Vice-
    President, Mr Ockelton. He sat with Upper Tribunal Judge McKee who  has
    decided other important cases on proxy marriages and EU  law  and  with
    Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McCarthy  who,  if  I  may  say  so,  is
    especially respected for his understanding of EU law.

 4. Mr Aslam submitted that the decision is equivocal but I do  not  agree.
    I find that the decision is extremely clear. It is that before  an  EEA
    national's partner can be admitted to the United Kingdom as  a  husband
    under the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006,  his
    relationship with he wife must be recognised as a marriage in  the  EEA
    national's own state.

 5. This may be a departure from what the law was thought to be but  it  is
    explained  in  Kareem.  The  essential  point  is  that  the  Directive
    2004/38/EC is intended to ensure the free movement  of  EEA  nationals.
    Thus an EEA national who moves to another EEA state can  be  joined  by
    her husband provided that her husband is recognised as such in her home
    state.  It is  not  intended  to  be  a  mechanism  for  EEA  nationals
    disgruntled by the marriage laws of their own country to  subvert  them
    by removing to another EEA state.

 6. Mr Aslam argued that if Kareem is not ambiguous then it is  wrong.   He
    is entitled to say that and I record his submission in case he wants to
    take matters further but I do not  agree  with  him.  The  decision  in
    Kareem makes it plain that earlier jurisprudence  had  not  tested  the
    assumption that all that was necessary  was  to  consider  whether  the
    marriage was recognised in the country in which the application  for  a
    residence permit was made and Kareem explains why, in the  judgment  of
    the Tribunal, that was not the relevant test.

 7. It follows that I am against Mr Aslam's  submissions  both  as  to  the
    understanding of Kareem and its correctness.

 8. I intend to follow Kareem  which  is  the  published  decision  of  the
    Tribunal and I rule that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  applied  the
    wrong test. Further, if he had applied the right test,  he  would  have
    dismissed the appeal insofar  as  it  related  to  the  claimant  being
    married for the purpose of the regulations. There was no evidence  that
    the proxy marriage on which the claimant relied was recognised  in  the
    Netherlands.

 9. Matters do not end there.

10. It is plain from the refusal letter that the Secretary of  State  asked
    herself if the claimant was  not  married  if  she  was  in  a  durable
    relationship under Regulation 8(1). The Secretary  of  State  concluded
    that the claimant was not but  this  decision  was  not  based  on  any
    dishonesty or  proved  deficiency  by  the  parties  to  the  purported
    marriage. Rather the evidence was just not good  enough  to  support  a
    different conclusion.

11. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not expressly decide  if  the  was  a
    "durable relationship" because he allowed the appeal for other reasons.
     It is quite clear that he did  accept  that  the  relationship  was  a
    durable relationship although he styled it as marriage.   It  is  plain
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted the evidence that  was  put
    before him.  Amongst that  evidence  were  clear  assertions  from  the
    claimant and the sponsor that they had lived  together  in  the  United
    Kingdom since August 2011 and this  is  confirmed  by  the  person  who
    provided them with accommodation.

12. Given the rest of the evidence in the case that  is  sufficient  in  my
    judgment to establish a durable relationship.

13. It follows therefore that although I set  aside  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal on the basis that the  claimant
    had established a marriage I substitute a decision allowing the  appeal
    to the extent that the appellant has established that he has a  durable
    relationship with he EEA national partner.

14. The Secretary of State must now decided what leave should be  given  to
    the claimant.
    Decision
    The First-tier Tribunal erred in law. The decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is set aside and I substitute a decision allowing  the  appeal
    to the extent that the claimant has established that he is in a durable
    relationship with an EEA national.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 23 June 2014                   |








