
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40304/2014
                                                               IA/40305/2014
                                                               IA/40306/2014
                                                               IA/40307/2014
                                                               IA/40308/2014
                                                               IA/40309/2014
                                                               IA/40310/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                      |          Decision and Reasons      |
|On  22nd July 2015                     |Promulgated                         |
|                                       |On 29th July 2015                   |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER Tribunal JUDGE KELLY

                                   Between

                          1) DR NAJAT GIRERA MARIEE
                              2) MR GOMA A MARE
                             3) JURIE GOMA MARE
                             4) SAJEDA GOMA MARE
                             5) GIRERA GOMA MARE
                              6) AMNA GOMA MARE
                             7) JOMANA GOMA MARE
                              (anonymity not directed)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Siddique, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Fell, Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellants are citizens of Libya. The  first  and  second  appellants
   (respectively born on the 1st January 1971 and the 9th August  1963)  are
   married to each other. The other appellants are their children whose ages
   currently range between 15 years and 22 months. They each appeal  against
   the decision of Judge Dearden, promulgated on the 23rd January  2015,  to
   dismiss their appeals against the  respondent's  refusal  to  grant  them
   leave to remain in the United Kingdom on private and family life grounds.
   Permission to appeal was granted by the  Upper  Tribunal  (Judge  Murray)
   upon a renewed application following refusal by the  First-tier  Tribunal
   (Judge Garratt).

2. Anonymity was not directed in the First-tier  Tribunal  and  I  therefore
   consider that it would serve no purpose to direct it at this stage.

3. The appellants were  granted  successive  periods  of  limited  leave  to
   remain following their arrival in the United  Kingdom  on  the  2nd  July
   2006. Their last grant of leave to remain expired on the 1st August 2014,
   since when they have remained  in  accordance  with  statutory  leave  to
   remain pending  the  determination  of  their  current  applications  and
   outcome of their appeals against the respondent's  refusal  thereof.  The
   respondent had previously granted limited leave to remain  to  the  first
   appellant for the purposes of  study  and  of  post-study  work  and  had
   granted leave to remain to the other appellants in line with that of  the
   first appellant as her dependents.

4.  Judge  Dearden  concluded  that  the  appellant's  putative  removal  in
   consequence of the respondent's refusal to grant their  applications  was
   both in accordance with the Immigration Rules and compatible  with  their
   rights under Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention for the Protection
   of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms. For ease of exposition, I  will
   consider each of the criticisms that are made of the reasoning  that  led
   to this conclusion in turn.

5. Firstly, it is said that Judge Dearden  "failed  to  take  to  take  into
   account material matters (viz the evidence of the  country  situation  in
   Libya in relation to the  best  interests  of  the  children)"  [see  the
   renewed application for permission to appeal]. However, it is clear  that
   the Judge Dearden did in fact consider the situation in  the  country  of
   return. Thus, at paragraphs 30 and 31 of his decision, he said this:

    30. I now examine whether the State of Libya is  in  such  a  state  of
       instability that it would put the United Kingdom in  breach  of  its
       obligations under Article 8  if  the  adult  Appellants  (and  their
       children) were returned to that country.  I  first  of  all  observe
       that in AT and Others [2014] UKUT 00318 it was said when considering
       Article 15C of Directive 204/83/EC,

       "There is not such a high level of indiscriminate violence in  Libya
       within the meaning of Article 15C  of  Council  Directive  204/83/EC
       (the Qualification Directive) so as to mean that substantial grounds
       exist for believing  that  an  individual  would,  solely  by  being
       present there, face a real risk which threatens his or her  life  or
       person".

       I observe that the principal Appellant has several  relatives  still
       in Libya and that it is possible to  travel  overland  from  Tripoli
       Airport to other destinations without a real  risk  of  persecution,
       serious harm or  Article  3  ill-treatment.   The  country  guidance
       decision in AT was delivered on 14th July 2014 and I am to follow it
       unless good reasons to the contrary are established.  Mr  Cole  says
       that the information contained  at  the  back  of  his  bundle  does
       persuade that the situation in Sirte is distinctly dangerous for the
       Appellants.  He relies firstly on page  3  of  his  bundle  being  a
       report from the United Nations Children's Fund indicating  that  40%
       of the schools in Libya were damaged in the 2011  revolution.   This
       is the internet article which is before the decision in  AT.   On  a
       similar basis the  report  from  the  Global  Coalition  to  Protect
       Education from Attack is dated before the decision  in  AT.   Whilst
       schools have been attacked there is  no  specific  information  that
       indicates that schools in Sirte have been attacked.  The Article  at
       page 8 of the bundle is a general one about children falling prey to
       terrorists but again is dated before the decision in AT.  Page 10 of
       the Appellants' bundle  indicates  that  armed  confrontations  have
       taken place in several areas but Sirte is not mentioned.  Whilst the
       report at page 12 of the  Appellants'  bundle  is  dated  after  the
       decision in AT  this  refers  to  children  in  Aleppo  rather  than
       children in Sirte.

    31. However principal reliance is placed on the report from the UN High
       Commissioner for Refugees dated 13th November 2011 to  be  found  at
       page 14 onwards of the  Appellant's  bundle.   This  indicates  that
       since the overthrow of Gaddafi there has been instability and  chaos
       and the country  has  seen  intense  clashes  between  armed  groups
       involving bombings and kidnappings.  It is indicated  that  hundreds
       of thousands have been forcibly displaced  across  the  country  and
       that the price of foodstuffs has risen  sharply.   The  UNHCR  urges
       that all States should suspend forcible returns to Libya  until  the
       security and  human  rights  situation  has  improved  considerably.
       However, the extended family of  the  principal  Appellant  are  not
       reported  to  have  encountered  any  of  these  difficulties.   The
       Appellant indicated to me in her evidence that her brother  aged  40
       had been kidnapped and killed "last Saturday".   Whilst  some  might
       say that there has been no opportunity  to  obtain  any  documentary
       evidence to support the contention made by the Appellant  I  observe
       that no application for adjournment of the proceedings was  made  to
       me.  Indeed even if the brother has been killed that in itself  does
       not mean that the  country  of  Libya  is  in  a  state  of  general
       insecurity or that this family would be targeted by anyone.  I  find
       that whilst the report from the UNHCR is to be respected it may well
       apply a different test to that which I am applying to  these  cases.
       There is nothing specific in any of the reports filed by Mr Cole  on
       behalf of the Appellants to suggest that the city of  Sirte  is  the
       subject of sustained  instability  sufficient  to  persuade  that  a
       flagrant breach of the Appellants' Article 8 rights would take place
       if they were returned to that city.

6. It is right to say that the above  passage  appears  under  the  heading:
   "The Position of the Principal Appellant and her Husband". They are  thus
   not specifically referenced to the best interests of the  children.  This
   is however immaterial given that the assessment of the  compatibility  of
   the children's removal with their best interests was one that was rightly
   conducted upon the assumption that the children would remain  with  their
   parents.

7. Mr Siddique argued strenuously that the unstable political  and  military
   situation  in  Libya  was  a  material  consideration  in  assessing  the
   children's best interests. I disagree. Article 8 cannot be considered  to
   provide an alternative and more accessible means of seeking  humanitarian
   protection to  that  provided  by  Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification
   Directive (as incorporated into domestic law by  paragraph  339C  of  the
   Immigration Rules). Indeed, I would venture  to  suggest  that  this  was
   implicitly accepted by Mr Cole, who sought to persuade Judge  Dearden  to
   depart from the finding of the Tribunal in AT and Others [2014] UKUT  318
   (IAC) which is to the effect that conditions in Libya  do  not  currently
   meet the threshold for engagement of Article 15(c). Had it been Mr Cole's
   argument that a lesser threshold sufficed for Article 8 purposes, then it
   it would have been unnecessary for him to persuade the judge that AT  and
   Others ought not to be followed. I therefore hold, as a  matter  of  law,
   that for the political and military situation to have been  relevant  for
   Article 8 purposes it was necessary for the appellants to show that there
   was such a high level of indiscriminate violence in Libya as to give rise
   to substantial grounds for believing that the appellants would, solely by
   reason of their presence there, face a real risk of  danger  to  life  or
   person. Judge Dearden found that the evidence did  not  demonstrate  that
   that threshold had been reached, and there is  no  suggestion  that  this
   finding was not reasonably open to him. It follows from this that I  must
   refuse Mr Siddique's application to admit further  evidence  relating  to
   the country situation in Libya as irrelevant to the question  of  whether
   Judge Dearden erred in his assessment of the evidence that was before him
   at the time of his decision.

8. Secondly, it is said that "the Judge has made perverse  findings  on  the
   sole issue in this appeal (viz  that  is  reasonable  (&  in  their  best
   interests) for the children who have lived in the  UK  for  more  than  7
   years to return to Libya" [see the renewed application for permission  to
   appeal]. According to Mr Siddique, the "perversity"  of  Judge  Dearden's
   findings in this regard arises from the fact that the older children  are
   settled at schools in the United Kingdom  and  are  otherwise  thoroughly
   integrated into British society by reason  their  respective  periods  of
   residence and the ages at which they first entered  the  United  Kingdom.
   This however wholly ignores the fact that, as non-British citizens,  none
   of the children in this appeal  have  a  right  (and  thus  a  legitimate
   expectation) to future education in the United Kingdom at public expense.
   It also contrary to the legally correct approach to the assessment  of  a
   child's best interests, which is neatly encapsulated at paragraph  58  of
   the judgement of Lewison LJ in EV (Philippines)  &  Ors  v  Secretary  of
   State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874:

         58. In my judgment, therefore, the assessment of the best interests
         of the children must be made on the basis that  the  facts  are  as
         they are in the real world. If one parent has no right  to  remain,
         but the other parent does, that is the background against which the
         assessment is conducted. If neither parent has the right to remain,
         then that  is  the  background  against  which  the  assessment  is
         conducted. Thus the ultimate question will be: is it reasonable  to
         expect the child to follow the parent with no right  to  remain  to
         the country of origin?

9. Mr Siddique argued that this could not be the correct legal test  because
   its application would necessarily mean that it was  always  in  the  best
   interests of a child to return to the country  of  origin.  That  is  not
   however the case. As Lewison LJ pointed out, the facts in  ZH  (Tanzania)
   [2011] UKSC 4 provide an example of where this would not be the case:

         59. On the facts of ZH it was not reasonable to expect the children
         to follow their mother to Tanzania, not least  because  the  family
         would be separated and the children would be deprived of the  right
         to grow up in the country of which they were citizens.

10. That of course is an example of a situation in which one of the  parents
   has a right to remain in the United  Kingdom  and  the  other  does  not.
   However, even where neither parent has leave to remain, as  is  here  the
   case, there are bound to be instances in which it would  nevertheless  be
   unreasonable for a child to follow his or her parents to the  country  of
   return. An obvious (but by no means the only)  example  of  such  a  case
   would be where the child has been taken into local authority care due  to
   abuse at the hand of the parents who are to be removed. In such  a  case,
   it would neither be reasonable nor  in  the  child's  best  interests  to
   expect him or her to follow the abusive parent to the country of origin.

11. Mr Siddique further argued that neither  paragraph  276ADE  nor  Section
   117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 framed the issue
   of 'reasonableness' of a child leaving  the  UK  within  the  context  of
   following his or her parents to the country of return. However, whilst it
   is true that there is no express reference to it in either provision,  it
   was held by the Tribunal in AM (s 117b) Malawi  [2015]  UKUT  0260  (IAC)
   that the question of reasonableness must be posed and answered within the
   context of whether it is reasonable to expect the child  to  follows  its
   parents to their country origin. That is  precisely  what  Judge  Dearden
   did. It follows that he did not err in law by doing so.

12. Thirdly, it is said that "the  Judge  has  given  weight  to  immaterial
   matters (viz the Judge's 'experience in families of this sort')" [see the
   renewed application for permission to appeal]. That complaint arises from
   paragraph 24 of Judge Dearden's decision:

    It is said that the four eldest children speak  some  Arabic  but  that
    their standards are poor.  Obviously the  eldest  child  speaks  Arabic
    better than the youngest child.  The principal Appellant would have  me
    accept that English is spoken at home and obviously English  is  spoken
    with friends and acquaintances at school and outside the house.  I  did
    not accept that I was told the truth about the ability of the  children
    to speak Arabic.  In my experience in families of this sort  Arabic  is
    spoken at home, but English is spoken outside the home.  The parents of
    these children are both from Libya and in my conclusion would  be  keen
    to ensure, for cultural and heritage reasons, that their children  also
    spoke Arabic.  The children's Arabic in  my  conclusion  might  not  be
    quite up to scratch with the Arabic spoken by children of the same  age
    in Libya, but they obviously have an understanding of Arabic, they  are
    young and adaptable, and in my conclusion if returned  to  Libya  could
    soon get their Arabic up to the required standards.  It is  not  as  if
    the children are going to have to learn Arabic  from  scratch.   In  my
    conclusion they already have a decent understanding and would  be  able
    to build on that.  The principal  Appellant  was  obviously  trying  to
    persuade me that Arabic is not spoken to any  decent  standard  by  the
    children to give the impression that enormous difficulties would follow
    if they were returned to Libya.  I do not accept that such is the case.

   I agree that it was an error of law for the judge to disbelieve the first
   appellant's evidence concerning her children's limited  facility  in  the
   Arabic language, solely on the basis that it did not accord with his  own
   experience of "families of this sort". It is  a  trite  but  nevertheless
   accurate statement of the law to say that it is impermissible for a judge
   to rely upon knowledge and  experience  gained  from  evidence  in  other
   cases. Still less is it permissible for a judge to rely upon  matters  of
   personal experience that he cannot  reasonably  be  assumed  to  possess.
   The reason for this is well expressed within the original application for
   permission to appeal:

         It is not understood what  the  Judge's  'experience'  is  in  this
         matter of culture and linguistics as the Judge  does  not  disclose
         his 'experience',  nor  did  he  provide  an  opportunity  for  the
         Appellants to comment on this matter.

   To put it another way, the knowledge and  experience  of  the  judge  are
   entirely opaque and thus prevent the party against whom they are  brought
   to bear from understanding the reasons that lie behind it.  Moreover,  it
   was quite unnecessary for the judge to make this particular finding given
   his general reasoning in paragraph 13. This is because - as Mrs Pettersen
   rightly pointed out - his general observation that the  adult  appellants
   were  in  a  position  to  assist  their  children  with   any   language
   difficulties they may face on  return  to  Libya  was  one  that  applied
   irrespective of the level of those  difficulties.  I  therefore  conclude
   that this error, standing alone within  an  otherwise  well-reasoned  and
   evidence-based decision, is not  one  that  can  be  considered  to  have
   affected the soundness of the judge's ultimate conclusion,  namely,  that
   it was reasonable and in the best interests of  the  children  to  expect
   them to follow their parents to Libya.

Notice of Decision

13. The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity is not directed

Signed                              Date


Judge Kelly

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


