
                                                      [pic]

|                                     |                                       |
|Upper Tribunal                       |                                       |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)     |Appeal number: IA/40044/2014           |
|the immigration Acts                                                          |
|Heard at: Field House  |             | |           Decision and Reasons       |
|                       |             | |promulgated                           |
|On 8 December 2015     |             | |           On 22 December 2015        |
|                                                                              |
|                                                                              |
|Before                                                                        |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Gill                                                     |
|                                                                              |
|Between                                                                       |
|                                                                              |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department    |Appellant     |
|                                                                              |
|And                                                                           |
|                                                                              |
|           |Khalida Sultana Farzana                           |Respondent    |
|           |(Anonymity Order Not Made)                        |              |

Representation

For the appellant:         Ms A  Fijiwala,  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
                 Officer.
For the respondent:    Ms E  King,  of  Counsel,  instructed  by   Rahman  &
                       Company Solicitors.

                           Decision and Directions


 1. The Secretary of State  has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Adio who,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 18 June 2015 following a hearing on 1 June 2015, allowed
    the appeal of Khalida Sultana Farzana  (hereafter  the  "claimant"),  a
    national of Pakistan born on 18 October 1959, against a decision of the
    respondent of 15 September 2014 to refuse her application of  7  August
    2014 (made on form FLR(M)) for variation of her leave as the spouse  of
    Amir Hussain (the "sponsor"). At the same time, the Secretary of  State
    decided to remove the claimant by way of directions under s.47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  As the claimant  had  no
    leave as a consequence of the decision of 15 September 2014, she had  a
    right of appeal under s.82(d) (as it then existed) of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 2. It was accepted before the judge that the claimant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of Appendix FM or para 276ADE of the Statement of  Changes
    in the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as  amended)  (hereafter  referred  to
    individually as a "Rule" and collectively the "Rules"). This means that
    it was accepted that she did not meet  the  requirements  of  EX.1.  It
    further follows that it was accepted that the claimant could  not  meet
    the requirement to show that there were no insurmountable obstacles  to
    family life being enjoyed between her and the sponsor  in  Pakistan  as
    required by EX.1 (b). She could not meet EX.1 (a) because her  children
    in the UK were over 18 years of age.

 3. Before the judge, reliance was placed solely on the claimant's  Article
    8 claim outside the Rules. He allowed the appeal on Article  8  grounds
    outside the Rules.

Factual background

 4. The claimant arrived in the UK on 20 June  2012  with  entry  clearance
    valid from 17 May 2012 until 17 August 2014 as  the  sponsor's  spouse.
    They were married in Pakistan on 18 October 1977 when the claimant  was
    18 years old and the sponsor 23 years old. The sponsor arrived  in  the
    UK on 22 May 1992 and obtained indefinite leave to remain on the  basis
    of long residence. He is now a British citizen.

 5. The claimant and  the  sponsor  have  six  children.  Three  reside  in
    Pakistan and three in the UK. They are all now over 18  years  of  age.
    The two younger children are a son (Faheem Abbas) and a daughter  (Zara
    Iram) who arrived in the UK with the claimant, on 20  June  2012,  aged
    (respectively) 18 years 3 months and  16  years  9  months.  They  were
    granted indefinite leave to enter the UK.

Reasons for refusal of the application

 6. The Secretary of State refused the application under  para  284(ix)  of
    the Rules on the ground that the claimant was required  to  provide  an
    original English language test certificate in  speaking  and  listening
    from an approved English language test provider but had  failed  to  do
    so.  It is relevant to note  that  para  284(ix)  makes  provision  for
    exceptions to the requirement  to  provide  an  English  language  test
    certificate. The version of para 284(ix) that applied at  the  date  of
    the claimant's application provided as follows:


        Requirements for an extension  of  stay  as  the  spouse  or  civil
        partner of a person present and settled in the United Kingdom


        284. The requirements for an extension of stay  as  the  spouse  or
             civil partner of a person present and settled  in  the  United
             Kingdom are that:


         ...
         (ix)(a) the applicant provides an original English  language  test
                 certificate in  speaking  and  listening  from  an  English
                 language test provider approved by the Secretary  of  State
                 for these purposes, which  clearly  shows  the  applicant's
                 name and the qualification obtained  (which  must  meet  or
                 exceed  level  A1  of  the  Common  European  Framework  of
                 Reference) unless:


             (i) the applicant is aged 65 or over at the time he makes  his
                 application; or
             (ii) the applicant has a physical  or  mental  condition  that
                 would prevent him from meeting the requirement; or;
             (iii) there are exceptional compassionate  circumstances  that
                 would prevent the applicant from meeting  the  requirement;
                 or


         (ix)(b) the applicant is  a  national  of  one  of  the  following
                 countries: Antigua and  Barbuda;  Australia;  the  Bahamas;
                 Barbados;  Belize;  Canada;  Dominica;   Grenada;   Guyana;
                 Jamaica; New Zealand; St Kitts  and  Nevis;  St  Lucia;  St
                 Vincent and the Grenadines;  Trinidad  and  Tobago;  United
                 States of America; or


         (ix)(c) the applicant has obtained an academic qualification  (not
                 a  professional  or  vocational  qualification),  which  is
                 deemed by UK NARIC to meet the  recognised  standard  of  a
                 Bachelor's or Master's degree or PhD in  the  UK,  from  an
                 educational  establishment  in   one   of   the   following
                 countries: Antigua and  Barbuda;  Australia;  The  Bahamas;
                 Barbados;  Belize;  Dominica;  Grenada;  Guyana;   Ireland;
                 Jamaica; New Zealand; St Kitts  and  Nevis;  St  Lucia;  St
                 Vincent and The Grenadines; Trinidad and  Tobago;  the  UK;
                 the USA; and provides the specified documents; or


         (ix)(d) the applicant has obtained an academic qualification  (not
                 a professional or vocational qualification) which is deemed
                 by UK NARIC to meet the recognised standard of a Bachelor's
                 or Master's degree or PhD in the UK, and


             (1) provides  the  specified  evidence  to  show  he  has  the
                 qualification, and
             (2) UK NARIC has confirmed that the qualification  was  taught
                 or researched in English, or


         (ix)(e) has obtained an academic qualification (not a professional
                 or vocational qualification) which is deemed by UK NARIC to
                 meet the recognised standard of a  Bachelor's  or  Master's
                 degree or  PhD  in  the  UK,  and  provides  the  specified
                 evidence to show:


             (1) he has the qualification, and
             (2)  that  the  qualification  was  taught  or  researched  in
                 English.

 7. The Secretary of State went  on  to  consider  Appendix  FM,  EX.1.(a),
    EX.1(b) and para 276ADE of the Rules which it is not necessary  for  me
    to summarise since these aspects of the decision  were  not  challenged
    before the judge. The Secretary of State then considered the Article  8
    claim outside the Immigration Rules.

 8. The requirement for an English language test certificate to be provided
    was introduced by HC194 which came into effect on 9 July 2012.  HC  194
    was ordered by the House of Commons to be  printed  on  13  June  2012.
    Notice of the impending requirement was first given through a  document
    issued by the  Home  Office  entitled:  "Statement  of  Intent:  family
    Migration" dated June 2012 but which was announced on about 11-13  June
    2012.

The judge's decision:

 9. The judge heard oral evidence from the claimant, the  sponsor  and  her
    two younger children. The evidence is summarised at paras  4-7  of  his
    decision. It was said, inter alia, that the  claimant  discovered  that
    she had to satisfy an English language test requirement in  2013,  that
    she has tried to learn English, attending a college and studying for 2-
    3 months but she failed the test.

10. In reliance upon the judgment of  Lord  Neuberger  in  Odelola  v  SSHD
    [2009] UKHL 25, Ms King (who appeared before the judge) submitted  that
    the claimant had a "vested interest" at the time that HC194  came  into
    force, namely her right to enjoy family life with her family in the UK.
    The Secretary of State had moved the goalpost  after  she  was  granted
    entry by introducing the English language requirement, giving  rise  to
    unfairness.

11. The skeleton argument before the judge also argued that the requirement
    to demonstrate proficiency in the English language was bound to have  a
    disproportionate impact on women in particular, and specifically  women
    from developing countries who are typically disadvantaged in  terms  of
    access to education. It was argued that the  claimant  had  had  little
    formal education and that it would be disproportionately harder for her
    to quickly learn a new language than it would for a man  who  would  be
    likely to have had access to more education and  opportunities  outside
    the home to be exposed to learning new skills.

12. The judge's reasons for allowing the appeal outside the  Rules  on  the
    basis of Article 8 may be summarised as follows: The judge  found  that
    the claimant enjoyed family life with the  sponsor  and  her  children.
    This persuaded him to consider the Article 8 claim outside  the  Rules.
    The judge found that the amendment to the Rules by  HC  194  by  which,
    under para 284(ix), applicants were required to comply with an  English
    language test requirement created  an  element  of  unfairness  in  the
    claimant's case because she had already been enjoying family life  with
    her husband before the rule change. Her family life was not established
    whilst she was in the UK unlawfully. She had been married for a  number
    of years and had lived in the UK for three years with permission, which
    went in her favour. She has lived without her husband and has only  had
    the opportunity to live with him again  after  a  lengthy  period.  Her
    children were  unlikely  to  return  to  Pakistan  with  her.   As  the
    claimant's education ceased at the age of 10 years, it was much  harder
    for her to learn English. The sponsor had said that he was  willing  to
    return to Pakistan when he retires from work in four years' time and it
    was unreasonable to expect him to return to Pakistan before then.

13. The judge's reasoning is set out at paras 12-15 which read:


        12.  Each appeal is to be decided on its own facts.  The burden  of
             proof is on [the claimant] and the standard of proof  is  on  a
             balance of probability.  I have taken into account the oral and
             documentary evidence before me and  the  circumstances  at  the
             date of the hearing.   I  have  considered  the  case  of  [the
             claimant] under Article 8 of the Human  Rights  Convention.   I
             accept that there is family life between [the claimant] and her
             husband and children.  They  all  live  together  in  the  same
             household as a family unit.  [The claimant]'s two children even
             though they are over 18 came together with her when she arrived
             in the country in 2012 and have since been living together as a
             family and the fact that they [sic] just over 18  does  not  of
             itself end the family life between them.  I note  that  in  the
             reasons for refusal letter the Respondent did not consider  the
             fact  that  there  are  other  circumstances  concerning   [the
             claimant's] case such as her lack of education since the age of
             10 and the fact that  her  husband  is  four  years  away  from
             retirement and has not been able to  enjoy  residing  with  his
             wife for a long period of time.  These are factors  which  have
             made me consider the matter more outside the Rules.


        13.  Applying the case of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27  I  find  that  the
             Respondent's decision interferes with the family life  of  [the
             claimant] and her husband to live together.  I accept that  the
             Respondent's decision is in accordance with  the  law  for  the
             maintenance of immigration control.  With regards to the  point
             made by Ms King about  the  discrimination  made  against  [the
             claimant] as someone who is a woman and who did not have enough
             access to education I do not accept this issue.  The  Secretary
             of State is in a position to  change  the  law.   I  take  into
             account the public interest and in this particular case  making
             English a requirement is to ensure integration into society  as
             well as reduce the public  cost  as  stated  by  Mr  Ali.   The
             obligation is to be assessed at the date of decision  and  that
             is the decision made in the case of Odelola.  I now  go  on  to
             look at the issue of proportionality.  In doing so I have taken
             into account paragraph 117B of the Immigration Act  2014.   The
             Act notes that it is in the public interest and  in  particular
             in the interests of the economic wellbeing of the country  that
             persons who seek to remain in the UK are able to speak  English
             because if they speak English they are a  less  burden  on  the
             taxpayer and are able to integrate into society.


        14.  On the other hand I note that [the claimant]  has  been  in  a
             relationship with her husband a qualifying partner and this was
             not established at a time when she was in  the  UK  unlawfully.
             She has been married to her husband for a number of years.  She
             was granted leave to enter the UK in 2012 and she has lived  in
             the UK for three years with  permission.   It  is  therefore  a
             factor in her favour.  [The claimant] also has family life with
             her children who accommodate her in  the  United  Kingdom.   In
             this particular case I find that the Respondent's  decision  is
             disproportionate to the sever  [sic]  [the  claimant]'s  family
             life.  She met the Rules under which family life was  permitted
             to develop from June 2012 and although there has been a  change
             in the Rules if she was to return  to  Pakistan  she  would  be
             living without her husband who she has only had the opportunity
             to live with  again  after  a  lengthy  period  of  time.   The
             children are  unlikely  to  go  back  with  her  as  they  have
             indefinite leave to remain.  There is an element of  unfairness
             in her case in that she had already been enjoying  family  life
             with her husband before the Rule  change.   To  that  extent  I
             accept Ms  King's  legal  argument  of  there  being  a  vested
             interest before the change of the law took place.


        15.  The circumstances of [the claimant] are such that she did  not
             have an education in English and stopped her education  at  the
             age of 10.  This has meant that it is much harder  for  her  to
             learn English than it is for  many  other  people.   There  has
             therefore been a disadvantage with  regard  to  her  access  to
             education.  There are other ways  in  which  the  Secretary  of
             State is able to deal with this issue.  [The claimant] does not
             qualify for indefinite leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom
             however she can still enjoy family life with her  husband  with
             discretionary  leave  in  the  United  Kingdom.   In  all   the
             circumstances  of  this  case  I   find   that   it   will   be
             disproportionate applying the case of Odelola and the respected
             family life that exists between [the claimant] and her  husband
             to remove her from the UK.  The Sponsor made it clear  that  he
             is willing to go back to Pakistan but it is not reasonable  for
             him to do so until he retires and he has got four more years to
             complete his working life in the UK.  I therefore find that  at
             this period of time  it  is  disproportionate  to  remove  [the
             claimant] from the United Kingdom  and  that  the  Respondent's
             decision amounts to a breach of her right to respect for family
             life under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.


        (my emphasis)

The Secretary of State's grounds:

14. There are two grounds.  Ground  1  is  that  the  judge  had  erred  by
    misdirecting himself or giving inadequate reasons. The judge had failed
    to provide adequate reasons as to why the fact  that  the  sponsor  was
    four years away from retirement affected the family  life/private  life
    claim of the claimant.  The question of whether the  claimant  has  the
    required English language test certificate has been  dealt  with  under
    the Rules. The judge had relied upon the length of  time  the  claimant
    and her husband  were  separated,  something  which  has  already  been
    covered under the Rules because an application for leave as  a  partner
    will always be underpinned by a desire to be united with a  partner  to
    avoid absence.

15. Ground 2 is that the judge erred in finding that  the  claimant  had  a
    "vested right"  prior  to  the  Rules  being  amended  to  include  the
    requirement for an English language test certificate. It  is  contended
    that the claimant was only granted leave to remain when she entered the
    UK in June 2012 and therefore she  only  ever  had  an  expectation  of
    further leave, never a legal right to it. The grounds contend that  the
    judge had misdirected himself as to the  judgment  in  Odelola  v  SSHD
    [2009] UKHL 25, in that, it was expressly stated  in  Odelola  that  no
    vested right existed. Furthermore, whilst the claimant in Odelola would
    have succeeded in her application on the basis of the rules  that  were
    in force at the time of her application,  the  claimant  had  made  her
    application for leave at a time when the Rules had already changed.

The claimant's response

16. On behalf of the claimant, Ms King filed a response under  rule  24  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008.  In  relation  to
    ground 1, reliance is placed on the judgment in R (Ganesabalan) v  SSHD
    [2014] EWHC 2712 (Admin) to the effect that there is no prior threshold
    for consideration of an Article 8 claim outside the Rules. Accordingly,
    the judge did not err in considering the Article 8  claim  outside  the
    Rules.

17. In relation to ground 2, it is contended that the judge did not err  in
    relying upon Odelola to find that the claimant had a vested  right  and
    that there was an element of unfairness in this case by virtue  of  the
    Rule change. Reliance is placed on the judgment of the Supreme Court in
    R (Quila) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 45 in which it was held that the choice as
    to where to carry out family life was an element of  the  enjoyment  of
    family life as described by Article 8(1).  It  is  therefore  contended
    that the claimant had a right to remain in the UK to enjoy  her  family
    life that existed supra to any right that could be granted to her under
    the Rules.

18. It is submitted in the claimant's response that this distinguished  the
    claimant's facts from the facts of the applicant in Odelola. Whilst  it
    was held in Odelola that there was no vested right in  that  case,  the
    Supreme Court did recognise that a change in the Rules was  capable  of
    amounting to an interference with a  vested  right.  In  this  respect,
    reliance is placed on paras 53-54 of the judgment of Lord Neuberger  in
    Odelola. It was contended on the claimant's behalf that,  but  for  the
    introduction of the English language requirement,  the  claimant  would
    have continued to satisfy the requirements of the Rules  on  which  she
    was admitted to the UK, thus enabling her to enjoy family life  in  the
    UK. It was properly open to the judge to find that the claimant  had  a
    vested right and there was an element of unfairness in this case  which
    tipped the balance in favour of allowing her appeal.

19. In the alternative, it is said that, even if the  judge  had  erred  in
    finding that the claimant had a vested right  and  that  there  was  an
    element of unfairness  in  the  claimant's  case,  the  error  was  not
    material as it is clear that he would have allowed the  appeal  in  any
    event, given the factors he had taken into account.

Oral submissions

20. At the hearing on 8 December 2015, I heard submissions from the parties
    on the question whether the judge had materially erred in law.  At  the
    commencement of the hearing, I showed to the parties the  Statement  of
    Intent dated June 2012 referred to at  para  8  above  and  a  document
    downloaded from the website of a law firm from which it is  clear  that
    the date on which the Home Office announced its intention to change the
    Rules was 11 June 2012.

21. Ms King had an opportunity to consider the  Statement  of  Intent.  She
    accepted that page 56 of  the  Statement  of  Intent  referred  to  the
    requirement for an applicant to establish that he or  she  has  English
    speaking and listening skills at level A1 or above.

22. I also asked the parties to address me  on  the  question  whether  the
    judge had erred by failing to consider whether  there  were  compelling
    circumstances for the grant of leave outside the Rules, pursuant to the
    judgment of the Court of Appeal in SS (Congo) v SSHD  [2015]  EWCA  Civ
    387, judgment in which was delivered on 23 April 2015, i.e. before  the
    hearing of the appeal before the judge.

23. Ms Fijiwala submitted (in  summary)  that  the  judge  had  misdirected
    himself in finding that the claimant had a vested right. Lord Neuberger
    found that the applicant  in  Odelola  did  not  have  a  vested  right
    notwithstanding that she satisfied the requirements of the Rules at the
    date that she submitted her application for leave. Lord Neuberger  said
    that  the  most  that  could  be  said  that  was  she   had   suffered
    disappointment. In the  instant  case,  the  Statement  of  Intent  was
    published before the claimant's arrival in the UK and  the  Rules  were
    changed 2 � weeks after her arrival. There was therefore no  unfairness
    at all.

24. Ms Fijiwala also relied upon the judgment of the  Supreme  Court  in  R
    (Ali and Bibi)  v  SSHD  [2015]  UKSC  68  that  the  English  language
    requirement pursued legitimate  aims.  There  were  exceptions  to  the
    requirement, none of which applied to the claimant. The claimant is not
    someone who had experienced difficulties in accessing training  because
    she has attended a training course in the UK and she had been in the UK
    for 2 years prior to her  application.  Although  at  para  91  of  the
    judgment, the Supreme Court considered that those who had  entered  the
    UK prior to the Rule change were in a weaker position  than  they  were
    following the amendment that imposed the English language  requirement,
    the courts should  give  the  Secretary  of  State  a  wide  margin  of
    discretion.  The Supreme Court concluded that, bearing in mind the wide
    discretion, the relevant English language  requirement  struck  a  fair
    balance and there was no unjustified interference with the  applicants'
    Article 8 rights.

25. Whilst Judge Adio  in  the  instant  case  had  noted  that  Parliament
    considered that it was  necessary  for  applicants  to  communicate  in
    English, this  should  have  been  a  significant  factor  against  the
    claimant.  The judge could only have allowed  the  appeal  outside  the
    Rules if there were compassionate  circumstances.  She  submitted  that
    there was no reasonably arguable case outside the Rules pursuant to  SS
    (Congo) and that, even if it had been necessary to consider the Article
    8 claim outside the Rules, the judge  should  have  placed  significant
    weight  on  the  claimant's  failure  to  meet  the  English   language
    requirement.

26. The judge had taken into account the fact that  the  sponsor  was  only
    four years away from retirement. However, it was a matter of choice  if
    the sponsor remained in the UK until his  retirement.  The  couple  had
    been separated for a number of years.  They  could  continue  to  enjoy
    their family life in that way until he retired, if he chooses.

27. Ms King relied upon the Rule 24 response.   In relation  to  ground  1,
    she submitted that the  circumstances  that  the  judge  found  existed
    amounted to compassionate circumstances. She submitted that  the  words
    in para 13 of the judge's decision that are underlined at  my  para  13
    above showed that the judge was mindful of the fact that  the  claimant
    did not satisfy the English language requirement.

28. Pursuant to Ganesabalan, there was no prior threshold for consideration
    of an Article 8 claim outside the Rules. The judge had identified  some
    particular features of the case that merited consideration outside  the
    Rules. It was not just that she had not passed the test  but  that  the
    reason why she had  failed  to  do  so  was  because  of  her  lack  of
    education.

29. Ali and Bibi was concerned with entry clearance  applications.  In  Ali
    and Bibi, the  Supreme  Court  considered  that  physical  barriers  to
    accessing training if a person is in a remote part  of  the  world  may
    amount to exceptional circumstances in an individual case. There is  no
    good reason to draw a distinction between a  physical  barrier  and  an
    inability to satisfy the Rule on the part of someone who has  attempted
    to satisfy the requirement but suffers a  disadvantage  on  account  of
    lack of education. Every case is fact-specific. It was for the judge to
    consider the reason why the relevant Rule was not satisfied  and  weigh
    that in the balancing exercise outside the Rules.

30. Ms King submitted that the term "vested right" was simply a  fancy  way
    of saying that there was an element of unfairness. She  submitted  that
    the judge did not misunderstand Odelola when he said that the  claimant
    had  a  vested  right.  Odelola  can  be  distinguished   because   the
    application in Odelola was an application for  leave  to  remain  as  a
    postgraduate doctor and therefore the applicant in Odelola did not have
    any greater right to be in the  UK  outside  the  Rule  that  had  been
    amended and which she could not satisfy, whereas  the  claimant  has  a
    right to family life which continues under Article 8(1). Thus,  whereas
    the amendment of the relevant Rule in Odelola removed the right of  the
    claimant to be in the UK, the amendment of the  relevant  rule  in  the
    claimant's case could not take away her right to enjoy family life.

31. Ms King submitted that the judge was entitled to find that there was an
    element of unfairness in the instant case and to take that into account
    in the balancing exercise. It is clear from para  13  of  his  decision
    that he took into account the public interest.

32. Ms King submitted that, although it may be that the Statement of Intent
    was published before the claimant's arrival, this  was  after  she  had
    been granted entry clearance. Her right to enjoy her family life in the
    UK came into existence then. She began enjoying her family life in  the
    UK before the Rules were amended on 9 July 2012. Although she may  have
    been on notice that there was an intention to amend the Rules, she  had
    already started to enjoy her family life in the UK.

33. I reserved my decision.

Assessment

34. I shall deal first with ground 2. In Odelola, all five of the judges of
    the Supreme  Court  agreed  that  the  applicant's  appeal  was  to  be
    dismissed.  Lord  Hope  did  not  give  any  substantive  reasons,  his
    Lordship's judgment being confined to the repayment of the  application
    fee paid by the claimant in that case.   Lord  Scott  agreed  with  the
    reasons given by Lord Brown dismissing the appeal.  Reasoned  judgments
    were given by Lord Hoffman, Lord Brown and Lord Neuberger.

35. Lord Brown summarised the reasoning of the Court of Appeal at para  29,
    to the effect that the presumption against retrospectivity applies only
    in the case of vested rights and that an argument that the  presumption
    applies in the case of the Rules is to beg the very question at  issue.
    At para 31, Lord Brown said that the whole debate was bedevilled  by  a
    failure to recognise  the  difficulties  inherent  in  the  presumption
    itself.

36.  Lord  Brown  said  at  para  35  that  the  Rules  are  statements  of
    administrative policy: an indication of who at any particular time  the
    Secretary of State will exercise her  discretion  with  regard  to  the
    grant of leave to  enter  or  remain.  Drawing  a  distinction  between
    legislation that confers "money or other certain benefit"  on  the  one
    hand and a mere statement of policy as to how presently it is  proposed
    to exercise an administrative discretion when eventually it comes to be
    exercised, Lord Brown held that a policy may be  changed  at  any  time
    (para 37). At para 39, Lord Brown concluded that  the  changes  in  the
    Rules, unless they specify to the contrary, take effect  whenever  they
    say they take effect with  regard  to  all  leave  applications,  those
    pending no less than those yet to be made.

37. The issue of vested rights did not feature in  the  reasoning  of  Lord
    Brown whereas Lord Hoffman specifically said that, whilst there was  no
    conceptual  reason  why  the  Rules  should  not  create  rights  which
    subsequent Rules should not, in the absence  of  express  language,  be
    construed as removing, they should not be so construed (paras 6 and 7).
    Thus, it is clear that Lord Hoffman considered that, when one looks  at
    the functions of the Rules, they should not be  construed  as  removing
    vested rights (para 7).

38. Ms  Fijiwala  referred  to  the  judgment  of  Lord  Neuberger  as  the
    dissenting judgment. Strictly speaking, it is not  correct  to  do  so,
    since all the judges were agreed about the outcome.

39. Whilst it is correct (as Ms King pointed out) that Lord Neuberger  said
    at para 52 that the common law presumption against retrospectivity  can
    apply to amendments to the Rules, his Lordship nevertheless went on  to
    say (at para 59) that there was in fact no vested right or a legitimate
    expectation,  saying:  "...  the  immigration  rules  would  have  been
    expected to be amended from time  to  time,  as  needs  and  perception
    change..."; that applicants in the position of  the  claimant  in  that
    case would suffer disappointment but it could not be  put  higher  than
    that; and that, whilst unfairness was a factor that could  be  invoked,
    it did not have great force.

40. In my judgement, the discussion at para 48 onwards of the  judgment  of
    Lord Neuberger was merely part of his Lordship's process  of  reasoning
    to reach the conclusion that the  presumption  against  retrospectivity
    does not apply to the Rules precisely  because  there  is  in  fact  no
    vested right or legitimate expectation. It is  inconceivable  that  his
    Lordship intended the question whether a rule has retrospective  effect
    to turn on the individual facts of a case, on whether the individual in
    a particular case has a vested right. I reject the suggestion that this
    was how the judgment of Lord Neuberger should be understood as it would
    mean that the question whether a rule has  retrospective  effect  would
    vary from case to case.

41. Thus, in finding that the claimant had a vested right in reliance  upon
    Odelola, the judge misunderstood the judgment of Lord Neuberger. It  is
    plain in my judgement, that Lord Neuberger rejected the notion that the
    concept of vested rights decides the question whether  a  change  in  a
    Rule has retrospective effect. I am therefore satisfied that the  judge
    misdirected himself in law and therefore fell into legal error.

42. Ms King sought to distinguish the claimant's case from the case of  the
    applicant in Odelola in that, whilst the amendment to the relevant rule
    in the Odelola case removed the right of the applicant in that case  to
    remain in the UK, the claimant continued to have her right to enjoy her
    family life and, in reliance upon Quila, her right to enjoy her  family
    life in the UK. However, this simply ignores the fact  that,  prior  to
    the amendment to the Rules, the Rules did not make  any  provision  for
    applications for leave on the basis of  Article  8.  Such  applications
    were considered outside the Rules. The claimant did not have  a  vested
    right to have her Article 8 family life claim considered and dealt with
    under the Rules. The amendment to para 284 of the Rules  did  not  take
    away her right to apply for and have her Article 8  family  life  claim
    considered under the Rules for the simple reason that Article 8  family
    life claims were not considered under the Rules prior to 9  July  2012.
    Insofar as the Rules provided for leave to  remain  as  a  spouse,  the
    general rule, that the Secretary of State  is  entitled  to  amend  the
    rules, applies. Thus, I reject Ms King's  attempt  to  distinguish  the
    claimant's case from that of the applicant in Odelola.

43. In any event, even if I am wrong in what I have said paras 40-41  above
    the judge also erred in finding that there was an element of unfairness
    in this case. Lord Neuberger made it plain in  the  Odelola  case  that
    unfairness was not a factor that carried great force  (para  59).  This
    notwithstanding the fact that the applicant in  Odelola  satisfied  the
    relevant rule at the time her application was made. Ms King relied upon
    the fact that entry clearance was granted to the claimant prior to  the
    publication of the Statement of Intent and that, by  the  time  HC  194
    came into force on 9 July 2012,  the  claimant  had  already  commenced
    enjoying her family life in the UK. In my judgment, this is a  hopeless
    argument  as  it  is  in  effect  a  submission  that  anyone  who  had
    established family life in the UK prior to 9 July 2012 was entitled  to
    be exempt from any amendments to the requirements under the  Rules  for
    leave as a spouse. In my judgment, this submission could  not  properly
    have been made, quite apart from the fact that the  submission  ignores
    the fact that, prior to 9 July 2012,  applications  for  leave  on  the
    basis of the right to family life under Article 8 were not  dealt  with
    under the Rules.

44. Furthermore, the concept of  unfairness  underpinned  the  unsuccessful
    arguments that were advanced before the Supreme Court  in  Odelola  and
    yet the appeal in Odelola failed, the Supreme Court holding unanimously
    that the Secretary of State is entitled to amend the Rules and that any
    such amendments apply from the date on which  they  are  said  to  take
    effect unless there are transitional provisions.

45. Thus, the  judge  erred  in  finding  that  there  was  an  element  of
    unfairness in the instant case. In any event, he  failed  to  recognise
    that the claimant had had  two  years  in  the  UK  to  access  English
    language courses and obtain the relevant qualification.

46. I am therefore satisfied that the error identified in paras 40-41 above
    and the error identified in paras 43-45  were  each  material  for  two
    reasons. Firstly, it is plain that the judge gave significant weight to
    what he perceived to  be  the  claimant's  vested  right  and  what  he
    perceived to be unfair in this case, whereas  it  is  clear  from  Lord
    Neuberger's judgment in Odelola at  para  59  that,  whilst  unfairness
    could be invoked, it does not have great force.

47. Secondly, and in any event, the judge's  failure  to  consider  whether
    there were compelling circumstances for the grant of leave outside  the
    Rules  rendered  each  error  material.  The  search   for   compelling
    circumstances is necessary because this approach gives  due  weight  to
    the strength of the public interest and the fact that the claimant  did
    not qualify under any of the exceptions listed in para  284,  including
    those provided for at para 284(ix)(a)(ii) and (iii) and, further,  that
    she did not meet the requirements of Appendix FM  and  EX.1.  In  other
    words, the judge failed to consider the Article  8  claim  outside  the
    Rules "through the lens of the Rules" to  borrow  the  phrase  used  by
    Sales LJ in SSHD v AJ (Angola) and AJ (Gambia) [2014] EWCA Civ 1636  at
    para 39.

48. The fact that the judge failed to consider  the  claimant's  Article  8
    claim outside the Rules through the lens of the Rules  is  demonstrated
    by the following:

    i.   The fact that he took into account the fact that the  sponsor  was
         only four years away from retirement without mentioning at all that
         it had been accepted that there were no insurmountable obstacles to
         family life between her and her husband continuing in Pakistan.

    ii.  The fact that he took into account that  the  claimant's  children
         are unlikely to return to Pakistan with her as they have indefinite
         leave to remain without considering whether  it  is  reasonable  to
         expect them to do so if they wished to enjoy family life with her.

    iii. The fact that he considered the claimant's lack of education (para
         12 of his decision) without noting that she did not satisfy any  of
         the exceptions in para 284(ix) of the Rules.

49. Ms King relied upon the fact that the judge said  at  para  13  of  his
    decision that he had taken the public interest. However, whilst  it  is
    clear from para 13 that the judge said that he had taken  into  account
    the fact that the English language requirement was  imposed  to  ensure
    integration and reduce the public cost, there is nothing to  show  that
    he had taken into account the fact that para 284(ix)(a) made  provision
    for exceptions which the claimant did not satisfy and that she did  not
    meet the requirements of Appendix FM and EX.1.

50. I do not accept Ms King's submission that the judge's errors  were  not
    material on the ground that it is clear that he would have allowed  the
    appeal in any event, for the reasons I have given above. In any  event,
    once the judge's flawed reasoning as to what he  perceived  to  be  the
    claimant's vested right and the unfairness he  perceived   is  stripped
    from the reasons he gave, it is plain that he further erred in  law  by
    giving inadequate reasons for allowing the appeal. It is at this  point
    that ground 1 of the Secretary of State's grounds to  the  effect  that
    the judge gave inadequate reasons becomes relevant. In this regard,  it
    is relevant to note that he failed to explain why  the  fact  that  the
    sponsor was 4 years away from retirement was relevant  to  his  finding
    that the decision was a disproportionate breach of the claimant's right
    to family life. In taking into account that the claimant  was  enjoying
    family life after being separated from the sponsor for some  years,  he
    failed to explain why that prevailed over the fact that it was accepted
    that there were  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  being
    enjoyed in Pakistan.

51. I do not consider that  the  judgment  in  Ali  and  Bibi  assists  the
    claimant in any way. One of the arguments before the Supreme  Court  in
    Ali  and  Bibi  was  that  the  English  language  requirement  had   a
    disproportionate impact  on  women  and  those  who  lacked  education.
    However, the discrimination ground failed before the Supreme  Court  in
    the challenge to the legality of the English language requirement, Lady
    Hale saying that the  discrimination  argument  added  nothing  to  the
    Article 8 ground.

52. Ms King submitted that there is no good reason to  draw  a  distinction
    between a physical barrier and an inability to satisfy the Rule on  the
    part of someone who  has  attempted  to  satisfy  the  requirement  but
    suffers a disadvantage on account of lack of education.  However,  this
    submission simply ignores the fact that  disadvantages  on  account  of
    lack of education was an argument that was advanced before the  Supreme
    Court in Ali and Bibi.

53. For all of the above reasons, I set aside the decision of Judge Adio to
    allow the appeal outside the Rules on  the  basis  of  Article  8.  His
    decision to dismiss the appeal under the Rules stands. His  summary  of
    the evidence he heard, at paras 4-7 of his decision, shall stand  as  a
    record of the evidence given to the First-tier Tribunal.

54. In the majority of cases, the Upper Tribunal  when  setting  aside  the
    decision  will  be  able  to  re-make  the  relevant  decision  itself.
    However, the Practice Statement for the Immigration and Asylum  Chamber
    of the Upper Tribunal at  para  7.2  recognises  that  it  may  not  be
    possible for the Upper Tribunal to proceed to re-make the decision when
    it is satisfied that:

         "(a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
             First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for
             that party's case to be put to and considered  by  the  First-
             tier Tribunal; or

         (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact  finding  which  is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal."

55. In my judgment this case falls within para 7.(b).  In  addition,  given
    that the claimant won her appeal before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    having regard to the Court of Appeal's judgment in JD (Congo) &  Others
    [2012] EWCA Civ 327, I am of the view that a remittal to the First-tier
    Tribunal is the right course of action.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  errors  on
points of law such that the decision to allow the appeal under Article 8  is
set aside. The decision to dismiss the appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules
stands. This case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  hearing  of
the Article 8 claim outside the Immigration Rules  by  a  judge  other  than
Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Adio.





Signed                                  Date: 17 December 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
