
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40690/2014
                                                               IA/40694/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 7th May 2015                      |On 15th May 2015                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              TEREZIA PACAJOVA
                                 HELAL AHMED
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Price instructed by Haque & Hausmann Solicitors
                    (Newcastle)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. On 29th January 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge V A Lowe promulgated
         the determination in this cause in  which  the  appeals  under  the
         Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 were allowed.

      2. The first  appellant  is  an  EEA  national,  being  a  citizen  of
         Slovakia, who claimed to be in the UK exercising treaty rights. The
         second  appellant  is  a  national  of  Bangladesh  with   a   poor
         immigration  history  who  applied  for   a   residence   card   as
         confirmation of a right to reside in  the  United  Kingdom  as  the
         first appellant's spouse. Both  parties  were  interviewed  on  6th
         October 2014 following which the respondent concluded they were not
         able to adequately communicate with each other such that it is said
         the decision maker failed to  see  how  a  couple  could  be  in  a
         subsisting and durable relationship without being able to  properly
         communicate. As a result it  was  said  the  marriage  was  one  of
         convenience entered into in an attempt to gain a residence document
         via fraudulent means.

      3. The Judge was able to consider the written material and  hear  oral
         evidence from the first appellant. The  second  appellant  was  not
         available as he had been removed to Bangladesh.

      4. The findings are set out from paragraph 17  of  the  determination.
         The issue before the Tribunal related to whether the  marriage  was
         one of convenience. The Judge also thought it necessary to  comment
         upon the removal of the second appellant when  such  had  not  been
         shown to be unlawful or successfully challenged by way of  judicial
         review. The amendments in the Immigration Act 2014  permit  removal
         in some EU cases even when an appeal is pending. Section 10 permits
         removal with an out of country rights of appeal which is  the  will
         of Parliament. The fact of the matter is that the second  appellant
         was not present, no arrangement had been made for  video  evidence,
         and his removal had not been shown to be unlawful.

      5. The second element that appears to have occupied the Judges mind is
         the evidence provided by the respondent in support of the claim the
         marriage was one of convenience. The  purpose  of  a  judge  is  to
         assess the weight to be given to the material made available and to
         make a reasoned decision based upon that evidence. In this case the
         Judge is critical of the structure of the interview suggesting that
         the respondent should have proceeded by providing the  interpreters
         requested and asking questions about the facts of the relationship.

      6. The appellants were provided with the interpreters they  sought  as
         they  were  asked  questions   with   the   assistance   of   those
         interpreters. The issue was not to ascertain whether the appellants
         were aware of the colour of the curtains in the bedroom or  how  or
         where they met but whether they could communicate  adequately  with
         each other. The theory being that those in a relationship should at
         least be able to communicate. This is tested by the provision of an
         interpreter in the required language and the posing of  a  scenario
         which the person being  asked  has  to  communicate  to  the  other
         partner. It was the quality of the replies  given  that  determined
         the refusal.

      7. There is no justifiable criticism of the methodology used which  is
         a matter for the respondent. Those in this  jurisdiction  who  have
         seen many such interviews are aware of the value for  both  parties
         in establishing claims to be able to communicate,  or  not  as  the
         case may be.

      8. Notwithstanding the above, the Judge also considered  the  relevant
         evidence and makes the following findings:

           . "I have to say that I do not find the alleged answers given to
             scenarios as showing  that  the  second  appellant  could  not
             understand Slovak Gypsy so that he  and  his  wife  could  not
             communicate. Not only was the language  used  standard  Slovak
             but it appears to  me  that  the  gist  of  the  scenario  was
             repeated in each case.  I  appreciate  that  there  were  some
             errors but there was no evidence  that  the  second  appellant
             simply could not understand.  To me, it appears to be a  quite
             credible attempt at questions  put  orally  in  an  unfamiliar
             language with no prior notice. Indeed, my opinion is  that  it
             positively shows that the couple can communicate in  practical
             situations albeit with the need in real  life  to  check  that
             each other has understood when a particular  time  of  day  is
             mentioned" [para 19].

           . "The couple apparently started a relationship  in  March  2013
             and cohabitation about 3 months later. There  is  evidence  of
             cohabitation and their consistent address  and  of  the  first
             appellant's pregnancy, the first antenatal  appointment  which
             she attended with her husband. There  is  nothing  to  suggest
             that they do not have a genuine relationship  other  than  the
             content of the refusal." [para 20].

Discussion


      9. The respondent's application for permission to appeal confirms that
         the second appellant was removed to Bangladesh on 23rd October 2014
         in line with an order of the Upper Tribunal made in judicial review
         proceedings JR/12812/2014. It therefore  appears  to  be  a  lawful
         removal.

     10. The grounds assert the Judge allowed the appeals as  he  considered
         the interview inadequate, but this  is  not  the  case.  The  Judge
         refers to the level of understanding and makes  findings  upon  the
         same. The  assertion  in  paragraph  8  of  the  grounds  that  the
         appellants' inability to communicate does raise sufficient  reasons
         to suspect that the marriage is one of  convenience  and  that  the
         appellants have failed to discharge  the  burden  of  proof,  is  a
         disagreement with the finding made in the alternative.

     11. Mere disagreement is not  enough  to  establish  arguable  material
         legal error in most cases. The Judge not only considered the  level
         of communication which appears  to  him  to  be  adequate  but  the
         history of the relationship and the fact the  first  appellant  was
         pregnant. That child  has  now  been  born  and  DNA  test  results
         provided at this hearing show the first and second appellant to  be
         the biological parents.

     12. It has not been shown the findings made are not adequately reasoned
         or perverse.  The test is whether  in  all  the  circumstances  the
         marriage  has  substance.  The  phrase  'marriage  of  convenience'
         relates to the marriage at its inception which must be assessed  at
         the date of the decision. As found  in  Papajorgji  (EEA  spouse  -
         marriage of convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 00038,  a  marriage  of
         convenience in this context is a marriage contacted  for  the  sole
         purpose or decisive purpose of gaining admission to the host state.
         A  durable  marriage  with  children  and  co-habitation  is  quite
         inconsistent with such a definition.

     13. The finding the evidence supported a genuine relationship that  led
         to marriage and the birth of a child and that the marriage was  not
         one of convenience for the purposes of gaining  admission  has  not
         been shown to be a findings contrary to the available evidence.

Decision

     14. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.

    Anonymity.

     15. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
         45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
         2005. I make no such order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
         Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 8th May 2015

