
IAC-PE-AW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40197/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 June 2015                       |On 15 June 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVID TAYLOR


                                   Between

                            mr Jody Opare Mensha
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Palmer of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Although the appellant to this appeal is, strictly,  the  Secretary  of
    State I have for the sake of consistency  continued  to  refer  to  the
    parties by their original First-tier Tribunal designations.  Thus,  the
    Secretary of State continues to be described as "the respondent".

2.   The appellant is a 33 year old citizen of Ghana (born 25  August  1981)
    who appealed against the respondent's decision dated 23 September  2014
    refusing his application for an EEA residence card as the spouse of  an
    EEA national.  The appellant's sponsor is Ms Evelyn Kwarteng, a  German
    national of Ghanaian origin, who has been in the  UK  since  July  2012
    working here and exercising treaty rights.

3.   The appellant  and  Ms  Kwarteng  went  through  a  ceremony  of  proxy
    marriage in Ghana on 21 December 2013 at  which  neither  of  them  was
    present and which was conducted there by  members  of  their  families.
    They claim to have been living together since  April  2013,  about  six
    months after they first met.   The  respondent's  reasons  for  refusal
    letter of 23 September 2014 did not accept that the marriage was  valid
    or accepted under Ghanaian law.  Nor was there any evidence that such a
    marriage was recognised by German law, the nationality of the  sponsor,
    as required by Kareem [2014] UKUT 00024.  The refusal letter went on to
    consider whether the parties were in a  durable  relationship  for  the
    purposes of regulation 8(5) of the 2006  EEA  Regulations  but  as  the
    parties had not lived together permanently for two years the respondent
    was not prepared to accept the durability of the relationship.

4.   The appellant appealed.  The appeal  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Coffey (who has signed the Decision)  sitting  as  a  Panel  with
    Designated Judge Woodcraft.  The Panel allowed the appeal finding  that
    the Ghanaian Proxy Marriage was valid under Ghana law and that it would
    be accepted under German law [74].

5.   The respondent sought permission to appeal and permission  was  granted
    on 9 April 2015 by Designated Judge Coates.  In essence, permission was
    granted on the basis that the Panel "appear to have overlooked the fact
    that the response from the German Embassy indicates that  the  marriage
    would not be accepted as valid in the eyes of German law".

6.   On behalf  of  the  respondent,  Mr  Tufan  submitted  that,  following
    Kareem, the main issue in this case  was  whether  there  was  adequate
    evidence that this marriage would be recognised as lawful under  German
    law.  The evidence was such that the Panel could  not  reasonably  have
    reached that conclusion.  Indeed, at [74] of the  judge's  decision  it
    was indicated "that the German authorities, like this  Tribunal,  would
    be unlikely to accept the marriage certificate  as  proof  of  a  valid
    marriage".

7.   In reply Mr Palmer relied only on the appellant's Rule 24 notice  dated
    5 June 2015 which essentially argued that the  Panel  was  entitled  to
    come to its conclusions.

8.   Having read carefully, before the commencement of the  appeal  hearing,
    the correspondence from the German  Embassy  I  indicated  that  I  was
    satisfied that the Panel erred in concluding, even on  the  balance  of
    probabilities, that the German authorities would accept  this  marriage
    as being valid under German law.  The letter of 21 March 2014 from  the
    German Embassy in Accra (at page 146 of the appellant's bundle  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal) concludes at page 149  and  makes  it  clear  that
    German courts would decide on the issue in their discretion  and  based
    on the evidence before them.  It goes on to state that:

         "The German Embassy in  Accra  has  refrained  from  authenticating
         Ghanaian civil marriage registration certificates  since  the  year
         2000 due to  the  unreliability  of  the  Ghanaian  civil  marriage
         registration  process.   Therefore  it  may  be  concluded  that  a
         Ghanaian customary marriage registration  certificate  is  of  even
         less evidentiary value". [my underlining]

9.   More than that, at the very end of the same document at  page  149  the
    embassy official concludes as follows:

         "According  to  the  non-codified  Ghanaian  customary  law  it  is
         mandatory that (1) both spouses are Ghanaian nationals and (2) both
         spouses live in  Ghana.   In  light  of  these  considerations  the
         existence of  customary  law  of  a  specific  tribe  granting  the
         possibility to  conclude  a  valid  customary  marriage  between  a
         Ghanaian and a non-Ghanaian who does live in Ghana  appears  to  be
         highly improbable."

10.  In a further letter from the embassy of Germany in  London  the  letter
    concludes (at page 152):

         "The uncodified  Ghanaian  common  law  as  a  requirement  for  an
         effective marriage among other things requires  that  both  marital
         partners  are  Ghanaian  nationals  and  reside  in   Ghana.    The
         eligibility of a marriage concluded under one of the  circumstances
         mentioned by you in accordance with  Articles  11  and  13  of  the
         Introductory  Act  of  the   German   Civil   Code   is   therefore
         questionable." [my underlining]

11.  For all these reasons I am  not  satisfied,  even  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities, that the evidence  is  such  that  it  establishes  that
    German law would recognise the marriage between the  appellant  and  Ms
    Kwarteng in the  circumstances  outlined  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision.

12.  The decision must therefore be set aside.  It is  somewhat  regrettable
    that the Panel did not go on to consider whether, in any  event,  there
    was a durable relationship between the parties such that the  appellant
    would qualify under Regulation  8(5)  of  the  2006  Regulations.   The
    appeal must therefore be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  when  all
    issues will be at large.   None  of  the  findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal are to be retained.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision contained an error of law and the  decision
is accordingly set aside in its entirety.  The appeal is to be  remitted  to
the First-tier Tribunal for a full rehearing on all issues.



Designated Judge David Taylor
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
12 June 2015
