
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40331/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28 May 2015                                |On 18 June 2015              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                           DEPUTY JUDGE DRABU CBE


                                   Between
                               Mr BILAL SHAHID
                        ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Mahood, Legal Representative  ,  Nationwide  Law
Associates.
For the Respondent:    Mr Esen Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the  appellant  who  is  a  national  of  Pakistan
    against the decision  of  Judge  Black,  a  Judge  of  the  First  Tier
    Tribunal, who upheld the respondents' decision dated  1  October  2014,
    refusing his application to remain as a spouse  of  a  British  citizen
    under Article 8.

 2. The appellant was granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal by
    First Tier Judge P J M Hollingworth  on  18  March  2015.  In  granting
    permission the Judge said, "An arguable error  of  law  has  arisen  in
    relation to the construction to be placed upon the wording of S-LTR.2.2
    (a). At paragraph 4 the judge has stated that  the  Respondent  refused
    the current application on suitability grounds that the Appellant  used
    deception in a language test in a previous application  as  a  student.
    The wording of  S-LTR.2.2  is  couched  on  the  basis  of  information
    provided in relation to the  application  including  false  information
    submitted to any person to obtain a document used  in  support  of  the
    application". Judge Hollingworth went on to say, "At  paragraph  8  the
    Judge has stated that the  fact  that  the  Appellant  took  a  further
    language test in 2014 is not material. The Judge  at  paragraph  8  has
    referred to the main thrust of the Respondent's  case  being  that  the
    Appellant was ineligible because of the previous deception used  in  an
    immigration application. The  Judge  referred  to  and  considered  the
    evidence produced in support of that. The Judge found the Appellant had
    used deception in a previous application  for  leave  to  remain  as  a
    student. The Judge concluded the requirements under  S-LTR.2.2(a)  were
    not met. The Judge has concluded that Article 8  was  not  engaged.  An
    arguable error of law arises in relation to the Judge's conclusion that
    the decision was proportionate since it was made in accordance with the
    Rules relating to family life. It is arguable that the  proportionality
    exercise has not been conducted on as wide a footing as it should  have
    been" Judge went on to say," At Paragraph 8 the Judge has  stated  that
    he found the Appellant used deception in  a  previous  application  for
    leave to remain as a student. An arguable error of law  has  arisen  on
    the basis of relationship between that finding and the  wording  of  S-
    LTR.2.2."

 3. At the hearing before me Mr Mahood representing  the  appellant  argued
    that whilst it is accepted that deception  was  used  in  the  previous
    application, it was not used with regard to the application  which  the
    respondent had refused. The appellant had not  used  any  deception  in
    relation to the current application and therefore the Judge had made  a
    material error in law.

 4. Mr Tufan for the respondent argued that the  appeal  had  been  brought
    under Section 10 (1)(b) as it was in force at the time and according to
    that the wording was simply "deception" and  not  in  relation  to  any
    specific application.

 5. I note that the respondent has relied on the  wording  of  S-LTR2.2  to
    refuse the application under Rules. I also note  that  the  application
    which the respondent refused on 1 October 2014 had  been  made  by  the
    appellant on 24 July 2013. I further note that the  admitted  deception
    was made in relation to a previous  application  made  on  22  February
    2012.

 6. Having read the suitability requirements under S-LTR.2.2 (a) I conclude
    that the wording of the requirement is such that it cannot  and  should
    not have been stretched to any deception  of  concealment  of  material
    facts in relation to the present application. It clearly states  "false
    information,  representations  or  documents  have  been  submitted  in
    relation to the application (underlining of the word  "the"  is  mine.)
    including false  information  submitted  to  any  person  to  obtain  a
    document used in support of the application: (underlining of  the  word
    "the" is mine.)

    or

    (b) there has been a failure to disclose material facts in relation  to
    the  application."  I  have  underlined  the  word  "the"  in  the  two
    requirements (a) and (b) which in my respectful view means simply  what
    it says. The requirement set out applies to  the  application  that  is
    being considered and not to any other.

 7. To that extent Judge Black's decision is in material error of law. As a
    consequence I also find that Judge Black's conclusion on the engagement
    of Article 8 and the proportionality  exercise  carried  out  was  also
    materially flawed. The decision is therefore set aside.

 8. In remaking the decision I conclude that the respondent's  decision  to
    refuse to vary the appellant's leave to remain was  not  in  accordance
    with the immigration rules,  in  that  she  was  wrong  to  refuse  the
    application under S-LTR.2.2. The appellant had not fallen foul  of  the
    requirement under S-LTR.2.2.

 9. The respondents' decision on the engagement of Article 8 was, as can be
    seen from the  reasons  for  refusal  letter,  based  upon  her  flawed
    conclusion about the appellant's suitability  as  well  as  eligibility
    under the Rules as is evident  from  paragraph  16  of  the  letter  of
    refusal. The respondent was also not satisfied  that  the  relationship
    between the appellant and his wife was genuine and subsisting as  there
    was insufficient evidence of that when she considered  the  application
    (see paragraph 15). Judge Black heard live evidence from the  appellant
    as well as his wife. She found (paragraph 9 of the determination)  that
    "the appellant is in a lawful marriage that is genuine  and  subsisting
    and his wife is a British citizen." Judge Black found (paragraph 10  of
    the determination) that "There  is  family  life  as  the  parties  are
    married and cohabiting, there would be an interference with  that  life
    if the appellant were removed and his wife remained in the  UK  and  as
    such sufficiently grave". She then went on to find that the decision on
    non-engagement of Article 8 is "lawful as it is in accordance with  the
    Immigration Rules." Judge Black, as has already  been  stated  in  this
    determination, erred in finding that the  decision  was  in  accordance
    with the Immigration Rules.

10. Judge Black then went on to find that the "decision is proportionate as
    it was made in accordance with the rules relating to family life."  Her
    consideration of the appellant's claim  under  Article  8  was  clearly
    contaminated by this material error and I find  that  the  respondent's
    decision on Article 8 claim was a disproportionate interference in  the
    family life of the appellant and his wife.

11. Reminding myself that I  must  carry  out  the  balancing  exercise  on
    proportionality fairly I find that the balance is tilted in  favour  of
    the appellant. No public interest will be served by  the  break  up  of
    this  young  family.   Further,  I  find  that  there  are  exceptional
    circumstances in this case in that the appellant's wife  is  a  British
    citizen with ailments  that  require  good  medical  facilities.  As  a
    British citizen she cannot be compelled to leave the United Kingdom and
    if she does not leave the United Kingdom her family life  and  that  of
    the appellant will come to an end. As a British citizen  she  does  not
    have a  right  to  secure  permanent  settlement  in  Pakistan  without
    abandonment of her British citizenship.

12.  This appeal is allowed both under Immigration Rules as well as  Article
    8 of the ECHR.



K Drabu CBE
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Date: 13 June 2015

