
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
                                IA/40267/2013
                                                               IA/40283/2013
                                                               IA/40273/2013
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|                                          |                            |
|Heard at Field House                      |Decision Promulgated        |
|On 14 January 2014                        | On 30 January 2015         |
|                                          |                            |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between

                            KARIMBHAI RAHIM MOMIN
                           ASMITA KARIMBHAI MOMIN
                                 IHAD MOMIN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr G Davison counsel instructed by AKL Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr P Duffy Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. This is an appeal by the Appellants against the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Boyd promulgated on 1 October  2014  which  dismissed  the
   Appellants' appeals on all grounds.
Background


3. The first two Appellants are a husband and wife born on 23  January  1976
   and 1 June 1979 and the third Appellant is their child born  on  16  June
   2009 and they are all nationals of India.
4. On 2 May 2013 the Appellants applied for leave to remain  in  the  United
   Kingdom outside of the Immigration Rules under Article 8 ECHR.
5. On 1  October  2013  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellants'
   applications and made directions for the Appellants removal. The  refusal
   decision was made by reference to the  Immigration  Rules  which  address
   Article 8 claims and also considered whether there were  any  exceptional
   circumstances  in  the  Appellants  case  such  that  the   refusal   was
   disproportionate. The letter set out the reasons why the  Appellants  did
   not meet the requirements of Appendix FM and paragraph  276ADE  and  also
   considered the third Appellants medical condition but  found  in  essence
   that there was treatment available for his condition  in  India  and  his
   medical circumstances did not warrant a further grant  of  leave  outside
   the Rules.
The Judge's Decision
6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Boyd ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal  against  the  Respondent's
   decision.  The  Appellants  conceded  that  they  could  not   meet   the
   requirements of the Rules and that the appeal was pursued on the basis of
   'Article 8 outside the Rules only and that claim arose out of the  second
   Appellant's ill health only.  Discretionary  leave  had  previously  been
   issued and they were looking for another grant of Discretionary leave.'
7.  The Judge found that the third Appellant had  a  heart  condition  which
   had required two episodes of cardiac surgery in March 2013  and  December
   2013. He found that leave had previously been granted to  allow  for  the
   surgery and then to allow a recovery  period  and  he  found  that  those
   grants were based on medical evidence stating that  the  third  Appellant
   was unfit to travel either at the time of the first surgery in March 2013
   or at the time of the second surgery in December 2013.  While  the  Judge
   heard evidence from the first Appellant to suggest that there had been no
   improvement in his sons condition the  Judge  found  that  this  was  not
   supported by the medical evidence. He found that before him there was 'no
   real evidence' as to the extent of the December 2013 surgery and what the
   result was. He found that that the most recent letter from  the  hospital
   dated 19 August 2014 from Dr Slavik no longer stated that he was unfit to
   travel and he noted that his school report confirmed he was a  child  who
   hopped, skipped and ran.  The judge found on the basis  of  the  evidence
   before him the operations had been successful and  no  further  operation
   was anticipated and that there was adequate treatment available in  India
   and there was no evidence to suggest that the type of medication  he  was
   required to take was unavailable in India.  He  therefore  dismissed  the
   appeal both under the Rules and Article 8.
8. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 2 December 2014 First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Levin gave permission  to  appeal  stating  that  given  the  child
   Appellant's medical condition it was arguable that the  Judge  failed  to
   consider the  proportionality  of  the  Respondent's  decisions  on  both
   private life and family life grounds and in so doing to  have  sufficient
   regard to the best interests of the child  under  s  55  of  the  Borders
   Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

9. At the hearing I heard submissions from  Mr  Davison  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that :

   (a)He accepted that between March - June  2013  the  Appellant  had  been
   granted discretionary leave as a result  of  the  child  Appellant's  ill
   health. The letters in the Respondent's bundle stated that the  Appellant
   was unfit to fly and required further surgery which he  had  in  December
   2013.

   (b) The Judge had focused on the operation and its success and had failed
   to look forward.

10. On behalf of the Respondent  Mr Duffy submitted that :

   a) The findings made by the Judge were open to him on the  basis  of  the
      evidence before him.

   b) The decision was solely concerned with the child's health,  which  was
      the basis of which the case was put. Therefore  the  Judge  took  into
      account the best interests of the child and  the  decision  to  remove
      them was proportionate.

   c) The previous grants of leave had been on the basis that the child  was
      not fit to fly. There was now evidence that he  was  on  the  road  to
      recovery and was able to return and receive treatment in India.

   d) Adequate reasons for the decision were given.

   e) The Judge made a finding that there was adequate treatment in India

Finding on Material Error

11. Having heard those submissions and read the Grounds of  Appeal  and  the
   Rule 24 Notice I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the  Tribunal  made  no
   material errors of law.

12. The first ground argued had been that the Judge failed to apply  section
   117B of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2014. This ground  was
   misconceived and was not one that Mr Davison sought to pursue. The  Judge
   made clear in paragraph 11 of the determination that in so far as it  was
   relevant to the case before him he took those provisions into account.

13. The second ground  suggests  that  the  Judge  failed  to  consider  the
   witness statements and medical evidence  before  him  and  give  adequate
   reasons for his decision. I am satisfied that the Judge took into account
   all of the relevant evidence. The Judge set  out  in  careful  detail  at
   paragraphs  8-11  the  oral  evidence  of  the   First   Appellant   that
   supplemented his witness statement. At paragraphs 12 -15  the  Judge  set
   out a detailed, accurate and careful analysis  of  the  medical  evidence
   making a number of references to documents within the Appellants  bundle.
   Mr Davision when asked was unable  to  identify  any  specific  piece  of
   evidence, documentary or otherwise, that the Judge  had  failed  to  take
   account in reaching his decision. I am therefore satisfied that this is a
   challenge to the weight that the Judge gave  to  the  various  pieces  of
   evidence and that this was a  matter  for  him  unless  irrationality  or
   perversity is being alleged which Mr Davison quite properly accepted  was
   not the case as such an argument would have no merit.

14. The third ground suggests that the Judges assessment  of  whether  there
   were exceptional circumstances by reference to the child  Appellants  ill
   heath  failed  to  take  into  account   the   Immigration   Directorates
   Instructions on Exceptional Circumstances. I am satisfied that this  case
   was put to the Judge on the basis only of the childs ill health  and  the
   entire decision was focused on that issue.

15.  I am satisfied that in determining the outcome of the  case  the  Judge
   properly directed himself in paragraph 11  as  to  the  law  including  a
   recognition that this case would  involve  an  assessment  of  Article  8
   outside the Rules as it was conceded that the Appellants could  not  meet
   the requirements of the Rules and that his decision was also required  to
   take into account the best interests of the child. The careful  focus  of
   the childs health makes it clear that this was in the  forefront  of  the
   Judgement's assessment under Article 8.

16. I am satisfied that it was open  to  the  Judge  on  the  basis  of  the
   medical  evidence  before  him  to  find  that  the  previous  grants  of
   Discretionary Leave had been underpinned by medical evidence that he  was
   unfit to fly as this was specifically stated  in  the  medical  evidence.
   This leave as a matter of fact allowed him to  have  the  two  operations
   that he required.

17.  The latest medical evidence that was before  the  Judge  was  dated  19
   August 2014 and was found at page 49 of the  Appellants  bundle  made  no
   suggestion that he was unfit to fly or indeed required  further  surgery.
   There was also evidence before the Judge that  the  child  Appellant  was
   demonstrating improved  strength  at  school  by  skipping,  running  and
   hopping. The Judge referred to this evidence at  paragraphs  13-  14  and
   indeed to an earlier letter from the GP at page 42 which  confirmed  that
   the child Appellant's medical condition, while requiring  medication  for
   the residual findings of the surgery, had improved. I am  satisfied  that
   on the basis of the evidence before him and in the absence of any medical
   evidence to the contrary the Judge was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the
   third Appellant was fit to travel.

18. The Judge then assessed whether  there  was  medication  and  follow  up
   available in India as was suggested in the refusal letter by reference to
   Country Information. The Judge properly recognised that caselaw  requires
   not equivalence of treatment but adequacy and availability of  treatment.
   The Appellant's provided no evidence as to available treatment and appear
   to have relied merely on Dr Slaviks comment in the letter at page 49 that
   he was 'not certain' that such  treatment  was  available  in  India.  By
   contrast the Respondent provided evidence in Annex B of their bundle that
   the Judge referred to in paragraph 16 of  his  decision  suggesting  that
   such treatment was indeed available.

19. I am satisfied that it was therefore open to the Judge to conclude  that
   in the circumstances the basis for the grant of discretionary  leave  had
   changed and there was, in the light of the  improvement  in  the  child's
   health, the lack of contra indications to travel and the availability  of
   treatment in India nothing to suggest that returning to  India  with  his
   family was anything other than in the child's best interests.

20. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as  a
   whole set out findings that were sustainable  and  sufficiently  detailed
   and based on cogent reasoning and the decision should stand.

CONCLUSION

21. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

22. The appeal is dismissed.

Signed                                                              Date
29.1.2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

