
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA408062014
                                                                 IA408162014
                                                                 IA408222014
                                                                 IA407992014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13th May 2016                     |On 25 May 2016                       |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     EOP
                                     BOP
                                     SOP
                                     YOP
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    No legal representation
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellants appeal against a decision of Judge Lever of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 5th August 2015.

 2. The  Appellants  are  all  Nigerian  citizens,  the  first  and  fourth
    Appellants are married and are the parents  of  the  second  and  third
    Appellants born 17th December 2008 and 19th February 2007 respectively.



 3. The Appellants applied for leave to remain in the United Kingdom  based
    upon their family and private life.  The applications were  refused  on
    13th October 2014.

 4. The Appellants' appeals were heard together by the FtT on 6th July 2015
    and dismissed.

 5. The Appellants applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    relying upon five grounds which are summarised below.

Ground 1

 6. The FtT failed to engage with the Respondent's failure to apply her own
    policy in relation to children with continuous residence in the  United
    Kingdom of more than seven years.

Ground 2

 7. The FtT erred in finding the adult Appellants not credible as when they
    gave  evidence,  they  were  not  cross-examined  by  the  Respondent's
    representative.  The FtT therefore acted unfairly.

Ground 3

 8. The FtT concluded that 'a false picture'  had  been  presented  to  the
    expert which undermined the usefulness of that report.  As the FtT  had
    erred in making adverse credibility findings, the FtT also erred in its
    approach to the expert report.

Ground 4

 9. In relation to Article 8 of  the  1950  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights (the 1950 Convention) and section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009, the FtT erred by not  having  regard  to  the
    actual terms of section 55, which are  to  safeguard  and  promote  the
    welfare of children.

Ground 5

10. The FtT erred in finding that the standard of  proof  when  considering
    Article 8 was the balance  of  probabilities,  rather  than  the  lower
    standard.

11. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Osborne of the FtT and I  set
    out below in part, the grant of permission;

         "Contrary to what is stated in the grounds  and  despite  the  fact
         that it was specifically raised in the skeleton argument, the judge
         dealt appropriately with the best interests of the  children.   The
         judge was not obliged to deal with each and every issue  raised  in
         the skeleton argument particularly in relation  to  a  Home  Office
         policy which has been withdrawn.  However, it is at least  arguable
         that the judge did not specifically provide the Appellants with  an
         opportunity to respond to specific matters which became the subject
         of his decision even though the  Respondent  chose  not  to  cross-
         examine  the  Appellants.   It  is  at  least  arguable  that   the
         Appellants/witnesses were deprived of appropriate opportunities  to
         clarify points the judge wished to raise.  At least to that  extent
         it is arguable that the Appellants were denied a fair hearing."

12. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, contending in summary that the FtT directed itself  appropriately
    and that it was open to the FtT  to  find  a  lack  of  credibility  in
    certain aspects of the Appellants' accounts.

13. Directions were issued that there should be an oral hearing before  the
    Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether the FtT had erred in law such  that
    the decision should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

14. There was no attendance by or  on  behalf  of  the  Appellants.   Their
    representatives had submitted a fax dated 4th May  2016,  referring  to
    the hearing date of 13th May 2016, advising the Tribunal that they were
    no longer representing the Appellants.

15. I considered rule 38 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 which states that if a  party  fails  to  attend  a  hearing,  the
    Tribunal may proceed with the hearing if satisfied that the  party  has
    been notified of the hearing or that reasonable steps have  been  taken
    to notify the party of the hearing, and  it  is  in  the  interests  of
    justice to proceed with the hearing.

16. I was satisfied that not only had the Appellants' representatives  been
    notified of the hearing by a notice  dated  7th  April  2016,  but  the
    Appellants had also received the same  notification  giving  the  time,
    date and venue of the hearing.

17. There was no application for an adjournment, and  as  I  was  satisfied
    that proper notice of the hearing had been given, and that the decision
    appealed against was dated 13th October 2014, I decided that it was  in
    the interests of justice to proceed with the hearing in the absence  of
    the Appellants.

18. I heard oral submissions from Mr McVeety who relied upon  the  rule  24
    response in submitting that the FtT had not erred in law.  I was  asked
    to find that it was  open  to  the  FtT  to  make  adverse  credibility
    findings, having considered the evidence of the adult Appellants.

19. I was asked to find that the  FtT  hearing  was  not  unfair,  and  the
    decision should stand.

20. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

Ground 1

21. I find no merit in the suggestion that the FtT failed  to  engage  with
    the Respondent's failure to apply her own policy.  If the reference  to
    a policy is a reference to DP5/96, I note that policy was withdrawn by
    the Respondent well before the Appellants applied for leave to  remain.
    The fact that  this  policy  was  withdrawn  was  acknowledged  in  the
    skeleton argument prepared on behalf of the Appellants, and the FtT was
    requested to consider paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) which applied to children
    who had lived continuously in the United Kingdom  for  at  least  seven
    years at  the  date  of  application.   The  FtT  considered  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv) and Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.

Ground 2

22. The FtT did not err in making adverse credibility  findings.   The  FtT
    was entitled to make adverse credibility findings in  relation  to  the
    adult Appellants who adopted their witness statements at the hearing.

23. It is the responsibility of the FtT  to  assess  credibility  and  make
    findings, and simply because the Respondent's  representative  did  not
    cross-examine the adult Appellants does not  mean  that  the  FtT  must
    accept that evidence as being credible.

24. In my view the FtT did not act unfairly.   The  findings  contained  in
    paragraph 24 were open to the FtT to make on the evidence.  The central
    issue relates to whether it is reasonable for the minor  Appellants  to
    leave the United Kingdom and reside in Nigeria.  The  finding  made  by
    the FtT that it was not accepted that the first Appellant ever intended
    to return to Nigeria, and the finding that it was not accepted that the
    fourth Appellant never intended to join  the  first  Appellant  in  the
    United Kingdom, are not in fact material or significant findings.  They
    do not go to the core of the appeals, which is whether it is reasonable
    for the minor Appellants to live in Nigeria.

25. The FtT was entitled to note that the applications for leave to  remain
    in the United Kingdom were only made after  the  arrest  of  the  first
    Appellant in October 2013, and prior to that both adult Appellants  had
    been living in the United Kingdom without leave.

26. The FtT was entitled to find, on the evidence presented, that the first
    Appellant's claim that he and his  mother  were  destitute  in  Nigeria
    because of greedy relatives, was inconsistent with the evidence in  the
    first Appellant's visa application, that  his  studies  in  the  United
    Kingdom had been funded by his uncle in Nigeria.

27. The Appellants relied upon the contents of their witness statements and
    in my view the FtT was entitled  to  analyse  that  evidence  and  make
    findings upon it, and  was  not  under  an  obligation  to  afford  the
    Appellants an  opportunity  to  comment  upon  every  proposed  adverse
    finding.  This ground does not disclose an error of law.

Ground 3

28. I find that this is linked with the second ground.  As I find that  the
    FtT did not err in making adverse credibility findings, I find that the
    FtT did not err in its approach to the expert report.

29. The FtT considered the expert social worker report in some detail as is
    apparent from paragraphs 31-35 of the FtT decision.  In  my  view,  the
    FtT carried out a thorough analysis of  the  report,  and  gave  cogent
    reasons for not accepting the report's conclusions.

Ground 4

30. I find no merit in this ground.  It is clear that the FtT was aware  of
    the  provisions  of  section  55  of  the  Borders,   Citizenship   and
    Immigration Act 2009.  As the FtT made clear in paragraph 27, the issue
    in relation to the minor Appellants was whether  or  not  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect them to leave the United  Kingdom  and  reside  in
    Nigeria.  The FtT pointed out in paragraph 31 that

         "In reality this case is focused on the position  of  the  children
         and it is very much with  their  situation  in  mind  that  I  have
         considered the evidence.  My examination of the evidence  presented
         includes paying regard to the social worker report  that  was  sent
         separately and was specifically referred to by  Dr  Mynott  in  his
         submissions."

31. The FtT correctly considered paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) as to  whether  it
    was reasonable to expect the  minor  Appellants  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom, and also considered the question of reasonableness in relation
    to Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.  The FtT demonstrated  that
    this was a primary consideration.

Ground 5

32. This is  not  a  case  where  the  Appellants  had  claimed  asylum  or
    humanitarian protection, nor had they raised  Article  3  of  the  1950
    Convention.  When considering Article 8 under  the  Immigration  Rules,
    the burden of  proof  is  a  balance  of  probabilities,  and  the  FtT
    correctly stated this to be the case.  I do not  accept  that  the  FtT
    erred by applying too high a standard of proof.

33. The grounds display a disagreement with the  findings  and  conclusions
    reached by the FtT but they do not disclose a material error of law.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the FtT did  not  involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law such that the decision must be set aside.  I do  not
set aside the decision.  The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The FtT made an  anonymity  direction.   I  continue  that  anonymity  order
pursuant to rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008.


Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 21st May 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeals are dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed   Date 21st May 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
