

                                    [pic]


The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)            Appeal number: IA/40380/2013

                                  IA/40384/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated   |
|On September 8, 2014                 |On September 9, 2014        |
|                                     |                            |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                       mrs ma elenita aquino convento
                        mr romeo rc arceo delos reyes
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Reid, Counsel, instructed by Blakewells
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1.  The  appellants,  born  November  2,  21983  and   January   5,   2010
    respectively,  are  citizens  of  the  Philippines.   The   first-named
    appellant entered the United Kingdom as a student on June 23, 2009 with
    leave to enter as a student until August  23,  2011.  The  second-named
    appellant, her partner, joined her in March 2010 as a family  dependant
    with leave to remain  until  the  same  date.  On  July  19,  2013  the
    appellants applied for further leave to remain under article 8 ECHR.
 2. The respondent refused their applications on  September  17,  2013  and
    decisions to remove them, including a direction under section 47 of the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006, were issued the same day.



 3. The appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal under Section  82(1)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on October 2,  2013
    and on April  11,  2014  Judge  of  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  Britton
    (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") considered their appeals on the
    papers and dismissed them in determination  promulgated  on  April  17,
    2014. The appellants sought permission to appeal this decision on April
    28, 2014  and  on  June  3,  2014  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Hollingworth granted permission finding it arguable the FtTJ had  erred
    in his approach to article 8 ECHR.  The  respondent  field  a  Rule  24
    response on June 12, 2014 accepting the FtTJ had erred in his approach.



 4. The matter initially came before me on July 30. 2014  and  I  adjourned
    the case for evidence to be served.

 5. The matter came back before me on the above date. The  appellants  were
    in attendance. The second-named appellant was unable to  give  evidence
    in English but there had been no request for an interpreter. Miss  Reid
    was content to rely on the evidence of the first-named appellant.

    EVIDENCE

 6. Mrs Convento adopted her recent statement. She confirmed she  had  come
    to Liverpool, United Kingdom, to study in 2009 and in 2010 her  partner
    had joined her as a dependent. He had remained here  as  her  dependent
    and she had extended her stay as a post study work  migrant.  Prior  to
    the expiry of that leave she had submitted her current  application  to
    remain. She stated she and her partner:

     a. Were law abiding.
     b. Were hard-working.
     c. Had built up strong community ties.
     d. Had regular contact with her partner's aunt who lived in Wimbledon.
     e. She had a twenty-seven year old brother who lived in the  City  and
        her partner's family lived outside Manila.

    She stated that if she and her partner were removed it would be  unfair
    after they had spent the crucial years of their lives in  the  country.
    They were expecting their first child in December 2014 and  her  doctor
    had advised her not to travel because of her pregnancy and diabetes.


    Mr Avery did not cross-examine her.


    SUBMISSIONS


 7. Mr Avery relied on the refusal letter and submitted that the appellants
    could not satisfy the Immigration Rules for the purposes of  family  or
    private life. He submitted that the Tribunal should only consider their
    appeal outside of the Rules if they had compelling  circumstances  that
    merited consideration. He submitted they had none. The  main  appellant
    had come as a student with no expectation of being  allowed  to  remain
    beyond her studies. Although she had obtained work as  a  Tier  1  post
    study work migrant this also brought  no  long-term  expectations.  The
    Tribunal in Nasim and others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT  00025  (IAC)  was
    relied on. This appeal was also being heard after the  Immigration  Act
    2014 came into effect and consequently Section 117B  of  the  2002  Act
    affected this appeal. Of  particular  relevance  to  this  appeal  were
    subsections (2) to (5) because the second named appellant spoke  little
    English and their private life had been created at a  time  when  their
    status was temporary. The fact the first-named appellant  was  pregnant
    did not alter their situation. He submitted that even if article 8  was
    engaged it was not disproportionate to expect  their  private  life  to
    continue in the Philippines.

 8.  Miss Reid accepted they could  not  met  the  requirements  of  either
    Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE HC 395. She  submitted  the  fact  they
    were law abiding, hard working, not reliant on  any  benefits  and  had
    integrated  well  meant  article  8  was  engaged.  Removal  would   be
    disproportionate especially  in  light  of  the  fact  the  first-named
    appellant had been advised not to  fly  during  the  remainder  of  her
    pregnancy and they  would  continue  to  work  and  contribute  to  the
    economy.

 9. I reserved my decision.

    ASSESSMENT OF EVIDENCE AND FINDINGS

10. The appellants entered the United Kingdom lawfully and had been  living
    here lawfully ever since. The first named appellant had  entered  as  a
    student in 2009 and the  second  named  appellant  had  joined  her  as
    dependent partner. They had committed no  offences  and  there  was  no
    suggestion that during this period  there  had  been  any  recourse  to
    public funds.

11. The first-named appellant spoke good English but I was told her partner
    did not. Section 117B(2) of the 2002 Act makes clear that

             "It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being  of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United  Kingdom
             are able to  speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English- (a) are less of a burden on  taxpayers,  and  (b)  are
             better able to integrate into society."

12. The appellants cannot meet the Immigration Rules  for  Appendix  FM  or
    paragraph 276ADE HC 395. The appellants had no other  basis  to  extend
    their stay in the United Kingdom other than article 8  and  since  July
    2013 article 8 has been encompassed within the Rules.

13. There are inherent difficulties  facing  this  couple  because  of  the
    decision of Nasim and others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 00025  (IAC).  The
    Tribunal considered the position of students, persons seeking to extend
    their stay for work and people who were law-abiding.

14. The Tribunal stated:

             "19. It is important to bear in mind that  the  "good  reason",
             which the state must invoke is not a fixity.  British  citizens
             may enjoy friendships, employment and studies that are  in  all
             essential respects the same as those enjoyed  by  persons  here
             who are subject to such controls. The fact that the  government
             cannot arbitrarily interfere with a British citizen's enjoyment
             of those things, replicable though they may be,  and  that,  in
             practice, interference is likely to be justified only by strong
             reasons, such as imprisonment for a criminal offence, cannot be
             used to restrict  the  government's  ability  to  rely  on  the
             enforcement of immigration controls as a reason for interfering
             with friendships, employment and studies enjoyed  by  a  person
             who is subject to immigration controls.


             20. We therefore agree with Mr Jarvis that [57]  of  Patel  and
             Others is a significant exhortation from the Supreme  Court  to
             re-focus attention on the nature and purpose of Article 8  and,
             in  particular,  to  recognise  its  limited  utility   to   an
             individual where one has moved along the continuum,  from  that
             Article's  core  area  of  operation  towards  what  might   be
             described as its fuzzy penumbra. The  limitation  arises,  both
             from what will at that point normally be the tangential  effect
             on the individual of the proposed  interference  and  from  the
             fact that, unless there are particular reasons  to  reduce  the
             public  interest  of  enforcing  immigration   controls,   that
             interest   will   consequently   prevail   in   striking    the
             proportionality balance (even assuming that stage is reached).


             21. In conclusion on this first general matter,  we  find  that
             the nature of the right asserted by  each  of  the  appellants,
             based on their desire,  as  former  students,  to  undertake  a
             period of post-study work in the United Kingdom,  lies  at  the
             outer reaches of cases requiring an affirmative answer  to  the
             second of the five "Razgar" questions and that, even if such an
             affirmative  answer  needs  to   be   given,   the   issue   of
             proportionality is to be resolved decisively in favour  of  the
             respondent, by reference to her functions as  the  guardian  of
             the  system  of  immigration  controls,  entrusted  to  her  by
             Parliament.


             The effect  on  human  rights  of  paying  one's  way  and  not
             committing criminal offences


             26. We do not consider that this set of submissions  takes  the
             appellants' cases anywhere.  It cannot rationally be  contended
             that their Article 8 rights  have  been  made  stronger  merely
             because, during their time  in  this  country,  they  have  not
             sought public funds, have refrained  from  committing  criminal
             offences and have paid the fees required in order to  undertake
             their  courses.   Similarly,  a  desire   to   undertake   paid
             employment in the United Kingdom is not, as such, a matter that
             can enhance a person's right to  remain  here  in  reliance  on
             Article 8.


             27. The only significance of not  having  criminal  convictions
             and not having relied  on  public  funds  is  to  preclude  the
             respondent from pointing to any public interest in  respect  of
             the appellants' removal, over and above the basic importance of
             maintaining a firm and coherent system of immigration  control.
             However, for reasons we have already enunciated, as  a  general
             matter that public interest factor is, in the circumstances  of
             these   cases,   more   than   adequate   to   render   removal
             proportionate."

15. I am satisfied that any private  life  created  was  during  the  first
    appellant's studies and also her work (similarly for  the  second-named
    appellant) and the fact they had worked here did not in  itself  create
    an expectation that they would be allowed to remain. The fact they  had
    not been in trouble and had paid their taxes was to  their  credit  but
    again this did not make their position any stronger. Section 117B(5) of
    the 2002 Act makes clear that  little  weight  should  be  attached  to
    private life established when immigration status is precarious.  Whilst
    I accept the appellants were here lawfully  they  both  knew  they  had
    limited leave to be here.

16. I am invited to consider the appeal outside the Rules under  article  8
    ECHR. The Courts in MM (Lebanon) & Ors, R (on  the  application  of)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department & Anor [2014] EWCA  Civ  985
    considered the approaches in Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) and  Nagre
    [2013] EWHC 720 Admin and confirmed the approach to be taken.

  17. The Court of Appeal in MM examined numerous authorities and stated:


         "128. ... In Nagre the new  rules  were  themselves  attempting  to
         cover, generally,  circumstances  where  an  individual  should  be
         allowed to remain in the UK on Article 8 grounds... Nagre does  not
         add anything to the debate,  save  for  the  statement  that  if  a
         particular person is outside the rule then he has  to  demonstrate,
         as a preliminary to a consideration outside the rule, that  he  has
         an arguable case that there may be good grounds for granting  leave
         to remain outside  the  rules.    I  cannot  see  much  utility  in
         imposing this  further,  intermediary,  test.    If  the  applicant
         cannot satisfy the rule, then there either is or  there  is  not  a
         further Article 8 claim.  That will have to be  determined  by  the
         relevant decision-maker.


         134. Where the relevant group  of  Immigration  Rules,  upon  their
         proper construction, provide a "complete code" for dealing  with  a
         person's Convention rights in the context of  a  particular  IR  or
         statutory provision, such as in the case  of  "foreign  criminals",
         then the balancing exercise and the way the various factors are  to
         be taken into account  in  an  individual  case  must  be  done  in
         accordance with that  code,  although  references  to  "exceptional
         circumstances"   in   the   code   will   nonetheless   entail    a
         proportionality  exercise.    But  if   the   relevant   group   of
         Immigration  Rules  is  not  such  a  "complete  code"   then   the
         proportionality test will be more at large, albeit  guided  by  the
         Huang tests and UK and Strasbourg case law.


         159. ... It seems clear from the statement of Lord Dyson MR  in  MF
         (Nigeria) and Sales J in Nagre that a court would have to  consider
         first whether the  new  MIR  and  the  "Exceptional  circumstances"
         created a "complete code" and,  if  they  did,  precisely  how  the
         "proportionality test"  would  be  applied  by  reference  to  that
         "code".


         162. ... Firstly, paragraph GEN.1.1 of Appendix FM states that  the
         provision of the family route  "takes  into  account  the  need  to
         safeguard and promote the welfare of children  in  the  UK",  which
         indicates that the  Secretary  of  State  has  had  regard  to  the
         statutory duty.   Secondly, there is no legal requirement that  the
         Immigration Rules should provide that the  best  interests  of  the
         child should be determinative.   Section 55 is not a  "trump  card"
         to be played whenever the interests of a child arise..."


18. The burden of proving article 8 is engaged falls on the  appellants.  I
    have considered all of the evidence including the fact the  first-named
    appellant is expecting their child. There is no evidence that  children
    in the Philippines cannot be catered for and despite the concerns about
    the Philippines stated in  their  witness  statements  they  both  have
    family members there.

19. They do not come anywhere near to satisfying the Immigration Rules  and
    having considered all of the above evidence I  am  not  persuaded  that
    this is a case that engages Article 8  outside  of  the  Rules  because
    there are no compelling circumstances that make  removal  unjustifiably
    harsh.  In  reaching  this   conclusion   I   have   considered   their
    private/family life arguments and had regard to the decision  of  Nasim
    in so far as their private life is concerned and  the  fact  that  they
    have no dependence on any UK based family as they stated they are  able
    to care for themselves with no reliance on benefits.

20. Even if I was obliged to consider this case  outside  the  Rules  I  am
    satisfied following the test set out in Razgar [2004] UKHL  00027  that
    removal would be interference but it would be in  accordance  with  the
    law and for the purpose of immigration control. Any  removal  would  be
    proportionate having regard to the above facts.

Decision

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did disclose an error.  I  have
    remade  the  original  determination  and  I  dismiss  the  appellants'
    appeals.


22. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order for anonymity was made in the First-tier and I do not  vary  that
    decision.

Signed:                                 Dated:





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT

I make no fee award as the appeal was dismissed.


Signed:                                 Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
