
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/40562/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th January 2017                          |On 26th January 2017          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         mrs evelyn emmanuel daniels
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    The Appellant in person


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State  I  refer  to  the
    parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant, Mrs Evelyn Emmanuel  Daniels,  a  national  of  Nigeria,
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of Secretary  of
    State dated 22nd September 2014 to refuse her application for leave  to
    remain in the UK.  Her daughter was born on 4th November 2007,  is  her
    dependant in this appeal as are her two sons, twins, born in the UK  on
    11th  June  2009.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Nicholls  allowed  the
    Appellant's  appeal  and  the  Secretary  of  State  now  appeals  with
    permission to this Tribunal.

 3. The background to this appeal is that  the  Appellant  and  her  eldest
    child entered the UK on 12th June 2008 with her husband who  had  entry
    clearance as a highly skilled Migrant.  Her husband applied for further
    leave to remain in January 2010 and she  applied  as  his  partner  and
    their child as the child of a Tier 1 Migrant.  Those applications  were
    refused in March 2010 and the appeals against that  refusal  dismissed.
    The Appellant did not leave the UK  and  her  husband  made  a  further
    application to regularise his status on 28th September  2012  with  the
    Appellant and their daughter as his dependants.  That  application  was
    refused on 20th September 2013.

 4. The Appellant and her husband were served with One-Stop Notices on 12th
    February 2014 and a response was made on the part of the Appellant  and
    her husband on 8th April 2014 raising issues under Articles 3 and 8  of
    the ECHR.  Those applications were refused on 22nd  September  2014  on
    the basis that the  Respondent  considered  that  the  refusal  of  the
    applications would not place the UK in breach of its obligations  under
    the Human Rights Act 1998.

 5. By the time the matter came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Nicholls
    in June 2016 the Appellant and her husband had separated and it was the
    Appellant's case that he had disappeared and that the Appellant was the
    sole parent of her three children.

 6. The judge heard  oral  evidence  from  the  Appellant  who  represented
    herself at the hearing.  The judge noted that the  Appellant  indicated
    that she accepted  that  there  was  no  specific  category  under  the
    Immigration Rules under which she could qualify for leave to remain  in
    the UK.  The judge considered a number of factors  including  the  fact
    that the children had by then been resident in the  UK  for  more  than
    seven years, the fact that the Appellant  has  been  diagnosed  as  HIV
    positive, the best interests of the children, the requirements of EX.1,
    the  situation  for  the  family  in  Nigeria,  and  the  family's  the
    circumstances in the UK. The judge considered the provisions of section
    117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.  The  judge
    concluded that the compelling and exceptional circumstances in the case
    are sufficient to outweigh the public interest and that the removal  of
    the Appellant from the UK would not be in the  best  interests  of  the
    children and would be in breach of Article 8 [31].

 7. In the Grounds of Appeal the Secretary of State contends that the judge
    made a material misdirection in law in that the assessment of the  best
    interests of the children is based purely on their length of  residence
    in the UK and does not take account  of  other  material  factors,  for
    example the children's Nigerian nationality, their lack  of  status  in
    the UK, the fact that their removal would be with  their  mother,  that
    they have no reported  health  problems  and  that  any  security  they
    currently have in the UK is purely as a result of welfare support.   It
    contended  that  it  follows  from  this   that   the   assessment   of
    reasonableness as set out in paragraph 29 of the  judge's  decision  is
    arguably wrong and that the  decision  is  unsustainable.  The  grounds
    point out that the children are Nigerian nationals, having been brought
    up in Nigerian culture, their ties to the  UK  are  restricted  to  the
    length of  their  residence  and  it  is  arguable  that  it  would  be
    reasonable to return the children to the country of origin  with  their
    mother.   It  is  submitted  that  the  proportionality  assessment  in
    paragraphs 30 and 31  of  the  decision  is  unbalanced  and  that  the
    Tribunal has failed to have regard to MA (Pakistan) &  Others  v  Upper
    Tribunal (IAC) & SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 705 which requires  consideration
    of the wider aspects of the case such as  the  Appellant's  immigration
    history, the family's financial independence or reliance on  state  aid
    and, had these aspects been considered, the conclusions may  well  have
    been very difference.

 8. At the hearing before me Mr Kotas  submitted  that  the  reasonableness
    assessment is one-sided,  he  submitted  that  the  judge  has  largely
    ignored the Appellant's lack of status since 2011 although  he  accepts
    that the judge notes that the Appellant did not enter  illegally  [25].
    He submitted that at paragraph 27 the judge notes that the two  younger
    children are 7 years old at the date of the hearing and it  is  unclear
    why the judge makes a finding that they have had two years of education
    and attaches significant weight to this factor.  He submitted that  the
    children are still in  primary  school  and  that  the  judge  has  not
    adequately developed his conclusions  that  the  educational  point  is
    significant.  He submitted that the judge  noted  that  the  Presenting
    Officer submitted that there  is  a  functioning  education  system  in
    Nigeria but the judge puts that issue to one side.  He submitted  that,
    if there is no impediment to re-adjusting to life in Nigeria, it is not
    clear why the judge has not taken that into account in  his  assessment
    of reasonableness.  He submitted that the factors set out in  paragraph
    30 were factors that were not in the Appellant's favour. He  said  that
    the Appellant has been wholly reliant on public support as set  out  in
    paragraph 15 of the decision but the judge counted in  the  Appellant's
    favour her ability to be financially independent, however he  submitted
    that this is not the test and is in fact a factor  which  should  weigh
    against the Appellant.  He accepted that there was no factual challenge
    to any of the issues considered by the judge  but  submitted  that  the
    reasonableness assessment had been inadequate.

 9. I have considered the assessment of the judge from paragraphs 19 to 31.
     It is clear to me that the judge has assessed all relevant factors  in
    this case including the best interests of the children including  their
    education, their life outside the family, their  involvement  with  the
    Church and the fact that their father has disappeared and their  mother
    is the sole parent. The judge also considered the length  of  residence
    of the children; the Appellant's medical condition;  the  circumstances
    in Nigeria including the fact that there are no remaining close  family
    there; the Appellant's criminal conviction; and the fact that there was
    no illegality in the Appellant's entry to the UK.

10. The judge did consider the fact that the Appellant has not left the  UK
    since she was refused further leave to remain and  the  ending  of  her
    appeal rights [25] and the fact that the Appellant did not  have  leave
    to remain.  Therefore the judge did take into account  the  Appellant's
    unlawful stay in the UK.  The judge took into account the fact that the
    Appellant had never acted dishonestly.

11. In considering the best interests of the children the judge  took  into
    account their education, the fact that the elder daughter is 9 and  has
    undertaken all of her education in the UK.  Whilst taking into  account
    the fact that there is a functioning education system in  Nigeria,  the
    judge concluded that  there  would  inevitably  be  disruption  to  the
    children's education as well as to the lives they had known in  the  UK
    [27].  The judge took into account the fact that the best interests  of
    the children are to remain with their mother, in  a  stable  household,
    and took into account the fact that the children  have  now  gained  so
    much needed stability in their lives [28].

12. The judge took into account the fact that the Appellant  has  qualified
    as a nurse and if she is permitted to work she has a lot to  contribute
    to the UK.  The judge attached particular weight  to  this  factor.   I
    acknowledge that the judge may not have properly applied  Section  117B
    in terms of the financial independence.  However  the  judge  did  take
    into account the fact that the Appellant has the ability to work  as  a
    nurse and counted that in her favour, he was entitled to do so.  In any
    event having concluded that Section 117B(6) applies the provision about
    financial independence has much less, if any,  weight  (Treebhawon  and
    others (section 117B(6)) [2015] UKUT 00674 (IAC)) .

13. Therefore looking at the decision as a whole I am  satisfied  that  the
    judge reached a conclusion open to him on the  basis  of  the  evidence
    before him considering all  relevant  factors  and  that  there  is  no
    material error in the judge's decision.

Notice of Decision

14. There is no material error of law  in  the  judge's  decision  and  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall therefore stand.

15. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 25 January 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I maintain the fee award made by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                              Date: 25 January 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
