
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41051/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 7th July 2014                                |On 11th July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              JESSICA SERENCIO
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G Asomaing, Solicitor on behalf of Alpha Shindara
Legal


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Ince) who in a determination promulgated  on
    8th July 2014 allowed the Appellant's appeal against  the  decision  of
    the Respondent to refuse leave to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  on
    Article 8 grounds outside the Immigration Rules.

 2. Whilst this is the appeal of the Secretary of State, for  the  sake  of
    convenience I will refer to the parties as they were before the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 3. The Appellant is a national of the Philippines born on 16th March 1973.
     The history of the proceedings  can  be  shortly  stated.   She  first
    arrived in the UK on 21st July 2008 as a student, having  worked  as  a
    nurse in the Philippines for seven years and in Saudi  Arabia  for  two
    years.  She came to the  United  Kingdom  to  pursue  an  NVQ  level  3
    qualification at the Overseas Nurse Training Organisation (ONTO).   She
    was granted successive leave to remain until 14th August 2013  and  had
    progressed in her studies up to level 5 of the NVQ  diploma.   She  had
    wished to progress onto a degree course and then a master's degree.

 4. In respect of her history, it was said that the Appellant had completed
    all of her level 5  by  November  2012  and  had  submitted  her  work
    assignments for assessment.  However, there were  delays  in  assessing
    hers and other students work caused by ONTO's failed attempt  to  merge
    with another college and a failure of the college's external  verifier,
    the Institute of Leadership  and  Management  (ILM),  to  come  to  the
    college to assess the work until December 2013.  The  position  of  the
    Appellant was that she had had five assignments still to be marked  but
    in the meantime ONTO's licence had been revoked by the Home Office  (it
    was a "highly trusted" college).  Consequently as her  assignments  had
    not been marked, her diploma could not be awarded.  This had caused her
    not only financial hardship but meant that she could  not  obtain  from
    the college any level 5 NVQ certificate to enable her to progress  onto
    another course at another college.  The Appellant only had her level  3
    qualification.

 5. In respect of her private life, during the five years that she had been
    in the United  Kingdom  it  was  stated  that  she  had  established  a
    "considerable" private life, had numerous  friends  and  had  joined  a
    number of different social and religious organisations.  At college she
    had founded the student council, organised events  and  attended  staff
    meetings.  She had  been  active  particularly  in  religious  matters,
    especially in relation to children. It was her case  that  her  studies
    had been curtailed by the college's failures and now its suspension and
    she wished to be allowed to remain to obtain her NVQ qualification  and
    progress onto a degree course as she had planned to do.

 6. The judge noted that in support of her case there were numerous letters
    from friends and colleagues testifying to her education, commitment and
    support of those around her, particularly in her religious activities.

 7.   The Appellant applied for leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  The
    decision of the Secretary of State dated  3rd September  2013  refused
    that application, considering the matter under paragraph 276ADE of  the
    Immigration Rules.  It was noted that she had not been resident in  the
    UK for a continuous period of twenty  years,  and  thus  did  not  fall
    within paragraph 276ADE(iii) and that as she was 40 years old, she  was
    not under  the  age  of  18,  and  therefore  did  not  meet  paragraph
    276ADE(iv) and that also she was not aged between 18 and  25  and  thus
    did not fall into the "half of her life period of residence in the  UK"
    category under paragraph 276ADE(v).  Furthermore it  was  not  accepted
    that she had lost ties in her home country of the Philippines where she
    had lived previously and therefore 276ADE(vi) did not apply.

 8.   The Respondent also considered whether  there  were  any  exceptional
    circumstances which would justify granting leave to remain outside  the
    Rules.  It was noted that she wanted to  complete  her  studies  whilst
    remaining in the UK but concluded she could return to  the  Philippines
    and complete them there or apply again to come to the UK as  a  Tier  4
    Student.

 9. The judge had the  advantage  of  hearing  the  oral  evidence  of  the
    Appellant and the submissions made on  behalf  of  both  parties.   The
    credibility of the Appellant was not challenged  by  the  Secretary  of
    State (see [19]) and the judge was satisfied  that  the  Appellant  had
    told him the truth concerning all the material aspects of her claim.

10. The  judge  began  from  the  premise  that  she  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules (see [20]),  however,  the  judge
    directed himself in accordance with the decision of Gulshan and whether
    there were  any  "exceptional  circumstances"  which  would  result  in
    unjustifiably harsh  consequences  for  the  Appellant  such  that  the
    refusal of the application would not be proportionate (see [26]).

11.   For the reasons that he gave  in  the  determination  at  [28-29]  he
    reached the conclusion that there were "exceptional circumstances" that
    existed in relation to her  case.   He  then  went  on  to  consider  a
    proportionality balance conducted outside  of  the  Rules  taking  into
    account the arguments of the Secretary of State relying on the cases of
    Nasim and others (Article 8) Pakistan [2014] UKUT 25 (IAC) and that  of
    Patel and Others v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72.  The  judge  distinguished  the
    factual circumstances of the Appellant's case from  the  Appellants  in
    the previous cases cited and conducted  a  proportionality  balance  at
    paragraphs [40-41] and reached the  conclusion  that  on  the  evidence
    before him the Respondent had failed to demonstrate that the removal of
    the  Appellant  would  be  proportionate.   It  is   plain   from   the
    determination that the reason that he had reached that  conclusion  was
    that this was an Appellant whose circumstances were analogous to  those
    of the Appellant in CDS (Brazil) and thus was  distinguished  from  the
    Appellants in Nasim and Patel and that she had not completed her course
    for the reasons given at [37], that the course was a "significant  part
    of her private life and that her removal would jeopardise what she  had
    so far achieved", and that she had been prevented from  completing  her
    studies, not by any change in the Immigration Rules, but by her college
    not marking her work and then its Tier 4 licence being suspended  which
    had then placed the Appellant in a "very precarious situation indeed as
    her five unmarked assignments are currently in the college premises and
    she has no access to them".

12.  The judge considered that "if she was required to  leave  the  UK  the
    chances of her recovering those documents will  substantially  diminish
    to the point that she will lose them forever".  The  judge  found  that
    "she had not completed her course, through no fault of  her  own".   He
    found that to be an exceptional circumstance and  in  the  light  of  a
    policy of granting students 60 days' leave  when  a  licence  had  been
    suspended and he saw no reason why she should not  be  treated  in  the
    same way.  Thus he found the decision to be a disproportionate one.

13. Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Heynes on 19th  May
    2014.  I should say  something  about  the  grant  of  permission.   At
    paragraph 1, Judge Heynes recorded that the permission application made
    by the  Secretary  of  State  was  "in  time".   In  the  grounds  that
    accompanied the application it referred to a short delay in making  the
    application due to the staff  shortages  in  the  administrative  team.
    There is no reference to that and I can only  find  that  Judge  Heynes
    when granting permission and by in stating that it was "in time" had in
    effect extended time and dealt with the application on  that  basis  on
    its merits.  There has been no challenge to the grant of permission  on
    behalf of the Appellant, either by way of a Rule  24  response,  indeed
    there is no Rule 24 response provided on behalf of the  Appellant,  nor
    in oral submissions.  In those circumstances  I  intend  to  treat  the
    permission application as one in which time was extended by  the First-
    tier Tribunal.

14. Mr Diwnycz appeared on behalf of the Secretary of State and relied upon
    the grounds.  He made no further oral submissions.

15.  Mr Asomaing submitted that the judge made no misdirection in  law  and
    that he had made it clear by applying the settled law that in this case
    he  found  on  the  facts  before  him  that  there  were   "compelling
    circumstances" in relation to her private life  and  had  distinguished
    the facts of her case from  the  other  authorities  cited  within  the
    determination.  The judge addressed the issues  properly  and  lawfully
    and it was open to him to reach the conclusion that  her  private  life
    would be terminated abruptly and that this would be disproportionate in
    the particular circumstances of her  case.   In  particular,  the  five
    marked assignments would be  lost  forever  as  the  judge  stated  and
    therefore she could not have been said to have completed her course and
    that that was the basis upon which her application had been made  until
    the issue was resolved.  Thus the decision of  the  judge  was  that  a
    period of leave should be granted to allow her to have her work  marked
    so that she could resume her studies elsewhere.  Thus he submitted  the
    application was misconceived and that the  judge  correctly  identified
    the issues of law and applied them to the facts of this case.

16. I reserved my determination.

17. The grounds make two principal assertions.  Firstly  they  assert  that
    the judge misdirected himself when reaching the conclusion relating  to
    this Appellant's "private  life"  and  that  the  findings  made  under
    Article 8 were a "material misdirection" as they do not  establish  the
    decision to refuse leave was "unjustifiably harsh".  In the grounds  at
    (a) and (b) and (c) the findings of the judge appear  to  be  in  issue
    that she would not have severed her ties to the Philippines,  that  the
    relationships and friends that she  had  in  the  UK  could  have  been
    maintained in the Philippines and therefore it did not  establish  that
    the decision to refuse was "unjustifiably harsh".   The  second  ground
    asserts that the judge had "no basis to allow the appeal under  Article
    8" citing the decision of the Supreme Court in Patel and Others  [2013]
    UKSC 72 and the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  in  Nasim  and  others
    (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 00025.  It is asserted  that  the  decision  to
    allow the appeal "was not lawful".

18. The grounds as drafted in reality challenge the findings  made  by  the
    judge concerning the elements  of  the  Appellant's  private  life  and
    further, in effect, that the judge had no basis in law for allowing the
    appeal on Article 8 grounds.  Those grounds were not expanded  upon  by
    Mr Diwnycz on behalf of the Secretary of State.

19.   I find that such submissions do not adequately take into account  the
    contents of the determination and, in particular, the judge's  analysis
    of the law including the authorities cited by the Secretary of State in
    light of the particular findings that he made.  Insofar  as  the  first
    grounds appear to be a challenge to his findings of fact, they are  and
    can be properly characterised as a disagreement with  the  findings  of
    fact properly reached by the judge on the evidence before him.  It  was
    entirely open for the  judge  to  make  those  findings  based  on  the
    evidence that was before him.  At [19] the credibility of the Appellant
    was not challenged by the Secretary of State and indeed the judge found
    that she had told him the truth concerning the factual elements of  her
    claim.  It was entirely open to the judge to reach  the  conclusion  on
    the evidence before him that she had not completed  her  studies.   The
    judge took into account the submissions made by the Presenting  Officer
    at [37] but reached the conclusion from the evidence  before  him  that
    whilst she had completed her academic assignments that she was required
    to complete, they remained unmarked and thus it could not be  said  she
    completed her course because she was not entitled  to  her  certificate
    which had shown that she had completed her course and was  entitled  to
    the qualification.

20.   Whilst the grounds make reference to the essential  elements  of  her
    private life being enjoyed outside of  the  UK,  the  judge  took  into
    account at [40] that she could return to the Philippines  and  complete
    her studies there but at [38] and [41] he placed  emphasis  and  weight
    upon the fact that the circumstances that she presently was in was  not
    "of her own making" and that if she was not in the UK it would be  very
    difficult for her  to  preserve  the  evidence  of  her  studies  which
    remained unmarked and obtain from the college what it currently held in
    relation to her existing qualifications.  Thus  he  found  her  studies
    were a "significant part of her private  life  and  her  removal  would
    jeopardise what  she  had  so  far  achieved"  and  at  [41]  that  the
    circumstances  that  the  Appellant  was  in  placed  her  in  a  "very
    precarious situation  indeed  as  her  five  unmarked  assignments  are
    currently in the college premises and she has no access to  them".   He
    considered that "if she is required to leave the UK the chances of  her
    recovering those documents will substantially  diminish  to  the  point
    that she will lose them forever".  He therefore took into account  that
    she had not completed the course through  no  fault  of  her  own.   He
    further took into account as part of the exceptional  circumstances  in
    her case that UKBA did have a policy of granting those a  short  period
    of leave who were in a similar circumstance to the  Appellant  and  was
    not at fault as a result of a suspension of the licence and  that  also
    was put in  the  balance  in  favour  of  the  Appellant.   Thus  those
    findings, I conclude, were ones that were entirely open to the judge to
    make on the evidence that was before him and, insofar  as  the  grounds
    appear to challenge those findings, they  were  properly  made  on  the
    evidence before him and could not be said to be perverse in  the  sense
    that no reasonable judge could have reached  such  conclusions  on  the
    evidence.

21. Insofar as the grounds submit that the findings did not establish  that
    the decision to refuse was "unjustifiably harsh" that has to be seen in
    the light of the ground in which  it  is  submitted  that  the  judge's
    decision to allow the appeal was unlawful.

22. It is plain from reading the determination as a whole  that  the  judge
    properly applied what  is  now  considered  to  be  the  settled  legal
    principles.  The decision of R (Nagre) v SSHD [2013] EWHC  720  (Admin)
    considered the new Immigration Rules which  were  amended  in  2012  to
    address  more  explicitly  the  factors  according  to   domestic   and
    Strasbourg case law weighing in favour of, or against,  a  claim  by  a
    foreign national based on Article 8 of the ECHR to remain in the United
    Kingdom.  Those amendments were introduced with the intention to  align
    the Immigration Rules more closely with the approach to be taken  under
    Article  8.   Instructions  were  issued  by  the  Secretary  of  State
    regarding the approach to be applied by officials in deciding to  grant
    leave to remain outside the Rules.  Those instructions were that if the
    Rules are not met  it  will  be  appropriate  normally  to  refuse  the
    application but leave can be granted where exceptional circumstances in
    the sense of "unjustifiably harsh consequences" on the individual would
    result.  As Mr Justice Sales stated, there is a dual discretion  "fully
    accommodated the requirements of Article 8".  In  accordance  with  the
    guidance set out in Nagre and Gulshan as confirmed in Shahzad  (Article
    8: legitimate aim) [2014] UKUT 00085 (IAC),  a  judge  is  required  to
    consider  the  question  of  proportionality  in  the  context  of  the
    Immigration Rules first with no need to go on to a specific  assessment
    of Article 8 if it is clear from the facts that there are no compelling
    or exceptional circumstances that require  that  course  to  be  taken.
    Thus as Gulshan stated, after applying the requirements of  the  Rules,
    only if there may be arguably good grounds for granting leave to remain
    outside the Rules is it necessary for Article 8 purposes to  go  on  to
    consider whether there are compelling  circumstances  not  sufficiently
    recognised under them.

23.   The judge properly directed himself in this way at  paragraphs  [22]-
    [25] and expressly took into account the decision of  Gulshan  and  the
    Secretary of State's guidance  concerning  "exceptional  circumstances"
    which he set out at length at [24] and [25].  This is the test that the
    grounds assert the judge  did  not  properly  apply.   The  judge  then
    proceeded  to  set  out  whether  there  were  any  such   "exceptional
    circumstances" identified from the particular facts of the appeal.   At
    [27] and [28] he reached the  conclusion  that  whilst  there  were  no
    exceptional circumstances at the date of decision, on the evidence that
    was before him, the date of the hearing being  the  relevant  date,  he
    found there to be  "exceptional  circumstances".   In  that  regard  he
    stated as follows:-

         "Since the decision there has been a further  development  in  that
         ONTO has had its Tier 4 licence suspended.   Normally,  when  that
         happens, UKBA grant a student affected by such at  least  60  days'
         leave to remain to find another course and to  regularise  matters.
         It would appear that the Appellant has no connection to the reasons
         why the college had its licence suspended and  therefore  it  would
         appear that this policy should apply to the Appellant and that this
         development therefore is capable of  amounting  to  an  exceptional
         circumstance.  However, as this situation did not  pertain  at  the
         date of the decision, the Respondent's decision is not in breach of
         her own policies  and  is  therefore  not  unlawful.   Accordingly,
         although I conclude that an exceptional  circumstance  now  exists,
         that does not entitle me to conclude that the decision in September
         2013 was in breach of the Rules.  However it  does  entitle  me  to
         take that into account when  considering  the  residual  Article  8
         claim under the ECHR."

24. By stating that, I take it to mean that the judge found that this was a
    circumstance that could not properly be said to  have  been  considered
    under the Rules and therefore  fell  out  with  the  Immigration  Rules
    dealing with Article 8 and led  him  to  the  conclusion  that  he  was
    required to conduct a more detailed analysis outside of the Rules which
    the judge then proceeded  to so do.

25. In this respect the grounds submit that there was no basis on which the
    judge could properly allow the appeal citing the decisions of Patel and
    Nasim.  However, the judge gave careful consideration to both of  those
    cases  not  only  citing  those  decisions  in  detail  but   also   by
    distinguishing the factual circumstances of those cases from  those  of
    this particular Appellant.

26.   In the case of Nasim, the judge took into account that the Appellants
    in Nasim had maintained there was an  unlawful  interference  to  their
    private lives due to a change in the  Immigration  Rules  during  their
    courses (which they had all completed) which meant  that  opportunities
    to remain in the UK which were  available  when  they  commenced  their
    studies were no longer  available  to  them.   It  is  plain  from  the
    analysis that  the  judge  undertook  that  he  found  this  particular
    Appellant to  be  in  a  category  distinguishable  from  that  of  the
    Appellants in Nasim  (that  would  apply  to  the  Appellants  also  in
    Patel), on the basis that the Appellant had not completed  her  studies
    and that she had been prevented from doing so due to the failure of her
    college to mark her work and that whilst she had completed the academic
    assignments they remained unmarked and therefore it could not  be  said
    that she had properly completed her course.  It was open to  the  judge
    to reach that conclusion on the evidence that she had not completed her
    course.

27.   In this respect he considered the decision of CDS (PBS:  "available":
    Article 8) Brazil [2010] UKUT 00305 (IAC) noting at [37] that this  was
    a case that was "analogous to that of the  Appellant  before  me".   He
    noted that in the case of CDS, a change in the sponsorship Rules during
    the course of a period of study was accepted as having a serious affect
    on the ability of the Appellant to conclude her course of  study.   The
    judge reached the conclusion that that scenario was analogous  to  that
    of the Appellant in that she had been  prevented  from  concluding  her
    course of study due to the failure of her college to mark her work  for
    over a period of a year.  Thus he found that she was in the position of
    not having completed her course which was different to  the  Appellants
    in the cases cited on behalf of the Secretary of State.

28. At [38] he concluded on the Razgar analysis the steps in favour of  the
    Appellant noting that it was not in dispute that she  had  built  up  a
    private life consisting of her extensive community contacts through her
    studies and her church activities and that those would be lost  if  she
    retuned to the Philippines.  Moreover, he  found  that  she  was  in  a
    situation that was "not of her own making" and that if she was  not  in
    the UK, it would be in his judgment "very difficult for her to preserve
    the evidence of her studies which remains unmarked and to  obtain  from
    the college what  it  currently  holds  in  relation  to  her  existing
    qualifications.  Her studies are a significant part of her private life
    and her removal  would  jeopardise  what  she  had  so  far  achieved".
    Consequently the judge found that there would be a serious interference
    of her private life on the basis of those facts if she was required  to
    return home at this time.  At [39] he resolved the other  questions  in
    the affirmative thus bringing him to the question  of  proportionality.
    In this respect the judge set  out  what  could  be  described  as  the
    "countervailing factors" or the factors put in the balance in favour of
    the Secretary of State.  He noted that she had no reason or entitlement
    to remain in the UK, she knew by the nature of the visa that it  was  a
    temporary stay and that she would have to  return  to  the  Philippines
    (although he noted in this context she was not asking to remain in  the
    United Kingdom indefinitely or permanently), that she would be reunited
    with close family in the Philippines and she could return  to  complete
    studies there or apply to re-enter the UK and that there were no health
    issues applicable to her.

29.   The balancing factors weighing in favour of the Appellant  were  also
    set out at [41] noting in favour of the Appellant, that she had been in
    the UK lawfully for a period of five years, that she  had  developed  a
    "significant private life and contributed positively to her community".
     Whilst the judge found that she had not been involved  in  a  criminal
    activity, he went on to state that that was what he  would  expect  and
    that was entirely consistent with the decision in Patel  and  Nasim  in
    which it was found that not having any  criminal  convictions  did  not
    enhance one's human rights.  However, he went on to state that she  had
    studied hard and that she had not contributed to the situation in which
    she had found herself.  He found that her situation  was  analogous  to
    that of the Appellant in  the  case  of  CDS  and  that  she  had  been
    prevented from completing  her  studies,  not  by  any  change  in  the
    Immigration Rules, but by her college not marking her work and then its
    Tier 4 licence being  suspended  placing  her  in  a  "very  precarious
    situation indeed as her five unmarked assignments are currently in  the
    college premises and she had no access to them".  Thus in  the  balance
    he considered that "if she is required to leave the UK the  chances  of
    her recovering those documents will substantially diminish to the point
    that she will lose them forever.  I reiterate that, in my judgment, she
    has not completed her course, through no fault of her  own".   He  then
    went on to place in the balance at [42] that that  was  an  exceptional
    circumstance that she had found herself in and that UKBA had  a  policy
    and that there was no reason why the  Secretary  of  State  should  not
    treat her in the same way as any other student in such a predicament.

30. After carrying out the balance at [40], [41] and [42], the judge stated
    this, "Balancing all these factors together I come, unhesitatingly,  to
    the conclusion that the Respondent has failed to demonstrate  that  the
    removal of the Appellant would not be disproportionate".

31. Having considered the determination when read as a  whole  and  in  the
    light of the authorities cited in the grounds and in the determination,
    I do not consider that it could  properly  be  said  that  the  judge's
    decision to allow the appeal was "unlawful" on the basis upon which the
    grounds assert, that the judge had no basis in law upon which to  allow
    the appeal.  It is plain from the authorities cited in the grounds  and
    considered by the judge himself that  he  found  as  a  fact  that  the
    Appellant's studies were a "significant part of her private  life"  and
    that she had not completed her course, that was a  sustainable  finding
    open to the judge.  Thus that was a fact capable of  being  taken  into
    account in the proportionality balance and the  reasons  given  by  the
    judge for her not being able to complete the  course.   The  judge  had
    proper regard to the decision of the Supreme  Court  in  Patel  and  to
    recognise Article 8's limited utility in private life  cases  that  was
    far removed from the protection of an individual's moral  and  physical
    integrity.  The decision in Patel at [57] that  Article  8  was  not  a
    general dispensing power and the judge considered this in  the  context
    of the particular Appellants in Patel because they could not  meet  the
    Immigration Rules and concluded that such  considerations  did  not  by
    themselves provide  Grounds  of  Appeal  under  Article  8,  which  was
    concerned with private and family life, not  education  as  such.   The
    decision in Patel made it clear that the wish of a promising student to
    complete the course, however desirable in general terms, is not  itself
    a right protected under Article 8 (see [57] of Patel).  In the decision
    of Nasim, the decision of Patel was considered further.   At  [20]  the
    Upper Tribunal agreed with the Secretary of  State  that  Patel  was  a
    significant exhortation from the Supreme Court to refocus attention  on
    the nature and purpose of  Article  8  and  to  recognise  its  limited
    utility to an individual where one has moved along the  continuum  from
    that Article's core area of operation towards what might  be  described
    as the "fuzzy penumbra".  At [21] the  Upper  Tribunal  considered  the
    particular Appellants in Nasim who  were  former  students  seeking  to
    undertake a period of post-study work.  They considered that this "lies
    at the outer reaches of cases requiring an affirmative  answer  to  the
    second of the five  'Razgar'  questions  and  that,  even  if  such  an
    affirmative answer needs to be given, the issue of  proportionality  is
    to be resolved decisively in favour of the Respondent, by reference  to
    her functions as the guardian of the system  of  immigration  controls,
    entrusted to her by Parliament".  The Upper  Tribunal  also  considered
    the scope of the decision  of  CDS  (Brazil)  at  [39-42].   The  Upper
    Tribunal distinguished the facts of CDS (Brazil) from the Appellants in
    Nasim, in a similar way as this First-tier Tribunal Judge  did  in  the
    light of the particular  facts  of  the  Appellant  with  whom  he  was
    concerned.  In the Upper Tribunal, the  Appellants  in  Nasim  had  all
    finished their course.  This led the Tribunal at [41] to  consider  the
    submission made by the Secretary of State in that case that the  obiter
    remarks in CDS regarding Article 8 were no longer good law in the light
    of Patel and Others.  The Tribunal did not accept that.   The  Tribunal
    said this:-

         "41. ...  We find that would go too  far.   It  is  true  that  the
             Tribunal in CDS made reference to the  particular  passage  of
             the judgment of Sedley LJ in Pankina regarding  the  need  for
             the Home Office 'to exercise some common  sense',  which  drew
             comment from Lord Carnwath at [57] of Patel  and  Others  (see
             above).  The Tribunal did, however, expressly acknowledge that
             it was unlikely a person would be able to show  an  Article  8
             right by coming to the United Kingdom for temporary  purposes.
             The chances  of  such  a  right  carrying  the  day  have,  we
             consider, further diminished, in the light of the judgments in
             Patel and Others.  It would, however, be wrong to say that the
             point has been reached where an adverse  immigration  decision
             in the case of a  person  who  is  here  for  study  or  other
             temporary purposes can never be found to be  disproportionate.
             But what is clear is that, on the state of  the  present  law,
             there is no justification for extending the obiter findings in
             CDS, so as to equate a person whose course of  study  has  not
             yet ended with a person who, having finished their course,  is
             precluded by the Immigration  Rules  from  staying  on  to  do
             something else."

32. Therefore in the light of paragraph 41, it cannot be said the judge had
    no legal basis whatsoever to allow the appeal as  the  grounds  submit.
    As the Upper Tribunal said in Nasim at [41] it would be  wrong  to  say
    that the point had been reached by reference to the decision  in  Patel
    that where an adverse immigration decision in the case of a person  who
    was here to study or other temporary purposes can never be found to  be
    disproportionate.

33.   In those circumstances it was therefore open to the  judge  to  reach
    the conclusion when carrying out the proportionality balance and on the
    particular facts of this case to reach the conclusion that he did.   In
    considering that balance of  proportionality,  it  is  plain  from  the
    determination that he had regard to the general  principles  enunciated
    in Patel  and  Nasim  and  relating  to  Article  8  and  gave  express
    consideration at [35] to the view that  Article  8  is  not  a  general
    dispensing power but on  the  particular  facts  of  this  case,  after
    conducting the balancing exercise, the  judge  reached  the  conclusion
    that  the  Respondent  had  not  demonstrated  that  her  removal   was
    proportionate.  In carrying out the balance he looked at  all  material
    matters including factors in favour of the Appellant and those  against
    her.  Whilst this might not have been the only possible outcome on  the
    facts of the case, the judge directed  himself  correctly  in  law  and
    plainly had regard to the competing arguments  and  struck  balance  by
    taking into account all  those  relevant  matters.   As  noted  in  the
    decision of Mukarkar v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1045, the  mere  fact  that
    one Tribunal has reached what may seem an unusually  generous  view  of
    the facts of a particular case does not mean that it has made an  error
    of law and in those circumstances, even if it might properly be said as
    a generous decision, it does not disclose any legal error.

34.   It is also further plain from  reading  the  determination  that  the
    judge envisaged a short period of discretionary  leave  (see  [40]  and
    [42] and [43]) and that it will be open to the Secretary  of  State  to
    grant leave in accordance with the decision of the  judge  and  on  the
    particular facts of this appeal.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not involve the  making  of  an
error on a point of law.  The decision shall stand.






Signed                              Date 10/7/2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

