
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41124/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 February 2016                   |On 1 March 2016                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                          FAOUZI BEN MOHAMED AMDOUN
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. M. Rashid of Counsel, Carlton Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr. C. Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Kainth promulgated on 18 August 2015 in which he refused
    the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision to  refuse  to
    issue an EEA residence card as confirmation of his right to  reside  in
    the UK under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006
    (the "Regulations").

 2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:

         "This  was  a  brief  decision  which  turned  on  the  appellant's
         inability to show that his ex-wife was a "qualified person" at  the
         date of decree absolute.  Although no jurisprudence is referred to,
         that approach is consistent with Sansam [2011] UKUT 165  and  other
         decisions.  The grounds, as  drafted,  raise  the  short  point  of
         whether that approach was correct,  given  the  Court  of  Appeal's
         decision in NA [2014] EWCA Civ 995 to refer precisely  that  issue.
         In the circumstances it is arguable that the Judge's  approach  was
         flawed."

 3. At the hearing  I  heard  submissions  from  both  representatives.   I
    reserved my decision which I now set out with reasons.

Submissions

 4. At the outset of his submissions, Mr. Rashid provided a copy of a grant
    of leave from the Appellant's passport which showed that  he  had  been
    granted five years residence from 6 November 2001 to 17 October 2006 on
    the basis of his marriage to his ex-wife.  This had not been before the
    First-tier Tribunal.  He accepted that the judge had not found that the
    Appellant had been living in the UK for a continuous five year  period,
    but submitted that this was evidence of such residence.   He  submitted
    that the Appellant was able to satisfy the requirements  of  regulation
    15(1)(b), but said that nobody had picked up on this at the hearing.

 5. In relation to regulation 15(1)(f), it was submitted  that  there  were
    three issues, and the judge had found  for  the  Appellant  on  two  of
    those.  He submitted that the judge had not  accepted  the  photocopies
    but that he could not find any rule which  prevented  photocopies  from
    being accepted in an EEA context.

 6. The second error made by the judge was in looking at 2011  rather  than
    2009 as the relevant date on which evidence was needed.  I was referred
    to paragraphs [16] and [17].  He submitted that the material  time  was
    2009.

 7. The third error related to NA.  There  was  no  requirement  under  the
    Directive for the EEA ex-partner to be exercising Treaty rights on  the
    date of the divorce.  I was referred to paragraph [21].  The  Directive
    did  not  impose  the  requirement,  which  was  only  imposed  by  the
    Regulations.  The Directive had direct effect.  The reference  made  to
    the ECJ was in July 2014, prior  to  the  hearing.   The  judge  should
    either have adjourned awaiting the ECJ,  or  should  have  applied  the
    Directive directly, and allowed the appeal.

 8. However for the purposes of regulation 15(1)(f)(i),  he  accepted  that
    there had been no finding of five years' continuous residence.

 9. Mr. Avery submitted that, in relation to regulation 15(1)(b), the judge
    could not be criticised for taking into account an issue  on  which  he
    had no evidence.  The judge was not impressed by the evidence regarding
    the EEA national at the time of the divorce.  Irrespective of the date,
    the evidence of the EEA national exercising Treaty  rights  was  simply
    not there.  He did not accept that the judge  had  the  wrong  date  in
    mind.

10. In relation to the referral to the ECJ, this did not  change  the  law.
    It was not appropriate to change the way in which  matters  were  dealt
    with now on the basis of this referral.

Error of law

11. Regulation 15(1)(f) provides that a person shall acquire the  right  to
    reside in the United Kingdom permanently if he:

      i) has  resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with  these
         Regulations for a continuous period of five years; and

     ii) was, at the end of that period, a family member  who  has  retained
         the right of residence.

12. The judge set out the evidence before him, consisting of a bundle of 48
    pages from the Appellant and payslips  from  2001  and  2002  [7].   In
    paragraph [13] he sets out the evidence on which the  Appellant  sought
    to rely, the wage slips for his ex-spouse from 2001 and 2002.

13. In paragraph [14] he states:

         "The evidence does not suggest that the appellant's  former  spouse
         was a qualified person under the 2006 EEA Regulations.  Other  than
         the wage slips for 2001 and 2002,  no  further  evidence  has  been
         submitted."

14. The judge is clear in his decision that  was  very  little  documentary
    evidence before him.  In order to meet the requirements of  regulations
    15(1)(f), the first thing that the Appellant needs to do is  show  that
    he has resided in the United Kingdom in accordance with the Regulations
    for a continuous period of five years.   In  the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter the Respondent stated  that  the  Appellant  failed  to  provide
    evidence that he had done so.  It is only once the judge was  satisfied
    that regulation 15(1)(f)(i) had been met that  he  needed  to  consider
    whether the Appellant met the requirements of 15(1)(f)(ii),  i.e.  that
    he was at the end of that period a family member who had  retained  the
    right of residence.

15. The judge does not set out the regulations in any detail.  In paragraph
    [3] he refers to the fact that the Respondent refused  the  Appellant's
    application  "with  reference  to  the   requirements   of   Regulation
    15(1)(f)", but he does not set out what  these  requirements  are.   He
    does not address whether or not the Appellant meets the requirements of
    regulation 15(1)(f)(i).  As accepted by Mr. Rashid, he made no  finding
    as  to  whether  the  Appellant  met  the  requirements  of  regulation
    15(1)(f)(i).

16. Therefore, irrespective of any error in relation  to  consideration  of
    regulation 10(5) and 10(6), which are required to be met  by  reference
    to regulation 15(1)(f)(ii), I  find  that  the  decision  involves  the
    making of an error of law insofar as the judge has failed  to  consider
    and make findings as to whether the Appellant met the  requirements  of
    the first limb of regulation 15(1)(f).

17. In order to ascertain whether or not this error  is  material,  I  have
    considered the evidence which was before the judge.   The  reasons  for
    refusal letter refers to the documents submitted with  the  application
    as being the wage  slips  for  the  Sponsor  from  2001  to  2002,  the
    Appellant's P60s, a letter  from  the  Appellant's  employer,  and  the
    marriage and  divorce  certificates.   The  schedule  of  documents  of
    evidence which was before the First-tier Tribunal includes "Lanc Office
    Cleaning six weeks payslips for Mr Amdoun", "Rentokil Initial ten weeks
    payslips for  Mr  Amdoun",  "Confirmation  of  employment  letter  from
    Initial Cleaning", "P60 2004-2005 for Mr  Amdoun",  "P60  end  of  year
    certificates to 2002, 2003, 2004 and 2005".  I have copies of P60s  for
    the Appellant ending 2002 to 2008, 2010 and 2011.

18. At the hearing before me, the Appellant provided a copy of his grant of
    leave dependent on the marriage to his EEA Sponsor from 2001  to  2006.
    This was not before the judge, but even had it  been,  although  it  is
    evidence that the Appellant was  permitted  to  reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom for a period of five years, it is not in and of itself evidence
    that he "has resided in the United Kingdom  in  accordance  with  these
    Regulations for a continuous period of five years".

19. In his statement the Appellant said that he came to the United  Kingdom
    in 2000 and has not left since that time.  He stated that he  has  been
    working since that time.  He provided evidence in the form  of  letters
    from friends to corroborate his claim that  had  not  left  the  United
    Kingdom.  However, evidence that he himself has been  working  and  has
    been resident is not enough to  show  that  he  has  been  residing  in
    accordance with the Regulations.  Evidence is needed to show  that  his
    EEA Sponsor was exercising Treaty rights.

20. As set out by the judge  in  paragraph  [14],  there  was  very  little
    evidence before the judge relating to the Sponsor's exercise of  Treaty
    rights.  There was no evidence before him that the EEA Sponsor had been
    exercising  Treaty  rights  for  a  five-year  period.   The  Appellant
    provided payslips for the EEA Sponsor for 2001 and 2002, but this  does
    not cover a five-year period.

21. I therefore find that there was no evidence before the  judge  to  show
    that the Appellant had been  residing  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
    continuous period of five years in accordance with the Regulations, and
    therefore no evidence that he met regulation 15(1)(f)(i).  Consequently
    I find that this error of law was not  material,  and  the  Appellant's
    appeal fell to be dismissed as he  failed  to  show  that  he  met  the
    requirements of regulation 15(1)(f)(i).

22. Given that the Appellant failed to show that he met the first  limb  of
    regulation 15(1)(f), it was unnecessary for the  judge  to  proceed  to
    consider the second limb of the regulation.  Therefore, without  making
    any specific finding on that issue, I find that any error of law in the
    judge's consideration of regulation 15(1)(f)(ii) cannot be material.

23. I accept that the decision states that the appeal  is  dismissed  under
    the Immigration Rules, but it is clear from the body  of  the  decision
    that the judge was considering the appeal under the Regulations.

24. It was submitted that the Appellant had now  located  his  ex-wife  and
    could provide evidence that she had been working, in which case  it  is
    open to him to make a fresh application.

Notice of decision

The decision does not involve the making of a material error of law.   I  do
not set it aside.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss  the  Appellant's  appeal
stands.


Signed   Date 25 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
