
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA415852014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th May 2016                     |On 26th May 2016                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

                                MR EJAZ MUNIR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr O Noor, Counsel instructed by Samuel & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 7th February  1984.   He
    appealed against the respondent's  decision  to  refuse  to  grant  him
    further leave to remain in the United Kingdom  under  the  points-based
    system and paragraph 245GF of the Immigration Rules.

2.   First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Jessica  Pacey  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal and stated the following.   The  appellant's  previous  sponsor,
    Roberts Support Services Limited, did not hold and did not apply for  a
    renewal of a Tier 2 sponsor licence.  They surrendered their licence on
    2 June 2014 and the appellant has not provided  any  credible  evidence
    that he was still employed  by  them.  The  company  surrendered  their
    licence and that the appellant had  applied  for  leave  as  a  Tier  2
    Migrant in 2013 and indicated that he was no longer employed by Roberts
    Support Services Limited so therefore did not meet the requirements  of
    paragraph 245GF(e)(i-ii).  The judge held that there was no independent
    evidence of probative value to support the appellant's assertions,  and
    explanation for why he had left  the  country  on  family  visits.   He
    refused to admit the post decision evidence.

 3. The reason why permission to appeal was granted is that  the  judge  in
    granting permission stated that the judge arguably  failed  to  address
    the case of Ahmed and Others (PBS: admissible evidence) [2014] UKUT 365
    (IAC) that the decision refusing leave under paragraph 245GF is not one
    considered under the PBS and  therefore  the  judge  erred  in  law  in
    failing to take into account post decision evidence.

 4. Mr Noor on behalf of the appellant accepted at  the  hearing  that  the
    permission Judge was not correct and that paragraph 245G  is  indeed  a
    PBS decision and therefore post decision evidence cannot  be  admitted.
    He accepted that the respondent's refusal was made  under  the  points-
    based scheme.  He made no further submissions.

 5. I find there is no error of law in the determination of the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the evidential limitations apply to the appellant and post
    decision  evidence  cannot  be  considered.   I  therefore  uphold  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal and dismiss this appeal.

Appeal dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Mrs S Chana   Date 25th day of May 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Mrs S Chana   Date 25th day of May 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana
