
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/41087/2014
                                                               IA/41091/2014
                                                               IA/41093/2014
                                                               IA/41098/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:  Field House               |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On:  7th July 2015                   |On:  9th October 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    Dr Y
                                    Mrs A
                                  Master A
                                   Miss A
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                 Respondents


For the Appellant:     Mr Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr MacKenzie, Counsel instructed by Legal Rights
Partnership


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Respondents are all nationals of Nigeria. They are respectively
         a husband, wife and their two minor children. On the 9th July  2014
         the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Lagunju)  allowed  their  linked
         appeals against decisions to remove them from  the  United  Kingdom
         under s10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999. The Secretary  of
         State now has permission[1] to appeal against that decision.

    Background and Matter in Issue

      2. This case concerns a family who applied for leave to remain in  the
         United Kingdom on 'private life' grounds. Their  applications  were
         made on the 8th September 2014 and so fell to be  considered  under
         the 'new rules', in particular paragraph 276ADE:
             276ADE (1). The requirements to be met  by  an  applicant  for
             leave to remain on the grounds of private life in the  UK  are
             that at the date of application, the applicant:
                  (i) does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds  in
                  Section S-LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. in Appendix
                  FM; and
                  (ii) has made a valid application for leave to  remain  on
                  the grounds of private life in the UK; and
                  (iii) has lived continuously in the UK  for  at  least  20
                  years (discounting any period of imprisonment); or
                  (iv)  is  under  the  age  of  18  years  and  has   lived
                  continuously in the UK for at least 7  years  (discounting
                  any period of imprisonment) and it would not be reasonable
                  to expect the applicant to leave the UK; or
                  (v) is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years  and  has
                  spent at least half of his life living continuously in the
                  UK (discounting any period of imprisonment); or
                  (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is  aged  18  years  or
                  above, has lived continuously in the UK for less  than  20
                  years (discounting any period of imprisonment)  but  there
                  would be very significant  obstacles  to  the  applicant's
                  integration into the country to which he would have to  go
                  if required to leave the UK

      3. The adult  applicants  submitted  that  the  conflict  in  Northern
         Nigeria presented significant  obstacles  to  their  reintegration:
         they relied on sub-paragraph  (vi).  In  respect  of  the  children
         reliance was placed on the fact that the two  children  (and  their
         younger sister M) were born in the UK and have never lived anywhere
         else. The eldest child Miss A was born on the 24 March 2006 and  so
         at the date of the application was aged 8 years and 6 months.   She
         therefore fell for consideration under sub-paragraph (iv).

      4. The First-tier Tribunal allowed all four appeals.  The  appeals  of
         the  First,  Second  and  Third  Respondents  were  allowed   under
         276ADE(1)(vi), that of the Fourth under  276ADE(1)(iv).   All  four
         appeals were further allowed with reference to Article  8  'outside
         of the Rules'.

      5. The Secretary of State now challenges  these  decisions  under  the
         Rules on the unhelpfully vague ground  that  the  "Judge  erred  in
         finding that the  appellants  meet  the  requirements  of  276ADE".
         Where the grounds do particularise it is rather haphazard,  but  in
         the course of submissions it became clear that  the  complaint  has
         two strands:
          i) In  respect  of  276ADE(1)(vi)  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has
             misdirected itself and has made  findings  not  based  on  the
             evidence before it;
         ii) In respect of 276ADE(1)(iv) the First-tier Tribunal has failed
             to give the proper interpretation to the term "reasonable".

      6. As to Article 8 the grounds submit that the Judge  has  "failed  to
         identify any unduly harsh consequences" for the family should  they
         be  removed.  Reference  is  further  made  to   Zoumbas   and   EV
         (Philippines) to the effect that it is not unreasonable  to  expect
         children to relocate with their families if their parents  have  no
         leave to remain.

      7. The reasoning of the First-tier Tribunal, the challenge to  it  and
         my findings are most conveniently addressed in order of the matters
         in issue.

    Issue 1: 'very significant obstacles to reintegration'

      8. First-tier Tribunal Judge Lagunju  agreed  with  the  Secretary  of
         State that neither adult could succeed under Appendix FM.  She  was
         however apparently satisfied that they could meet the  requirements
         of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi):
             "I find due to the unrest caused by the regular attacks by the
             renowned Islamic terrorist group Boko Haram,  there  would  be
             significant obstacles to integration on  return.  Due  to  the
             general unrest in their home  area,  I  find  there  would  be
             obstacles to securing employment and generally  settling  into
             life in Nigeria"

      9. The Secretary of State's first challenge to that  finding  is  that
         there was no evidential basis to conclude that  the  activities  of
         Boko  Haram  would  somehow  impede  either  adult  from  obtaining
         employment. The second is more fundamental: the Secretary of  State
         submits  that  there  is   no   lawful   precedent   for   limiting
         consideration of the prospects of reintegration to the  home  area.
         This family may  originate  from  Northern  Nigeria  but  there  is
         nothing to prevent them going to live somewhere else, for  instance
         in Abuja or Lagos.

     10. The Respondents' Rule 24 response does not address this ground.  In
         his submissions Mr  MacKenzie  submitted  that  there  was  copious
         evidence before the First-tier Tribunal relating to the conflict in
         Northern Nigeria and that it was therefore open  to  the  Judge  to
         infer from this material that it would present an obstacle  to  the
         family's  resettlement.  As  to  where  they  might  resettle,  the
         existence of that conflict was plainly relevant to consideration of
         276ADE(1)(vi).

     11. I find that this ground of  appeal  is  made  out.  The  First-tier
         Tribunal did not apply the correct test  under  276ADE(1)(vi).  The
         rule reads:
             '(vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or above,
             has lived continuously in  the  UK  for  less  than  20  years
             (discounting any period of imprisonment) but  there  would  be
             very significant obstacles to the applicant's integration into
             the country to which he would have to go if required to  leave
             the UK'

     12. This requires  there  to  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
         applicant's integration into his  country  of  origin.    It  would
         appear from paragraph 24 of the  determination  that  the  Tribunal
         only considered whether there were  significant  obstacles  to  the
         family's integration back into the  Northern  Nigerian  state  from
         which they originally came.

     13. Mr MacKenzie  submitted  that  there  was  no  analogous  'internal
         flight' principle when considering 276ADE.   I do not  agree.  That
         is because the rule itself requires the  applicant  to  demonstrate
         the obstacles in respect of the country, not just  a  part  of  it.
         The obstacles identified in this determination are confined to  the
         Judge's concern about the prospect of this young family  resettling
         in an area where they might be affected by the activities  of  Boko
         Haram. Those were perfectly legitimate concerns, but he should  not
         have stopped there. The rule requires a holistic assessment of  the
         situation upon  return  to  the  country  of  origin,  not  just  a
         particular part of it.  For that reason the reasoning in respect of
         the application of 276ADE to the  adult  Respondents  must  be  set
         aside.

     14. I would add that at paragraphs 30-32 the determination  appears  to
         conclude that the Master A also meets the requirements  of  276ADE.
         This is said to be because there are significant obstacles  to  his
         integration,  apparently  an  application  of  276ADE(1)(vi).  That
         provision could not possibly have applied to him since  he  was  at
         the date of decision only six years old.  That decision must too be
         set aside.

    Issue 2:  the meaning of 'reasonable' in 276ADE(1)(iv)

     15. In respect of Miss A the relevant provision was sub-section (iv):
             '(iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived  continuously
             in the UK for at least 7  years  (discounting  any  period  of
             imprisonment) and it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the
             applicant to leave the UK;'

     16. In a letter dated the 26th September 2014 the  Secretary  of  State
         had set out her case as follows:
             "... although she is under 18 and has lived in the  UK  for  7
             years it is deemed reasonable for her to leave the UK with her
             family. As she is still at a young age where she can adapt  to
             life in another country...
             While she has spent his (sic) first 8 years in the  UK,  young
             children can adapt to new circumstances, and at that  age  her
             private life will be quite insular  (parents  and  home).  The
             Country of Origin Information (COI) Report for  Nigeria  dated
             11 June 2013 states  'The  Nigeria  section  of  Europa  World
             accessed  18  December  2012  undated,  stated  that   primary
             education begins at six years of age and lasts for six  years.
             Secondary education begins at 12 years of age and lasts for  a
             further six years. Education to junior secondary  level  (from
             six to 15 years of age) is  free  and  compulsory'.  There  is
             education available in  Nigeria  for  her  and  her  siblings,
             although not of the same standard as that available in the UK,
             furthermore the child would have the same  family  support  as
             that available in the UK.
             ...
             Ultimately your client and her partner will be able to provide
             all the support their  children  require  there,  knowing  the
             language and culture of that country. The children  are  young
             enough to adapt to life in Nigeria with their  parents.  Their
             material quality of life  there  might  not  be  to  the  same
             standard as what is in the United Kingdom, but that  alone  is
             not a significant enough factor to justify  allowing  them  to
             remain in this country. There  might  be  some  initial  minor
             disruption  to  the  children's  private  life,  but   it   is
             considered  that  this  will  be  reasonable   vis-�-vis   the
             legitimate aim of immigration control and economic  well-being
             of the United Kingdom".

     17. The only matter in issue was therefore whether it was  "reasonable"
         for Miss A to go to Nigeria.   In  approaching  this  question  the
         First-tier Tribunal noted [at 25] that the children  were  entirely
         unfamiliar with the cultures and customs of that  country.  It  was
         further noted that the  benchmark  of  seven  years  residence  has
         assumed significance not just in the Rules themselves, but  in  the
         jurisprudence relating to Article 8: reference is for instance made
         to Azimi-Moeyed  (decisions  affecting  children,  onward  appeals)
         [2013] UKUT.  That she had passed that "notable period of time"  in
         the UK was therefore a "weighty consideration".  Miss A (and indeed
         her brother who was by then approaching the seven  year  mark)  had
         established their own ties  to  the  UK  and  were  flourishing  at
         school. Miss A had developed a keen interest in swimming and  other
         extra-curricular activities.  Here Judge  Lagunju  again  mentioned
         Boko Haram and their hostility towards the education of women as  a
         relevant factor.  The potential disruption to her  education  would
         have  long-term  detrimental  affects   on   her   well-being   and
         development. In conclusion  it  is  found  that  it  would  not  be
         reasonable to expect her to leave the United Kingdom: "it is likely
         that she has already  put  down  roots,  formed  her  own  personal
         identity, made links with the community and solidified  friendships
         in the UK".

     18. Of this the grounds of appeal simply say that  the  Judge  "erred".
         Before me Mr Jarvis expanded on this to submit that the  Judge  had
         taken  the  wrong  approach  to  what   'reasonable'   meant.   The
         determination considers in some detail the quality of Miss A's life
         in the UK and touches on what her life might be like in Nigeria. It
         is not evident however that the Tribunal weighed into  the  balance
         any of the countervailing factors, such as the  principle  that  it
         was in the public interest to  remove  persons  with  no  leave  to
         remain.   Mr Jarvis said that  it  was  the  Secretary  of  State's
         position that "reasonable" was to be equated with  "proportionate".
         The Judge had been required to weigh against Miss A the  fact  that
         neither she nor her parents had any leave to remain.

     19. Having heard Mr Jarvis' submissions I was bound to point  out  that
         they were substantially at odds with the submissions  I  had  heard
         from the Secretary of State in other cases  on  this  exact  point,
         where it had expressly been agreed that "reasonable" was not to  be
         equated with "proportionate" in the Article 8 sense. I referred  Mr
         Jarvis  to  the  current  guidance,  the  Immigration   Directorate
         Instruction 'Family Migration: Appendix FM Section 1.0b Family Life
         (as a Partner or Parent) and Private Life: 10-Year  Routes'   ("the
         IDI") which appears to place a good deal of weight on  the  private
         life of a child with seven years or more residence, and  stipulates
         that where this benchmark has been reached, "strong reasons"  would
         be required to refuse leave to remain:
             11.2.4. Would it  be  unreasonable  to  expect  a  non-British
             Citizen child to leave the UK?
             The requirement that a non-British Citizen child has lived  in
             the UK for a  continuous  period  of  at  least  the  7  years
             immediately preceding the date of application, recognises that
             over time children start to put down roots and integrate  into
             life in the UK, to the extent that being required to leave the
             UK may be unreasonable. The longer the child  has  resided  in
             the UK, the more the balance will begin to swing in  terms  of
             it being unreasonable to expect the child to leave the UK, and
             strong reasons will be required in order to refuse a case with
             continuous UK residence of more than 7 years.
             The decision maker must  consider  whether,  in  the  specific
             circumstances of th�e case, it would be reasonable  to  expect
             the child to live in another country.
             The decision maker must consider the facts  relating  to  each
             child in the UK in the family individually, and also  consider
             all the facts relating to the family as a whole. The  decision
             maker should also engage with any specific  issues  explicitly
             raised by the family, by each  child  or  on  behalf  of  each
             child.
             [Emphasis added]

     20. This guidance is suggestive of a presumption that where  the  child
         had reached the relevant length of residence,  she  gets  to  stay.
         Decision-makers  are  then  required  to  weigh  into  the  balance
         countervailing factors in order to determine whether  these  amount
         to "strong reasons" capable of outweighing the child's private life
         rights: if the  test  was  the  'classic'  Article  8  question  of
         proportionality, it would be the public interest which would  weigh
         heavily and it would be for the child to provide strong reasons why
         she should stay. That is the difference between the test under  the
         Rules, and that outside of the Rules. Mr MacKenzie  submitted  that
         it  would  be  rather  self-defeating  if  an   application   under
         276ADE(1)(iv) could be rejected simply by pointing  to  the  public
         interest in removing persons with no leave to remain, since it  can
         be presumed that no-one with leave to remain would be  making  such
         an application.

     21. Mr Jarvis requested further  time  to  take  instructions  on  this
         point. I agreed to accept submissions in writing.

     22. Those submissions were received by email on  the  16th  July  2015.
         Therein  Secretary  of  State  maintains  that  "reasonable"  means
         "proportionate",  but  not  in  the  sense  that  it  is   commonly
         understood in Article 8 appeals:
             "... the fact the [Secretary of State]  places  emphasis  upon
             the child's long residence  in  the  guidance  quoted  has  no
             material bearing on the question of  what  the  correct  legal
             approach is. Paragraph 11.2.4 as quoted above, merely reflects
             the [Secretary of State]'s acceptance of the weight that  will
             be given to the child's  long  residence  which  itself  is  a
             necessary requirement for entry into the second  part  of  the
             sub-section: the assessment of reasonableness"

         Having referred to Haleemudeen and McLarty the submissions go on:
             "Proportionality is therefore to be understood as the approach
             to be taken rather than the test to  be  applied.  It  is  not
             therefore  to  be  conflated  with  the  test  of   compelling
             circumstances outside of the Rules (which is itself  conducted
             through a proportionality exercise). It is of  course  obvious
             that the examination of reasonableness takes place within  the
             Rules themselves (276ADE(1)(iv)) which means that there is  no
             requirement for the A to show  compelling  factors.  In  other
             words   the   starting   point   for   the   examination    of
             "reasonableness" is not  predicated  upon  failure  under  the
             Rules as is  the  case  with  an  assessment  of  "compelling"
             outside of the Rules [see for instance PG (USA) v SSHD  [2015]
             EWCA Civ 118"

     23.  The  Secretary  of  State  does  not  accept  that  she  has  made
         contradictory submissions in other appeals:  she  has  consistently
         maintained that  the  question  must  be  approached  holistically,
         taking all  relevant  factors  into  account.  Particular  emphasis
         should  have  been   placed,   for   instance,   on   the   serious
         countervailing  effect  of  illegal   working   in   the   UK.    A
         comprehensive consideration of all relevant factors would make  the
         decision compliant with the Secretary of State's obligations  under
         s55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

     24. These submissions were a helpful clarification of the Secretary  of
         State's position. I have taken them  into  account  in  determining
         what 'reasonable' means within the context of the Rule, and in turn
         whether it can be found that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  its
         approach.

     25. I start by considering the Rule itself. There are four  alternative
         provisions contained within the rule. Two of them simply require  a
         period of residence: any applicant who has had 20 years  continuous
         residence or a young person between the age of 18 and  25  who  has
         spent at least half of his life in the UK will prima facie succeed.
         Whether they do will depend of whether they meet  the  'suitability
         requirements' set out in S-LTR 1.1-2.3 and S-LTR 2.3 and  3.1.  So,
         for instance, the applicant who arrived on  her  9th  birthday  and
         made an application the week after she turned 18 could only succeed
         if she does not fall foul of any of those diverse criteria set  out
         in Appendix FM (matters failing  under  the  heading  'suitability'
         range from being under a deportation order to failing without  good
         reason to attend an interview).  On the face of it the  'residence'
         provisions set  down  the  minimum  requirements  for  strength  of
         private life needed to engage the UK's responsibility,  whilst  the
         'suitability' requirements are the countervailing matters that that
         Secretary of State considers must weigh against an applicant.  That
         suggests that if anywhere, 276ADE1(i) is where  the  decision-maker
         is invited to weigh in the public interest.

     26. The two remaining alternatives within 276ADE are  (iv),  pertaining
         to children, and (vi), applicable to those adults who have  neither
         the qualification by way of age nor long residence  to  immediately
         found a claim under 'private life'.  The  Secretary  of  State  has
         consistently emphasised the high threshold  inherent  in  (vi).  An
         adult applicant who cannot  show  that  he  has  been  here  for  a
         sufficiently long period of time must instead show that there would
         be "very significant obstacles to the applicant's integration  into
         the country to which he would have to go if required to  leave  the
         UK". That reflects the Secretary of State's view that an adult  who
         has not been here  for  a  very  long  period  will  ordinarily  be
         expected to give up  any  private  life  that  he  has  managed  to
         establish in that time and re-establish a new one  somewhere  else.
         The rule requires such an adult to give very  weighty  reasons  why
         his private life in the UK has assumed a greater significance  than
         it would  otherwise  be  afforded.  The  high  threshold  therefore
         applies to whether Article 8(1) rights are even  engaged;  as  with
         other applicants under the Rule, the public interest is only  found
         in the Appendix FM suitability requirements.

     27. That leaves children, who must  now  show  a  set  period  of  long
         residence and that it would not be reasonable  to  expect  them  to
         leave the UK. Given the structure of  the  rest  of  the  paragraph
         there would not appear to be any rationale for weighing  additional
         public interest factors against the child.  If the  requirement  is
         to be read in the context of the rule as a whole, 'reasonable',  as
         in 'very significant obstacles to integration' goes to strength  of
         private  life,  rather  than  the  public  interest  factors  which
         militate against leave being granted. I would suggest that as  with
         all  other  'private  life'  applicants,  these  are  contained  in
         Appendix FM.

     28. In respect of the Secretary of State's submission that her  current
         guidance simply serves to underline the weight to be attached to  a
         residence of seven years  or  more,  this  has  little  merit.  The
         Secretary of State does  not  need  to  give  guidance  on  how  to
         interpret the first limb of the provision:  either  the  child  has
         been here for seven years or  she  hasn't.  That  the  guidance  is
         directed at the second limb is evident from the heading.   That  is
         not  to  say  however,  that  the  long  residence  itself  has  no
         significance in determining the approach to be taken  to  the  term
         'reasonable'.

     29. The genesis of the 'seven year provision' was the concession  known
         as DP5/96.  That  policy,  and  those  which  followed,  created  a
         general, but rebuttable, presumption that enforcement action  would
         "not normally" proceed in cases where a child was born here and had
         lived continuously to the age of 7 or over, or where,  having  come
         to the United  Kingdom  at  an  early  age,  7  years  or  more  of
         continuous  residence  had  been  accumulated[2].   As  the  policy
         statement[3] which accompanied the introduction of paragraph 276ADE
         (1)(iv) puts it: "a period of 7 continuous years spent in the UK as
         a child will generally establish a sufficient level of  integration
         for family and private  life  to  exist  such  that  removal  would
         normally not be in the best interests of the child" [my  emphasis].
         As I set out above, the current guidance reaffirms that this is the
         starting point for consideration of the rule.  Numerous ministerial
         statements over the years have maintained the government's position
         as to its significance. A recent example  is  the  speech  of  Lord
         Wallace of Tankerness in the debate in the House of  Lords  on  the
         introduction of section 117B (6) NIAA 2002 by way of the amendments
         in the Immigration Act 2014:
             "we have acknowledged that if a child has reached the  age  of
             seven, he or she will have moved beyond simply having  his  or
             her needs met by the parents. The child will be  part  of  the
             education system and may be  developing  social  networks  and
             connections beyond the parents and home. However, a child  who
             has not spent seven years in the United Kingdom either will be
             relatively young and able to adapt, or if they are older, will
             be likely to have spent their earlier years in  their  country
             of origin  or  another  country.  When  considering  the  best
             interests of the child, the fact of citizenship  is  important
             but so is the fact that the child has spent a  large  part  of
             his or her childhood in the United Kingdom"[4].

     30. There is then a considerable body of opinion  leaning  towards  the
         same interpretation of 276ADE(1)(iv). The historical roots of  this
         provision, the case-law, Ministerial statements and current  policy
         documents  all  recognise  that  after  a  period  of  seven  years
         residence a child will have forged strong links with the UK to  the
         extent that he or she will have an established private life outside
         of the immediate embrace of his parents and siblings. It is, as  Mr
         Jarvis notes, that private life which is  the  starting  point  for
         consideration under this Rule. The relationships and  understanding
         of life that a child develops as he grows older are  matters  which
         in themselves attract weight. The fact that the child might be able
         to adapt to life elsewhere is a relevant factor but  it  cannot  be
         determinative, since exclusive focus on that question would obscure
         the fact that for such a child, his "private life"  in  the  UK  is
         everything he knows.   That is the starting point, and the task  of
         the Tribunal, as it has always been,  is  to  then  look  to  other
         factors to decide whether, on the particular  facts  of  the  case,
         these displace or outweigh the presumption in favour  of  leave  to
         remain. Those factors are wide-ranging and varied.  The  IDI  gives
         several examples  including,  for  instance,  the  child's  health,
         whether his parents have leave, the extent of family connections to
         the  country  of  proposed  return.  The  assessment  of  what   is
         "reasonable" will call for the decision-maker to weigh such matters
         into the  balance  and  to  see  whether  they  constitute  "strong
         reasons" - the language of  the  current  IDI  -  to  proceed  with
         removal notwithstanding the established Article  8  rights  of  the
         child in the UK.  The  fact  that  a  child's  parents  might  have
         overstayed,  entered  or  worked  illegally  or  sought  to   evade
         immigration  control  might  all  be  thought  pertinent   to   the
         assessment of 'strong reasons'. Whether they amount to such in  any
         given case would depend on the facts.

     31. The reasoning of the First-tier Tribunal in this case is set out at
         paragraph 17 above.  The determination gives careful  consideration
         to the depth and quality of Miss  A's  private  life,  and  to  the
         substantial disruption likely to be caused by removal  to  Nigeria.
         In respect of Boko Haram and the conflict in the  North  Mr  Jarvis
         submitted that this was an irrelevant factor, as it  had  been  for
         the purpose of 276ADE (1)(vi). I do not agree. This is a  different
         test.  The fact that this family will be internally displaced  upon
         return will certainly be an obstacle, but not necessarily  a  "very
         significant one".  It  must  however  be  relevant  to  a  holistic
         assessment of what is "reasonable". I find that this was  a  matter
         that the Tribunal was entitled to  take  into  account.   What  the
         determination does not do is to  consider  whether  there  are  any
         countervailing factors. For the reasons set out above, this  is  an
         error of law. I set  the  decision  aside  with  findings  of  fact
         preserved.

    The Re-Made Decisions

     32. The best interests of  the  child  being  of  primary  concern,  my
         starting point is Miss A:  s55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
         Immigration Act 2009.

     33. It is accepted that Miss A has lived in this  country  continuously
         since she was born on the 24th March 2006.  She is now aged 9 years
         and 7 months and is therefore a 'qualifying child'.   I  adopt  the
         findings of the First-tier Tribunal about the strength and  quality
         of her private life in the UK.

     34.  I  now  consider   whether   there   are   strong   reasons   why,
         notwithstanding  that  established  private  life,  it   would   be
         reasonable to expect Miss A to leave the UK.  There is no  evidence
         of any criminality on the  part  of  any  of  the  Appellants.  The
         Secretary of State's submissions suggest that one or  more  of  the
         adults have been working without  permission  but  I  can  find  no
         reference to this  in  either  the  determination  or  the  refusal
         letter, and I have not been directed to  any  evidence  to  suggest
         that this is so. Dr Y does refer in his witness statement to having
         written  some  research  papers   and   having   attended   various
         conferences but it is not  clear  whether  he  has  been  paid  for
         either.  It would seem that for most of the time he  has  spent  in
         the UK he has been studying as  a  privately  paying  international
         student, having been awarded his Masters degree and then  his  PhD.
         What is clear is that Dr Y has not had valid leave for much of  the
         time he has spent in the UK. Having arrived in 2005 with  leave  to
         enter as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant he failed to  apply  to
         vary that leave before it expired in January 2009. It  was  perhaps
         for that reason  that  subsequent,  late,  applications  for  leave
         'outside of the Rules' failed. I am told that in 2011, having  made
         four  attempts  to  regularise  his  position,   he   was   granted
         discretionary leave with no restriction on employment.  That  leave
         expired on the 31st August 2011 and he  has  had  no  leave  since.
         Between August 2011 and August 2014 it would seem that  he  made  a
         series of representations to the Secretary of  State  in  order  to
         secure an immigration  decision  which  would  confer  a  right  of
         appeal, which he finally  got  on  the  12  August  2014  when  the
         Secretary of  State  made  removal  directions.   The  family  have
         therefore spent two periods in the UK with no valid leave.  I  have
         given weight to that matter, and to the fact that the First, Second
         and Third Respondents do not currently qualify for leave to  remain
         under any  of  the  Immigration  Rules.     Having  done  so  I  am
         satisfied that there are not, in this  case,  sufficiently  weighty
         reasons to justify interference with the  well-established  private
         life of Miss A (and her siblings).   I  therefore  allow  Miss  A's
         appeal with reference to paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration
         Rules.

     35.  In  respect  of  the  adult  Appellants  Mr  MacKenzie  relies  on
         276ADE(1)(vi) and Article 8 outside of the Rules. For the reasons I
         allude to above, I am not satisfied that the high test in the Rules
         can be made out. The adult Appellants are both  educated  and  have
         spent most of their lives  in  Nigeria.  I  accept  that  they  are
         unlikely to choose to resettle in the north of  the  country  where
         the civilian population are facing  substantial  difficulties  with
         the activities of Boko Haram and its  conflict  with  the  Nigerian
         armed forces. The family could however settle in  another  part  of
         Nigeria, for instance in Abuja  or  Lagos.  No  evidence  has  been
         adduced to  demonstrate  that  there  would  be  "very  significant
         obstacles" to the integrating into one of these large cities.

     36. Turning to Article 8 outside the Rules I note that 276ADE(1)(vi) is
         not a 'complete code' for the purpose of considering private  life,
         since its exclusive focus is the life that the applicant might lead
         upon return to his country of origin; the Rule leaves no  room  for
         consideration of the private life that might exist within  the  UK.
         As such my Article 8 assessments are more "at large" in  line  with
         Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 and Huang [2007] UKHL 11.

     37.  I  accept  and  find  as  fact  that  the  adult  Appellants  have
         established a private life  in  the  UK  where  they  have  worked,
         worshipped,  made  friends  and  studied.   There   would   be   an
         interference with those Article 8(1) rights  if  they  were  to  be
         removed.

     38. The  decision  to  remove  persons  with  no  leave  to  remain  is
         rationally  connected  to  the  legitimate  Article  8(2)  aim   of
         protecting the economy and I accept that it is a decision that  was
         lawfully open to the Respondent at the date she took it.

     39. In assessing proportionality I have had  regard  to  s117B  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  (as  amended  by  the
         Immigration Act 2014). The  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
         controls  is  in  the  public  interest  and  although  the   adult
         Appellants  have  made  numerous  attempts  to   regularize   their
         position, the reality is that they have, for the  most  part,  been
         without valid leave in the UK.   It  is  accepted  that  Dr  Y  has
         completed a PhD since his arrival in the UK and I can  assume  from
         this that he speaks good English.  Mrs Ab is  also  educated  to  a
         high level, and records in her statement that she and  her  husband
         have always spoken English at home, which in turn  has  meant  that
         the children have grown up with English as  their  first  language.
         There is no evidence that the family have ever claimed benefits and
         I accept that if the adult Appellants were given the opportunity to
         work lawfully they would do  so.  They  came  to  this  country  as
         privately-funded students and have to that extent been  financially
         independent; that said I do bear in mind that the minor Appellant's
         have been accessing state funded education to which they  have  not
         been,  for  some  years,  entitled.   The  private  lives  of  each
         individual Appellant have all been established whilst their  status
         in the UK has been either precarious or  unlawful  and  as  such  I
         attach little weight to it in the context of Article 8  outside  of
         the Rules.

     40. I have taken all of that into account, as I am required  to  do  by
         statute: Dube (ss.117A-117D) [2015] UKUT  90  (IAC).  Mr  MacKenzie
         concentrates his submissions on the final sub-paragraph of s117B:
             "(6)      In the case  of  a  person  who  is  not  liable  to
             deportation, the public interest does not require the person's
             removal where-
               a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and
                  (b)  it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                  leave the United Kingdom."

     41. It is not in dispute that Miss A is a qualifying child, or that her
         parents have a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship  with
         her.  Since I have found that it would not be reasonable to  expect
         her to leave the United Kingdom it follows that the public interest
         does not require the removal of her parents.

     42. Mr Jarvis agreed that if the  appeals  of  the  First,  Second  and
         Fourth Respondent were allowed, it would follow that the appeal  of
         Master A would also be allowed on Article 8 grounds.

     43. Having considered all of those matters  I  am  satisfied  that  the
         Respondent has now shown the removal  of  this  family  is  in  the
         public interest or a proportionate response to the need to maintain
         immigration control. This is  a  family  who  have  not  sought  to
         deliberately  evade  the  authorities,  nor   to   make   vexatious
         applications. They have maintained contact with the Home Office and
         have, during the periods where their leave  lapsed,  made  repeated
         attempts to regularise their  positions.  During  that  time  Dr  Y
         achieved what he came to the UK to  do.  Having  come  as  a  post-
         graduate  student  he  now  holds  a  PhD  in  his   chosen   field
         (agriculture) and hopes to embark on a career that will  have  both
         academic and practical application. During the time it took him  to
         complete his studies, his young family grew up. Miss A and Master A
         have both established rounded private lives in the UK and  are  now
         embarking on academic careers of their own.  They would  very  much
         like to stay living at  their  home,  attending  their  school  and
         playing with the same friends. It is not an  ideal  situation.  The
         rest of the family do not qualify for leave to remain and were they
         the only appellants the public interest may have demanded that they
         return to Nigeria. Miss  A  has  however  integrated  into  British
         culture to an extent that Ministerial statements, published  policy
         and, I find, the Rules  recognise  that  it  will  very  likely  be
         contrary to her best interests to expect her to leave now.  She  is
         fast approaching the age at which  she  will  qualify  for  British
         nationality and will no doubt be an asset to her community, just as
         her parents hope. In those circumstances I find that the balance is
         tipped and that her parents and siblings  should  be  permitted  to
         stay with her.

    Decisions

     44. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law
         and it is set aside to the extent identified above.

     45. I re-make the decision in the appeals as follows:
             "The appeal of Miss A is allowed under the Immigration Rules.
             All of the appeals are allowed with  reference  to  Article  8
             ECHR."

     46. Because two of the parties  are  minors  I  make  a  direction  for
         anonymity having had regard to Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1
         of 2013: Anonymity Orders.

"Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the Respondents  to
this appeal are granted anonymity.  No report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify any member of this family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to the  Respondents.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings".


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                         18th September 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly on the 6th May
2015
[2] For a detailed history of the rule and its development see Dyson LH in
Munir v SSHD [2012] UKSC 32 paras 9-13
[3] The Grounds of Compatibility with Article 8 of the ECHR: Statement by
the Home Office (13 June 2012) at 27.
[4] At column 1383, Hansard 5th March 2014

