

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal
Numbers: IA/41326/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                      |            Decisions & Reasons      |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 20 August 2015                     |            On 4 January 2016        |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson
                   Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson


                                   Between


                     Mrs Yohana Yuniarti Bita McCaffery
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:         Mr A Devlin, instructed by McGlashan MacKay
For the Respondent:        Ms M O'Brien, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The background to this case is the death in Scotland in January 2014 of
    the  appellant's  British  Citizen  husband.   She  is  a  national  of
    Indonesia. They married in Aberdeen on 18 March 2005.  The  couple  had
    met in September 2000 in  Jakarta  where  Mr  McCaffery  worked  as  an
    engineer in the oil and gas  industry.  Thereafter  the  appellant  met
    members of her husband's family when they visited Indonesia. Her  first
    trip to Scotland was in April 2002.

 2. The Indonesian assignment finished  in  April  2003,  after  which  the
    couple lived together for periods of time in  Scotland.   According  to
    the Respondent's summary (and details from a copy of the passport)  the
    appellant had been granted multiple entry visit visas  by  the  British
    Embassy in Jakarta in 2003 and on a further occasion in 2004.  She  was
    granted entry clearance based on her  marriage  and  then  entered  the
    United Kingdom on 14 January 2005 with leave until 10 July  that  year.
    In April 2005 her leave as a spouse was granted until April 2007.

 3. In 2006 the appellant left the United  Kingdom  with  her  husband  for
    Russia, where he worked  in  Siberia  for  two  years.   The  appellant
    returned to the United Kingdom as a visitor in  November  2007  and  in
    September 2008, she was given entry clearance as a spouse valid until 1
    December 2010. However the couple left the United Kingdom for Angola in
    December  2008  and  lived  there  in  connexion  with  Mr  McCaffery's
    employment. Mr Devlin explained that the couple had  regularly  visited
    the United Kingdom during that time but he accepted that the  appellant
    had not spent an extended period in the United Kingdom since 2008.  The
    copy passport which was valid until 31 December 2012 shows entry to the
    United Kingdom in August 2010.

 4. According to the appellant's application leading to the decision  under
    appeal, she returned to the United Kingdom on  20  December  2013.   As
    revealed in her statement it was then that  her  husband's  cancer  was
    diagnosed. After his death in early 2014,  the  appellant  returned  to
    Angola to sort matters out and thereafter returned as a visitor to  the
    United Kingdom on 16 February 2014 with 6 months leave.  She applied on
    24 July 2014 before expiry of that leave for leave  to  remain  on  the
    basis of private and family life.  This was refused by the Secretary of
    State  who  decided  on  30  September  2014  to  refuse  to  vary  the
    appellant's leave to enter or remain and she made  a  further  decision
    for her removal. The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal was  against
    those decisions.

 5. First-tier Tribunal Judge Clapham heard evidence from the appellant  in
    the course of which she explained her intention had been to live in the
    United Kingdom permanently with her husband from  February  2014.   The
    judge also heard evidence from the appellant's husband's son, his wife,
    and his brother.  She also had before her statements  by  other  family
    members.

 6. It was conceded before the First-Tier Tribunal  by  Mr  McGlashan  (who
    represented the appellant on that  occasion)  that  the  appellant  was
    unable to meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules.   Mr  Devlin
    indicated to us that the applicable  rule  would  have  been  paragraph
    276ADE.  It is not surprising that a concession was made in  the  light
    of the limited time the appellant had spent in the United  Kingdom  and
    in the light of the evidence of her connections and ties  to  Indonesia
    which would result in no real obstacle to integration.

 7. The judge addressed Article 8 in her findings and reasons.  This was on
    the basis of submissions from Mr McGlashan that  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent had not given proper consideration to family life. He argued
    that no weight had been given to the importance  of  the  wider  family
    here, with whom the appellant had been associated since 2000  and  that
    she had formed a  particularly  close  bond  with  her  late  husband's
    grandson R aged three.  He relied on the intentions of the  parties  to
    settle in the United Kingdom once the  postings  abroad  had  finished.
    The claim related not simply to private but family life  which  existed
    in tandem.  It was argued that  the  bond  forged  between  R  and  the
    appellant  was  stronger  than  between  the  child  and  his   natural
    grandparents, thus crossing the threshold of family life.



 8. The judge made these findings:

       i) There is no doubt that the appellant had "normal  familial  ties"
          with individual members of the McCaffery family.

      ii) It may well be that the relationship between  the  appellant  and
          her "adopted grandchild" is sufficient to constitute family life.



     iii) The interference with that life is  proportionate  on  the  basis
          that the bonds  were  formed  at  a  time  when  the  appellant's
          immigration status was precarious, not having indefinite leave to
          remain.

      iv) The fact that the appellant and her late husband intended to live
          in the United Kingdom was not relevant to the balancing exercise,
          since whether or not to do so would depend  upon  the  particular
          rules at any given time.

       v) The appellant and her late husband continued  to  maintain  links
          not only to his family but  also  to  her  family  in  Indonesia.
          There was nothing to prevent such visits continuing.

      vi) The fact that the appellant had substantial assets in the UK  did
          not lend weight to the argument one way or the other.

     vii) The appellant has substantial family connections in Indonesia.

    viii) Accordingly, removal was proportionate.

 9. The grounds of challenge and our analysis are as follows:

Ground 1

10. It is argued that it was unclear whether the judge accepted that family
    life existed.  Having regard to all the evidence  of  the  strength  of
    ties that bound the appellant to her step family was deficient  and  if
    the conclusion was that family life did not exist was perverse.

11. In the course of argument Mr Devlin developed this ground on the  basis
    that there was family life between the appellant and other  members  of
    the McCaffery family.

12. It is correct that the judge made  no  finding  on  whether  there  was
    family life  between  the  appellant  and  her  late  husband's  family
    members, but it is clear that she had the  relationships  in  her  mind
    having regard to the detail with which she set out the evidence  before
    reaching her conclusions.

13. We are not persuaded that the evidence could have rationally  supported
    a finding of family life within the meaning of article  8.   Mr  Devlin
    relied on the decisions in Ghising (family  life-adults-Gurkha  policy)
    [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC) as approved by the Court of Appeal ( as to  its
    analysis of family life) by the Court of Appeal  in  R(Gurung)  v  SSHD
    [2013] 1 WLR 2456.

14. Application of these authorities to the evidence does not in  our  view
    indicate error by the judge in her analysis. The  appellant  spent  the
    majority of her time with her late husband outside the  United  Kingdom
    and  away  from  his  family.  The  judge  was  entitled  to  draw  the
    distinction between family life and family ties. The shared  grief  the
    parties have, although compelling,  does  not  result  in  family  life
    having been established in the short time that the appellant  has  been
    here taking account of where the appellant has for the large part  been
    living. This ground is disagreement and not one that  identifies  error
    by the judge.

15. We reminded the parties of the decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    England and Wales, in Singh and Anor v SSHD [2015]  EWCA  Civ.     That
    authority was not amongst those produced  by  Mr  Devlin,  although  we
    consider it to the point.  We quote in particular the  observations  of
    Sir Stanley Burnton at [25]:

         "However, the debate as to whether an applicant has or  has  not  a
         family life for the purposes of Article 8 is liable to be arid  and
         academic.  In the present case, in  agreement  with  Sullivan  LJ's
         comment when refusing permission to appeal,  the  issue  is  indeed
         academic, and clearly so.  As the European Court  of  Human  Rights
         pointed out in AA, in a judgment which I have found  most  helpful,
         the facts to be examined in order to assess proportionality are the
         same regardless of whether family or private life is engaged.   The
         question for the Secretary of State, the Tribunal and the Court  is
         whether those factors lead to  the  conclusion  that  it  would  be
         disproportionate to remove the applicant from the United Kingdom. "

16. It is clear that the  judge  took  into  account  all  the  facts.  The
    remaining   challenges   relate   the   judge's   assessment   of   the
    proportionality of interference.

Ground 2

17. We regard this aspect as a separate ground which we take to be that  in
    respect of the appellant's  private  life,  the  judge  had  failed  to
    consider this aspect and, if  she  had,  she  had  not  done  so  in  a
    structured  Razgar  way  with  reference  to  the  proportionality   of
    interference. Mr Devlin argued in addition that the judge had  confined
    her consideration to the grandchild and had failed to take account  the
    impact of removal of the appellant on the lives  of  the  other  family
    members with reference to Beoku-Betts v SSHD [2008] UKHL 39.  Mr Devlin
    also argued that there  was  no  consideration  of  the  practical  and
    compassionate issues underlying this case.

18. It is correct that the judge did  not  set  out  the  formal  steps  in
    Razgar, although we are satisfied that in substance she did and  indeed
    referred to the test laid down in Razgar.   The  judge  identified  the
    connexions the appellant had with the United Kingdom, the circumstances
    in which they had arisen and the impact on those connections of removal
    of the appellant.  Whilst a more structured approach  might  have  been
    adopted, we  find  no  material  error  in  the  judge's  analysis.  In
    substance she did what was required She took all relevant evidence into
    account and her conclusion that visits between the family members could
    continue was rationally open to her.



Ground 3

19. This appears to be a  challenge  to  proportionality  analysis  of  the
    interference in the family life between  the  appellant  and  her  late
    husband's grandchild and also the private life the appellant relies on.
     Objection is taken to the  judge's  observation  that  this  had  been
    formed when the appellant's immigration status was precarious.   It  is
    argued this finding is irrational, in the light of the appellant having
    had a clear and settled intention to live  permanently  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

20.  We  begin  with  the  relationship  between  the  appellant  and   the
    grandchild.  The judge considered the case on the basis that  it  might
    "well be" that the relationship with the grandchild was  sufficient  to
    constitute family life. She nevertheless found the  bonds  were  formed
    when  her  immigration  status  was  precarious.   Although   statutory
    consideration of precariousness is confined in section 117B to  private
    life, the  judge  was  rationally  entitled  to  take  the  appellant's
    immigration status into account when assessing the  proportionality  of
    interference with the speculative family life with the grandchild. This
    is particularly so in the light of Mr Devlin's concession that he could
    not go so far as to say that the appellant had a parental  relationship
    with the grandchild.  It  follows  by  virtue  of  this  understandable
    concession that the appellant is unable to benefit  from  section  117B
    (6).  We conclude that the extent to which the judge found family  life
    existed, she was entitled to take the  appellant's  immigration  status
    during the formation of that family in assessing the proportionality of
    interference.  It needs to be remembered that the appellant was here as
    a visitor and the basis on which a party is in the country during which
    the family life developed is a legitimate aspect to  be  considered  in
    the proportionality exercise.

21. We turn now to the proportionality analysis of the private life factors
    in the case. The Tribunal made clear in AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015]  UKUT
    0260 (IAC) that a persons immigration status  is  precarious  if  their
    continued presence in the United Kingdom will be dependant on obtaining
    a further grant of leave. The appellant has only been here as a visitor
    since coming here with her late husband in December 2013. Her continued
    presence has been dependent on obtaining further leave on which she was
    unsuccessful. There is  no  doubt  that  the  appellant  developed  the
    relationships that feature in  her  private  life  when  she  was  here
    lawfully but  statute  requires  little  weight  to  be  given  in  the
    circumstances.

22. Although the appellant had in the past the prospect of permanent  leave
    on two occasions that possibility was lost as a result  of  the  couple
    choosing to live elsewhere. Thus the connexions that  were  established
    during "precarious" leave  and  the  possibility  that  ultimately  the
    couple intended to live here permanently are not sufficient to displace
    the force of primary legislation.

23. The judge was sympathetic and naturally so in the sad circumstances  of
    this case. She was correct however to observe that that this could  not
    form part of the balancing exercise. She  took  into  account  all  the
    relevant evidence and reached a rational conclusion within the range of
    permissible responses under Article 8 without material error.  The task
    before us is to decide whether the judge erred in law.  The possibility
    that another tribunal might have reached a different conclusion on  the
    facts does not of itself indicate error. The grounds of challenge are a
    disagreement with the judge's conclusions  and  they  do  not  identify
    error. Nevertheless it always remains open to the Secretary of State to
    exercise her discretion on a compassionate basis and we hope  that  she
    turns her mind to this possibility.

24. This appeal is dismissed.



Signed
[pic]             Date: 3 September 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

