
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41862/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 19th April 2016                   |On 14th September 2016               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                            mr Paul Adedeji Ajayi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No legal representation
For the Respondent:    Mr J Parkinson (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge John Hollis, promulgated  on  11th  February  2015,  following  a
    hearing "on the papers" on  23rd  January  2015,  whereupon  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of  the  Appellant.   The  Appellant  subsequently
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Nigeria, who  was  born  on  31st
    July 1985.  He appealed against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent  to
    refuse his combined application  for  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  2
    (Minster of Religion) Migrant and a biometric  residence  permit  under
    paragraph 245HD of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is  that  he  used  to  work  as  a  director  of
    evangelism at the Northampton branch of the  Christ  Apostolic  Church,
    and that his duties  includes  preaching,  teaching,  and  advising  on
    evangelical beliefs of the church.  He used to liaise with  the  senior
    pastor through minister of  religion  about  the  evangelical  strategy
    needed for wherever he is located.  This is clear from  a  letter  from
    the Christ Apostolic Church, dated 15th September 2014, written by  the
    Reverend S. O. Oluwasola, chairman of the board  of  trustees,  to  the
    Secretary of State in the Appellant's application.

 4. The Respondent Secretary of State refused the application on the  basis
    that the Appellant did not meet the requirements  of  paragraph  245HD,
    namely, that the Appellant's Sponsor the Christ Apostolic  Church,  New
    Testament Assembly,

         "Has not performed an 'appropriate resident labour market  test  as
         defined in Appendix A.  The  Respondent  was  therefore  unable  to
         award any points under Appendix A: Attributes  in  the  Appellant's
         point-based application'".  (See paragraph 4).

 5. The Appellant, however, complains that the vacancy of the  job  he  now
    feels was advertised with the universal job match on 17th  April  2014,
    that he saw the advert and he printed a copy of it on 22nd May 2014 and
    that he "enclosed a copy alongside other supporting documentation", and
    that this alone is 35 days which is more than the minimum  required  28
    days that the advert  was  still  online  for  until  June  2014.   The
    Appellant claims that his Sponsor told him the advert was made  for  60
    days (paragraph 5 of the determination).

 6. In his determination, the judge stated that, "Exception D of form IAFT-
    1 the Appellant states that he is sending a copy of his 'certificate of
    sponsorship  (detail)'  and  a  copy  of  the  advert"  (paragraph  7).
    However, the judge then stated that, "I can find no trace of a document
    entitled 'certificate of sponsorship' in the documents before me"  (see
    paragraph 7).  The judge also observed that, "additionally, there is no
    letter from the Sponsor to show that the Appellant has, in  fact,  been
    appointed  to  the  position  advertised  (paragraph  8).   The   judge
    concluded that, "I, therefore, find that the Appellant  has  failed  to
    submit a 'certificate of sponsorship' as showing the  details  required
    by paragraph 245HD" (see paragraph 9).

 7. The appeal was dismissed.



Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application state that the judge erred  in  law  because
    the evidence complained of had in fact been submitted.  The certificate
    of sponsorship had been  submitted.   A  letter  showing  that  he  was
    employed had been submitted.

 9. On 20th May 2015, permission to appeal by the First-tier  Tribunal  was
    refused, but not without the observation that it was not clear why  the
    judge had failed to locate the certificate of  sponsorship  because  it
    was in  the  Respondent's  bundle  and  it  was  also  annexed  to  the
    Appellant's Grounds of Appeal.  Permission was refused because this was
    a PBS case and it was incumbent on the Tribunal not to take  the  grant
    of evidence that was not submitted in support of, and at  the  time  of
    making, the application to which the immigration decision related.

10. On 22nd July 2015, however, the Upper Tribunal  granted  permission  on
    the basis that the judge should  have  considered  the  certificate  of
    sponsorship, "when it is contended in the renewed grounds that  it  was
    within the bundle of documents before him [i.e. the judge]".

11. On 21st August 2015, a Rule 24 response was entered to the effect  that
    the Sponsor had not  performed  the  resident  labour  market  test  as
    defined in Appendix A and this meant that the appeal could not  in  any
    event have succeeded.

Submissions

12. At the hearing before me on 19th April 2016,  the  Appellant,  who  was
    unrepresented, stated that the certificate of  sponsorship  was  before
    the Tribunal and it was in the bundle that was sent to the Tribunal and
    ought to have been considered.  Second, he drew  my  attention  to  the
    letter of 15th September 2014 from the Christ Apostolic Church,  signed
    off by the Reverend S. O. Oluwasola,  the  chairman  of  the  board  of
    trustees, confirming that the Appellant had "just been employed by  the
    church/charity with a certificate of sponsorship number  C2R8E7500T2V".
    The letter explained that the duty of the applicant was to  work  as  a
    "director of evangelism at the Northampton branch" of the  church.   It
    also went on to say that, "the Rule passes the resident  labour  market
    test as it was advertised with the DWP universal job match with the job
    ID 2074997".

13. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Parkinson,  as  a  Senior  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer, stated that there is only one issue in this  appeal
    and this was whether the Appellant meets the requirements  of  Appendix
    A.  He did not do  so  because  the  certificate  of  sponsorship  only
    contained one date and this was 17th April 2014.  It did not  show  the
    period during which time the Appellant had seen his position advertised
    as required by the Rules.

14. This meant that the resident labour market  requirement  had  not  been
    met.  The refusal letter had already made this clear.  It was not clear
    from looking at the certificate of sponsorship that the advert had been
    put in for 28 days in the previous six months.

15. The Appellant had chosen a "paper hearing".  He was not  able  to  give
    evidence at the hearing.  He could not succeed now.   This  was  a  PBS
    case.  The judge could only look at evidence that had been  put  before
    the Secretary of State.  Under  paragraph  92(a)(iii)(3)  the  resident
    labour market test must be satisfied.  It  must  be  satisfied  for  28
    days.  This had not been done.

16. In reply, Mr Ajai stated that the job had been advertised on 17th April
    2014 and the advert is dated 22nd May 2014.  This alone is 35 days.  It
    was clear that the evidence was there  even  before  the  Secretary  of
    State.  One only has to look at the date of the advert being  22nd  May
    2014.

Error of Law

17. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are  as  follows.   First,  the  letter  of  15th
    September 2014 from  the  Christ  Apostolic  Church  was  part  of  the
    Appellant's bundle and should have been considered.  It  was  a  letter
    written to "the Home Secretary" in Croydon.  It  was  also  before  the
    Respondent Secretary of  State  at  the  time  of  the  making  of  her
    decision.  The letter is clear.  It makes it abundantly plain that  the
    Appellant has been employed with the certificate  of  sponsorship  with
    the appropriate registration number.  It also makes it clear  that  his
    job was advertised with  the  DWP  universal  job  match  with  job  ID
    2074997.

18. It is further made clear that his duties include, preaching,  teaching,
    and advising on evangelical beliefs of the church.  Section 92 sets out
    in the alternative a number of matters that must  be  considered.   The
    judge failed to do so.

19. Second, the advert is dated 22nd May 2014 and it confirms the  date  of
    the advertisement being 17th April 2014.  The advert was placed on  the
    church website as well.  These are  material  matters  that  the  judge
    should have taken into account and a failure to do so is  an  error  of
    law.

Remaking the Decision

20. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before him, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am allowing this appeal for the following reasons.

21. First, the letter of 15th September  2014  from  the  Christ  Apostolic
    Church makes it clear that the Appellant has already been  employed  by
    the church in the capacity of director of evangelism and that  his  job
    has been advertised with the DWP universal job match.  It also makes it
    clear that "the role passes the resident  labour  market  test".   This
    letter is from a "A rated Sponsor and we certified" the fact that  the,
    "maintenance and that of his dependant throughout  the  period  of  his
    employment with us".

22. Second, the job was clearly advertised  on  17th  April  2014  and  the
    advert remained on the website until 22nd May 2014, a period of 35 days
    in itself, and if one were to take this into account it is  clear  that
    the 28 day period during the period preceding six months is  satisfied.
    The decision has to be made on a balance of probabilities, and on  that
    basis, this appeal must be allowed.



Notice of Decision

23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    allowed.

24. No anonymity order is made.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 13th September 2016


