
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/41717/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 August 2015                    |On 7 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH


                                   Between

                             ms doreen bonabaana
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. S. Vokes of counsel, instructed by Wornham & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant who was born on 10 June 1981 is  a  national  of  Uganda.
    She applied for permanent residence on 15 January 2013  on  account  of
    her marriage to a Hungarian national.  They  had  been  married  on  17
    February 2006 in Hungary but they divorced on  21  January  2013.   The
    application was refused on 30  September  2013  because  there  was  no
    divorce certificate, there was no evidence that he had been  exercising
    treaty rights at the date of divorce and also no evidence that she  had
    been here for five years in accordance with the requirements of the EEA
    Regulations.

2.   She appealed against this decision on 10 October 2013 and said she  was
    not aware that she had to prove that her husband had been exercising  a
    treaty rights at the time of their divorce and she relied on  the  fact
    that her marriage had lasted for three years and that for at least  one
    year of their marriage they had been living in the United Kingdom.  Her
    grounds also said that she was pregnant and currently unemployed.

3.   At the hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Blake  on  1  December
    2014 she elected to appear in person as  she  had  lost  confidence  in
    those then representing her. She said that she now  accepted  that  she
    could not rely upon her previous marriage to an EEA national as a basis
    upon which to continue  to  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom.  But  she
    asserted that she was now in a  genuine  relationship  with  a  British
    citizen and also had a child with him.  At that hearing, the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge found her to be a credible witness and accepted that she
    was in a genuine relationship with a British citizen. But  he  did  not
    adjourn the hearing to enable her to  provide  further  evidence  about
    their circumstances. He just noted that she had told him that  she  was
    intending to make a new application on that basis.

4.   The solicitors now representing her subsequently appealed on the  basis
    that her Article 8 rights had been raised and should  have  been  dealt
    with by the judge.  On the basis of case law current at that time  that
    was a perfectly sensible ground to raise and this was  the  basis  upon
    which Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein granted her permission  to  appeal
    on 6 June 2015.

5.   Prior to Judge Goldstein granting permission the  President  heard  the
    case of Amirteymour and others (EEA appeals; human rights) [2015]  UKUT
    466 (IAC) on 31st March 2015 but it  was  not  promulgated  until  last
    week. Therefore  neither  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Goldstein  nor  those
    representing the Appellant would have been aware of it.

6.   The President decided that "where no notice under section  120  of  the
    2002 Act has been served and where no EEA decision to remove  has  been
    made, an appellant cannot bring a Human Rights challenge to removal  in
    an appeal under the EEA Regulations. Neither the factual matrix nor the
    reasoning in JM (Liberia) [2006] EWCA Civ 1402 has any  application  to
    appeal of this nature". In the light of this  decision,  the  Appellant
    cannot succeed in her appeal but it does not detract from the fact  the
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  had  believed  that  the  appellant  was  a
    credible witness and that she had a genuine relationship with a British
    husband. Furthermore, I have noted  that  in  preparation  for  today's
    hearing her solicitors put in a large amount of evidence  which  showed
    that she was in a relationship which  was  subsisting  with  a  British
    citizen and they had a child and also raised some issues about  whether
    it would be reasonable for the child to leave the United Kingdom.

7.   Counsel today quite fairly accepts that her appeal  must  be  dismissed
    but hopes that the fact that there previously was  a  reasonable  basis
    for her appeal will be taken into account when she makes an application
    for leave to remain. When  the  Appellant  appealed  her  grounds  were
    arguable  and  it  was  on  this  basis  that  she  delayed  making  an
    application for leave to remain.

Notice of Decision

1.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision and reasons  did  not  contain
    any errors of law and is upheld.

2.   The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.

3.   No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]

Signed   Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch 27th August 2015
