
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41491/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford           |                                                  |
|                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated                    |
|On 29th September 2015      |                                           On 4th |
|                            |February 2016                                     |
|                            |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                          Vivian Samir Ramzy METRY
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs R Frantzis, instructed by Simpson Millar,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Vivian Samir Ramzy Metry, was born on 29 August 1983 and
    is a female citizen of Egypt.   The  appellant  applied  for  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom  with  her  husband  (the  sponsor).   Her
    application was refused by  a  decision  of  the  respondent  dated  18
    October 2014 on the basis that she did not  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE of HC 395 in respect of her private life in the United
    Kingdom.  At the time of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  (9
    January 2015) the appellant was pregnant with a child.

 2. The grounds of appeal refer to the judge's alleged failure, in making a
    proportionality assessment under Article 8 ECHR  (it  appears  to  have
    been  accepted  that  the  appellant  could  not  succeed   under   the
    Immigration Rules), to take account of "the fact that the  child  is  a
    British citizen."  As I have noted above, there was no child as at  the
    date of the hearing but the child did exist having been born before the
    promulgation of  the  decision.   The  matter  is  further  complicated
    because the judge recorded at [30]  that  Mrs  Fell  (the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer) "very properly  conceded  that  the  appellant  was
    unable to travel back to Egypt at the date of the hearing  due  to  the
    advanced stage of her pregnancy."   It  appears  to  follow  that  that
    concession lost any relevance when the pregnancy came to an end that is
    before the promulgation of the decision.  The only  issue  remains  the
    judge's assessment of proportionality and whether that  assessment  was
    legally valid as at the date of the promulgation of his decision.

 3. The judge took a  number  of  factors  into  account  in  reaching  his
    decision.  He considered the case of Chikwamba 2008 UKHL 40.  He  noted
    that the appellant and sponsor intended to  return  to  Egypt  after  a
    family visit (during which the appellant discovered her  pregnancy)  to
    enable her to make an application for leave to enter as a spouse in the
    normal way.  The judge recorded that the appellant only relied upon her
    claimed ill-health during the course of her pregnancy as her reason for
    not returning to Egypt [48].  Indeed, the appellant explained that  she
    wished to take the child to Egypt as soon as it was safe to do so after
    its birth so that the grandparents and other relatives living  in  that
    country might see the child.  In assessing the appellant's evidence and
    her immigration history, the judge  reached  the  conclusion  that  her
    evidence contained "significant discrepancies and  inconsistencies  and
    [was] less  than  truthful."   The  judge  referred  also  to  evidence
    provided by the respondent that an  application  made  from  Egypt  was
    likely to be granted very quickly, there being a delay of  only  a  few
    days between the  submission  of  an  application  to  the  ECO  and  a
    decision.  The judge also considered the position if the child had been
    born by the date of the hearing finding that "if  Section  55  [of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009] is  applicable  to  this
    appeal it will be in the child's best interests to accompany its mother
    and father to Egypt pending decision on its mother's application."

 4. The judge was required to consider the evidence which was before him as
    at the date of the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.   There  was  no
    child at the date of that hearing. It was reasonable for the  judge  to
    take into account the  appellant  and  sponsor's  stated  intention  to
    return to Egypt to enable family members to see  any  child  which  may
    have been born and also, significantly, for the appellant  to  make  an
    application out of country to enter the United  Kingdom  as  a  spouse.
    The grounds of appeal are therefore  misleading  by  referring  to  the
    child in the present tense when that child did not exist either at  the
    date of the hearing before the judge.  On the facts  that  were  before
    him at the date of the hearing, I find that the  judge  has  reached  a
    decision which was plainly available to him.  If  the  facts  have  now
    changed following promulgation of the  decision,  it  is  open  to  the
    appellant to make a  fresh  application  to  the  Secretary  of  State.
    Alternatively, she may return to Egypt and make an application  out  of
    country in the normal  way.   In  the  circumstances,  the  appellant's
    appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                              Date   20 December 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date 20 December 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

