
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number IA/41033/2014
                                                               IA/41040/2014
                                                               IA/41045/2014
                                                           and IA/41055/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower Birmingham|Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 2nd November 2015                 |On 19th November 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                                     C A
                                     A J
                                     F A
                                    L F H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Pipe (Counsel, instructed by Elder Rahimi
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are a family and are nationals of Ghana. The Appellants'
    immigration history is considered below. The basic facts are  that  the
    adult Appellants appear to have entered the UK  unlawfully  many  years
    ago and remained without leave. The children were born in  the  UK  and
    the Third Appellant, their son, is now 9 and has lived in  the  UK  all
    his life.

 2. The Appellants applied for leave to remain (LTR) in the  UK  which  was
    refused for the reasons given in the Refusal  Letter  of  the  29th  of
    September 2014. Their appeals were considered  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Pooler on the papers as the Appellants elected not to attend  the
    hearing. The appeals were allowed in a decision promulgated on the  3rd
    of June 2015. Following that the Respondent sought permission to appeal
    which was granted leading to this decision.

 3. The Judge found that none of the Appellants could not succeed under the
    Immigration Rules in relation to private  and  family  life  (paragraph
    21). The decision turned whether it was reasonable to expect the eldest
    child to leave the UK and go and live in Ghana.  Turning  to  paragraph
    276ADE the Judge rejected an argument based on  the  Third  Appellant's
    approaching 10th birthday and the rights that would follow if  he  were
    to be granted British Citizenship. As the Judge noted in  paragraph  27
    there was nothing in the Third Appellant's circumstances to distinguish
    him from the majority of other children of his age. The Judge noted the
    parents' immigration history and then considered section  117B  of  the
    2002 Act and concluded that it would not be reasonable to expect him to
    leave the UK, on that basis the Appellants succeeded.

 4. The submission of Mr Pipe was that the findings made were open  to  the
    Judge and for the reasons given. He submitted that the Judge  had  been
    aware of EV (Philippines) & Ors [2014] EWCA Civ 874 although he had not
    referred to it, the Appellant's representatives had made  reference  to
    it in their written submissions. He submitted that it was not  relevant
    as it did not concern paragraph 276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules  as
    amended.

 5. When first introduced paragraph 276ADE(iv) did not contain a  reference
    the requirement that the removal of a child who had been in the UK  for
    7 years or more must be found to be unreasonable.  That  was  added  by
    HC780  which  was  further  amended  by   HC810   which   applied   the
    reasonableness requirement to all applications made after  the  9th  of
    July 2012. Before  that  amendment  the  sub-rule  simply  referred  to
    residence of at least 7 years.

 6. The addition of the need to find that  removal  would  be  unreasonable
    must, in my view, mean that more is required than the fact that a child
    has established a life in the UK of the sort that would be expected  of
    any child of that age. If that were not so, any child who had  been  in
    the UK for more than 7 years and lived   a  life  comparable  to  other
    children of the same  age  would  succeed,  that  would  rob  the  term
    "unreasonable" of any meaning and make the amendment superfluous.

 7.  The  overall  circumstances  have  to  be  assessed  and   more   than
    establishing the life that would be expected is  needed  to  justify  a
    finding that removal would be unreasonable. Although  the  case  of  EV
    (Philippines) concerns a case arising under  the  old  version  of  the
    Immigration Rules, i.e. pre 9th of July 2012, there is nothing  in  the
    case that would suggest that the  interpretation  of  the  term  should
    differ between the situation in that case  and  under  the  Immigration
    Rules as they now stand.

 8. Lewison LJ at paragraph 58 to 60 made the following observations;

         "58.     In my judgment, therefore,  the  assessment  of  the  best
         interests of the children must be made on the basis that the  facts
         are as they are in the real world. If one parent has  no  right  to
         remain, but the other parent does, that is the  background  against
         which the assessment is conducted. If neither parent has the  right
         to remain, then that is the background against which the assessment
         is conducted. Thus the ultimate question will be: is it  reasonable
         to expect the child to follow the parent with no right to remain to
         the country of origin?

      1. On the facts of ZH it was not reasonable to expect the children  to
         follow their mother to Tanzania, not least because the family would
         be separated and the children would be deprived  of  the  right  to
         grow up in the country of which they were citizens.

      1. That is a long way from the facts of our case. In our case none  of
         the family is a British citizen. None has the right  to  remain  in
         this  country.  If  the  mother  is  removed,  the  father  has  no
         independent right to remain. If the parents are removed, then it is
         entirely reasonable to expect the children to go with them. As  the
         immigration judge found it is obviously in their best interests  to
         remain with their parents. Although it is, of course a question  of
         fact for the tribunal, I cannot see that the desirability of  being
         educated at public expense in the UK can outweigh  the  benefit  to
         the children of remaining with their parents.  Just  as  we  cannot
         provide medical treatment for the world, so we cannot  educate  the
         world."

 9. I find that the Judge was not entitled to find, against the  background
    of a poor immigration history on  the  part  of  the  adults  in  which
    everything established in the UK has  been  based  on  their  continued
    illegal presence in the UK where education and  health  care  to  which
    none of them was entitled, that removal was unreasonable.  The  finding
    that the Third Appellant's circumstances were essentially no  different
    from any other 9 year old did not justify a finding  that  his  removal
    could be said to  be  unreasonable.  More  is  required  and  with  the
    addition of the facts of the  family's  overall,  negative  immigration
    history,   the   Third   Appellant's   personal   circumstances    were
    insufficient.

10. The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  does  not  contain  a  full
    analysis of the family's circumstances. At the hearing it was indicated
    by both representatives that the proper course of action, in the  event
    that I found that the decision did contain an error of law, would be to
    remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal  for  re-hearing.  Directions
    for that are given separately but I indicate here  to  avoid  confusion
    that I see no need for there to be an oral hearing and the case can  be
    considered as a paper case in line with the Appellants original  Notice
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

CONCLUSIONS

    The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision.

    The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing on all
    issues with no findings from the First-tier Tribunal being preserved.

Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.)

Fee Award

    I make no fee award which is a matter to be considered  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal having decided the remitted appeals.


Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 18th November 2015

