
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/41466/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 20 October 2015                   |On 28 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                               Mr RISHI KALIA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     absent
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Wilson promulgated  on  26  May  2015,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal.

Background

3.    The Appellant was born on 4  September  1986  and  is  a  national  of
India.

4.    On 31 January 2013 the Appellant applied for leave to  remain  as  the
spouse of a person present & settled in  the  UK.  On  6  October  2014  the
Secretary of State refused the Appellant's application.

The Judge's Decision

5.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal Judge  Walker  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision.

6.    Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 27 August 2015  Designated  Judge
of the First tier Tribunal McCarthy gave permission to appeal stating  inter
alia

         "In paragraphs 13 and  15  Judge  Wilson  made  findings  that  the
         appellant has a genuine parental relationship with his children and
         that some sort of marital relationship  was  subsisting.  The  fact
         that  the  appellant  is  facing  removal  meant  the   immigration
         decisions had the potential of  severing  those  relationships  and
         given relevant case law any judge was bound to  find  article  8(1)
         was engaged. Yet Judge Wilson made no finding on this. Nor  did  he
         undertake a proportionality assessment as required by law,  wherein
         he would have had to balance the appellant's circumstances with the
         statutory public interest considerations listed in s. 117B  of  the
         2002"

The Hearing

7.    The Appellant did not attend the appeal nor was he represented at  the
appeal. I am satisfied that due notice of the appeal  was  served  upon  the
Appellant at the address that was  given.  I  am  therefore  satisfied  that
having been served notice of the hearing and  not  attended  it  is  in  the
interests of justice to proceed with the hearing in the Appellant's  absence
as I am entitled to do by virtue of paragraph 38 of The  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

8.    I explained to Ms Everett that I had before me the grounds  of  appeal
together with a copy of the grant  permission  to  appeal  dated  27  August
2015, and I will take account of both.

9.    Ms Everett for the respondent relied  on  the  rule  24  response  and
argued that, notwithstanding the terms of the grant  permission  to  appeal,
the appellant could not succeed because findings of fact can  only  be  made
on the basis of evidence presented. She argued that a fair  reading  of  the
decision demonstrates that the appellant did not  lead  sufficient  evidence
to discharge the burden of proof and that the judge could not make  findings
of fact which favoured the appellant because  of  the  paucity  of  evidence
before him. She told me that the decision does not contain a material  error
of law and urged me to dismiss the appeal and allow the decision to stand.





Analysis

10.   Between [3] and [11] the judge summarises the evidence  placed  before
him. At [12] and [13] the Judge effectively says that there  are  unresolved
conflicts between the evidence of the appellant and that of  his  wife.   It
is at least implied that the judge found neither the appellant nor his  wife
to be either credible or reliable witness.

11.   However it is there that the decision really peters out.  It  is  hard
to discern what if any findings of fact the judge made on the basis  of  the
evidence placed before him. It is  clear  that  the  Judge  finds  that  the
appellants cannot succeed under the immigration rules, but the  Judge  makes
no findings of fact in relation to appendix FM. The judge does  not  mention
appendix FM, and does not appear to have considered it.

12.   In R (on the application of Esther Ebun Oludoyi & Ors) v Secretary  of
State for the Home Department (Article 8  -  MM  (Lebanon)  and  Nagre)  IJR
[2014] UKUT 00539 (IAC) it was held that there is nothing  in  R  (Nagre)  v
SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin), Gulshan (Article  8  -  new  Rules  -  correct
approach) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC) or Shahzad (Art 8: legitimate  aim)
[2014] UKUT 00085 (IAC) that  suggests  that  a  threshold  test  was  being
suggested as opposed to making it clear that there was a  need  to  look  at
the evidence to see if  there  was  anything  which  has  not  already  been
adequately considered in the context of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  which
could lead to a successful Article 8 claim. These authorities  must  not  be
read as seeking to qualify or fetter the assessment of Article  8.  This  is
consistent with para 128 of R (MM & Others) v  SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  985,
that there is no utility in  imposing  a  further  intermediate  test  as  a
preliminary to a consideration of an Article 8  claim  beyond  the  relevant
criterion-based Rule. As is held in R (Ganesabalan) v SSHD [2014] EWHC  2712
(Admin), there is no prior threshold which dictates whether the exercise  of
discretion should be considered; rather the nature  of  the  assessment  and
the  reasoning  which   are   called   for   are   informed   by   threshold
considerations.

13.   The grounds of appeal in this case clearly focused the  issue  on  the
appellant's article 8 ECHR rights. The Judge acknowledges that that was  the
focal point in this appeal in the last sentence  of  [1]  of  the  decision.
What the Judge has manifestly failed to do is to  consider  whether  or  not
article 8(1) is engaged. The Judge has not then considered  the  five  stage
test set out in Razgar. If the Judge had  followed  that  course  is  likely
that he would then have to address  the  question  of  proportionality.  The
decision does not contain  any  consideration  of  proportionality  nor  any
mention of the factors set out in section 117B of the 2002  Act.  The  words
"proportionate"  and  "proportionality"  do  not  appear  anywhere  in   the
decision. The word "disproportionate" appears in [1] only,  when  the  Judge
summarises the grounds of appeal.

14.   The notice of decision simply records  "I  dismiss  the  appeal".  The
appellant is not told whether the appeal is dismissed under the  immigration
rules or on article 8 ECHR grounds.





Finding on Material Error

15.   I find that the decision is tainted by material errors of  law.  There
is no finding that article 8(1) is engaged,  despite  findings  that  family
relationships exist. There is  no  analysis  of  the  appellant's  potential
article 8 ECHR rights. The assessment of proportionality is wholly  lacking.


16.   The failure of the First-tier Tribunal to address  and  determine  the
engagement of article 8 ECHR constitutes a clear error of law. This error  I
consider to be material since had the Tribunal conducted this  exercise  the
outcome could have been different. That in my view is the  correct  test  to
apply. The decision must be set aside in its entirety.

REMITTAL TO FT

17.    Under  Part  3  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Practice
Statement of the 25th of September 2012 the case  may  be  remitted  to  the
First Tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

    (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or



    (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

18.   In this case I have  determined  that  the  case  should  be  remitted
because of the extent of the fact finding exercise which is still  necessary
to ensure the Appellant has an opportunity to put  his  case  to  the  First
tier Tribunal.  In this case none of the findings of fact are to  stand  and
the matter will be a complete re hearing.

19.   I consequently remit  the  matter  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
sitting at Hatton Cross to be heard before any First-tier Immigration  judge
other than Judge AA Wilson.

Decision

20.   The decision of the First-tier tribunal is tainted by material  errors
of law.

21.   I set aside the decision. The appeal is remitted  to  the  First  Tier
Tribunal to be determined of new.



Signed      Date 27 October 2015

      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
