
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41062/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13 June 2014                               |On 24 June 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM

                                   Between

                              KWAKU AGYEMAN ADU
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Watterson, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1.   The appellant is a citizen of Ghana born on 10 January 1965. He  has
      appealed with the permission of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  a
      decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Blum  dismissing  his  appeal
      against the decision of the respondent, made on 27 September 2013,  to
      refuse to grant  him  settlement  on  the  basis  of  14  years'  long
      residence, but allowing the appeal on article 8 grounds. The appellant
      believes the  judge's  decision  that  the  "clock  stopped"  for  the
      purposes of accruing continuous residence as a result of  the  service
      of a decision notice ("IS81") on 6 October  1997  was  erroneous.  The
      appellant accepts he received this document.  The  dispute  is  as  to
      whether this notice had the effect the  judge  believed  it  had.  The
      grounds seeking permission to appeal also argue the  judge's  approach
      to the issue caused procedural unfairness to the  appellant,  who  was
      not given the opportunity to address the effect of  the  IS81  at  the
      hearing. Permission to appeal was granted to argue all grounds.


   2.   The respondent has cross-appealed on  the  grounds  that  the  judge
      erred in his conduct of the proportionality  balancing  exercise.  The
      judge found the delay and errors in the respondent's handling  of  the
      appellant's case reduced the  public  interest  in  his  removal.  The
      grounds seeking permission to appeal argue  the  judge  erred  in  his
      assessment of the ability of the appellant to re-establish his private
      life in Ghana.  This application had not been decided  by  the  First-
      tier Tribunal before this appeal was listed on the basis of the  grant
      of permission to appeal made to the appellant. The parties agreed that
      I should proceed by determining firstly whether Judge Blum's  decision
      contains a material error of law because,  if  his  decision  ere  set
      aside and re-made allowing the appeal under the rules, the decision on
      article 8 would become academic. Mr Bramble did not wish  to  withdraw
      the respondent's application so I have reconstituted myself as a Judge
      of the First-tier Tribunal to decide that  application.  My  decision,
      refusing to grant permission to appeal, is  contained  in  a  separate
      document.

   3.   Mr Bramble accepted Judge Blum erred on both the points made in  the
      grounds. I agree. The appellant was not given the opportunity to  make
      submissions on the effect of the IS81 notice which, as seen,  was  the
      basis on which Judge Blum determined the appeal against the appellant.
      This was unfair. Mr Bramble also  accepted  the  notice  in  question,
      which was a notice of refusal of leave to  enter,  was  not  a  notice
      capable of stopping the clock, as the judge found. The requirement  of
      paragraph 276B(i)(b), on which the appellant relied, was as follows:


         "he has had at least 14 years continuous residence  in  the  United
         Kingdom, excluding any period spent in the United Kingdom following
         service of notice of liability to removal or notice of  a  decision
         to remove by way of directions under paragraphs 8 to 10A, or 12  to
         14, of Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971 or section 10 of  the
         Immigration and Asylum Act 1999, or of a  notice  of  intention  to
         deport him from the United Kingdom."


   4.   Judge Blum found the IS81 fell within the above because  the  notice
      included reference to a proposal to set removal directions and as such
      manifested a clear intention to remove the appellant. He reasoned that
      it was irresistibly clear from the circumstances that the  notice  was
      issued under paragraph 8 of Schedule 2 to the  Immigration  Act  1971.
      However, as explained in Ms Watterson's grounds seeking permission  to
      appeal, the respondent's own internal  guidance  lists  the  kinds  of
      documents which can have the effect of stopping the clock and the list
      does not include an IS81. I  find  the  judge  erred  in  finding  the
      appellant had not accrued  14  years'  continuous  residence  for  the
      reason he gave.


   5.   I set aside Judge Blum's decision to the  extent  he  dismissed  the
      appeal under the long residence rules and I  remake  the  decision  as
      follows.


   6.   The respondent's case was that the clock stopped due to the  service
      of form IS82 on 22 January 1998. The appellant  denied  receiving  it.
      Judge Blum found that the appellant had  given  the  Home  Office  his
      correct address  and  the  evidence  of  the  efforts  of  his  former
      solicitors  to  obtain  information  about  his   immigration   status
      supported his claim not to have received  the  forms  posted  to  him.
      These  findings  have  not  been  challenged  and  I  regard  them  as
      preserved. The appellant arrived in the UK  on  6  October  1997.  The
      first occasion on which the clock could be said to have stopped was 18
      March 2013, when the appellant was served with form  IS151A  with  the
      refusal of his long residence application. The appellant passed the 14
      year mark in October 2011. It follows that the appellant  succeeds  in
      showing he met the requirements of paragraph 276(i)(b).

   7.   That leaves the issues of paragraphs 276B(ii), (iii) and (iv). These
      read as follows:


         (ii) having regard to the public interest there are no reasons why
         it would be undesirable for him to be given indefinite leave to
         remain on the ground of long residence, taking into account his:


           (a) age; and
           (b) strength of connections in the United Kingdom; and
           (c) personal history, including character, conduct, associations
           and employment record; and
           (d) domestic circumstances; and
           (e) previous criminal record and the nature of any offence of
           which the person has been convicted; and
           (f) compassionate circumstances; and
           (g) any representations received on the person's behalf.

         (iii) the applicant does not have one or more  unspent  convictions
         within the meaning of the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974;


         (iv) the applicant has sufficient knowledge of the English language
         and sufficient knowledge about life in the United  Kingdom,  unless
         he is under the age of 18 or aged 65 or over  as  at  the  time  he
         makes his application."


   8.   Subparagraph (iii) is not relevant because there  is  no  suggestion
      the appellant has any convictions. Judge Blum did not reach the  point
      of looking at the public interest factors in  his  considerations  and
      therefore made no findings on them. I note the respondent also stopped
      in the refusal letter at the point of deciding the appellant could not
      show 14 years' continuous residence.


   9.   Mr Bramble argued the correct determination would  be  to  find  the
      decision was not in accordance with the law because the respondent had
      not yet given any consideration  to  the  countervailing  factors.  Ms
      Watterson argued I should decide the matter myself and there was  only
      one possible outcome, which was that the appeal should be allowed.

  10. It is now reasonably clear that it is for the  Tribunal  to  determine
      whether the factors in paragraph 276B(ii)  render  it  undesirable  to
      grant indefinite leave on public policy grounds (see MU ('statement of
      additional grounds' - long residence - discretion)  Bangladesh  [2010]
      UKUT 442 (IAC), paragraph 12). I therefore disagree with Mr  Bramble's
      submission that the case should be "remitted" to  the  respondent  for
      further consideration. It is also clear from Judge Blum's findings  on
      article 8 that there are no significantly adverse factors which  could
      lead to refusal on this point. He found the appellant, who is  now  49
      years of age, had spent 17 years in the UK and that he had established
      a substantial private life during  that  time,  although  he  had  not
      partner or family life. He  noted  the  appellant  had  used  a  false
      passport to enter the UK and a false identity  to  obtain  employment.
      However, he had never gone to ground and he had made concerted efforts
      to chase up his application. He found the appellant was  a  churchgoer
      and had not relied on public funds.


  11. The use of false documents is a significant matter, as  is  absconding
      for a lengthy period. However, the appellant brought  himself  to  the
      notice of the authorities. Furthermore, the  Court  of  Appeal  in  ZH
      (Bangladesh) [2009] EWCA Civ 8  found  error  in  attaching  too  much
      significance to matters such as using false documents in  the  context
      of a claim by an appellant to  have  established  14  years'  unlawful
      residence during which he had maintained himself by working illegally.
      It must also be relevant that Judge Blum found the public interest  in
      removing the appellant was diminished by the  significant  delays  and
      errors on the part of the respondent which he identified. The  factors
      in paragraph 276B(i)(b) are not exhaustive and this point can be taken
      into account.


  12. Having had full regard to the  public  interest  in  general  and  the
      factors listed in the rule, I do not find it is  undesirable  for  the
      appellant to be granted indefinite leave to remain on the  grounds  of
      his long residence.


  13. The papers show the appellant indicated a willingness to submit a Life
      in the UK Test certificate through his solicitors  and  this  has  not
      been the subject of any adverse comment from the respondent. I  regard
      the requirement of subparagraph (iv) as having been met.


  14. I allow the appeal under paragraph 276B of the rules.

DECISION

     The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a material error on a  point
    of law and his determination dismissing the appellant's appeal  insofar
    as it was brought under the Immigration Rules is set aside.


    The following decision is substituted:


    The appeal brought under the Immigration Rules is allowed.


    No anonymity direction has been made.


    No fee award.
                               Signed                 Date 13 June 2014


                               Neil Froom, sitting as a Deputy Judge of the
                               Upper Tribunal

