
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41764/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 November 2015                  |On 3 December 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                    S A P
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr I. Graham, Counsel instructed by Robinson Ravani
                    & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI2008/269) the Upper Tribunal makes an Anonymity Order.   Unless
    the Upper  Tribunal  or  Court  orders  otherwise,  no  report  of  any
    proceedings or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or
    indirectly identify the original appellant.  This  prohibition  applies
    to, amongst others, all parties.

 2. The appellant is a citizen  of  India  born  on  2  June  1983.  He  is
    appealing against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  ("FtT")  to
    dismiss his appeal against the decision of the respondent to refuse him
    leave to remain in the UK. The appellant claims that requiring  him  to
    leave the UK breaches Article 8 of the ECHR.

 3. The appellant was granted leave to enter the UK as a  Tier  4  (General
    Student) on 14 September 2009 with leave until 17 April  2012.  Several
    subsequent applications for leave to remain were refused. On 5 November
    2013 he was officially recorded as an overstayer.

 4. The essence of the appellant's case before the FtT is that in  July  or
    August 2012 he met his current partner who, along with her 7  year  old
    daughter, is a  British  Citizen.  They  are  in  a  close  and  loving
    relationship and have been cohabiting since December 2013. His  partner
    had been the victim of very serious  domestic  abuse  from  her  former
    husband (from whom she was divorcing when the appellant  met  her)  and
    both she and her daughter have been traumatised by the experience.  The
    appellant has developed a close bond with his  partner's  daughter  and
    become a part of her life, assisting her in day to day matters, such as
    homework and collection from school, and also helping to build her self
    confidence.

 5. The appellant does not believe  his  partner  and  her  daughter  could
    realistically be expected to travel with him to  India.  He  has  given
    three reasons: first, they are  both  British;  second,  his  partner's
    daughter is the subject of  a  residence  and  prohibited  steps  order
    pursuant to which she cannot be taken outside of the UK for a period in
    excess of one month without the consent of  a  High  Court  Judge;  and
    third, his partner, as a divorcee and  someone  cohabiting  outside  of
    marriage, would be subjected to taunting and in a difficult position in
    India.

 6. It is the appellant's case that if he were removed from the UK, leaving
    his partner and her daughter without him,  the  daughter  would  suffer
    considerably.  A  report  was  obtained  on  this  issue  by  Chartered
    Psychologist Dr Saima Latif. Following a detailed assessment, Dr  Latif
    reached the following conclusions:
          a. The partner's daughter has developed a positive attachment  to
             the appellant and separation from him is  likely  to  have  an
             impact  which  may  continue  for  some  time,  resulting   in
             separation anxiety and psychological distress.
          b. If the appellant is removed  from  the  UK,  the  daughter  is
             likely to experience further difficulties and there will be  a
             greater strain on the parental and child relationship  in  the
             future
          c. She will find it very difficult to cope with  the  appellant's
             absence which will detrimentally impact on her well-being
          d. It is likely she will suffer psychological  difficulties  such
             as depression, anxiety, sleep difficulties and nightmares  and
             will  go  through  a  grieving  process   and   her   academic
             performance will deteriorate.

 7. Dr Latif also opined on what would happen  if  the  partner's  daughter
    were brought to India. Dr Latif asserts that she would be unable to  go
    to live in India because of the cultural and language barriers.



Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 8. The FtT first noted that this was not a case that could  succeed  under
    the Immigration Rules. It then carried out an assessment under  Article
    8, following the structured and sequential approach set out  in  Razgar
    [2014] UKHL 27.

 9. It found that there was family  life  between  the  appellant  and  his
    partner and partner's daughter that was sufficient to engage Article 8.
    It also found that removal of the appellant from the UK was  consistent
    with the legitimate aim of maintaining  immigration  control.  The  FtT
    then turned to the question of whether removing the appellant from  the
    UK would be proportionate.

10. In so doing, the FtT considered the public  interest  by  reference  to
    Section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  ("the
    2002 Act") and made the following findings:
          a. the relationship was formed at a time when the  appellant  did
             not have valid leave and therefore  little  weight  should  be
             given to his private life and relationship with his partner
          b.  the  appellant  is  unable  to  bring  himself   within   the
             Immigration Rules
          c. the appellant's English is at a level that required him to use
             an interpreter at the hearing
          d. the appellant has not demonstrated financial independence.

11. The FtT made reference to Section 55 of the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009 ("Section 55") and  made  the  following  findings
    which concern the partner's daughter:
          a. there is no evidence of the daughter having any  contact  with
             her natural father and it may be that her best interest is  to
             not have contact with him
          b. she has been brought up in the UK and exposed to its  language
             and culture
          c. she is relatively young and could  adapt  to  new  situations,
             although it would be better for her to stay in school  in  the
             UK
          d. The restriction on the  daughter  travelling  outside  the  UK
             could be the subject of an application to the  High  Court  to
             allow her to move to India
          e. The  appellant's  and  his  partner's  families  would  likely
             provide support and assistance in India.

12.  The  FtT  concluded  that  there  was  nothing  unique,  different  or
    exceptional in this appeal that would indicate a decision  outside  the
    Immigration Rules was appropriate and dismissed the appeal.

Grounds of appeal and submissions

13. The grounds of appeal assert that the FtT failed to give weight to  the
    evidence showing the appellant's partner  was  the  victim  of  extreme
    domestic abuse and that the daughter has suffered psychologically. They
    further submit that there was a failure to give weight  to  the  trauma
    suffered by the partner and her daughter and  to  the  strong  bond  of
    dependency they have formed with the appellant and  the  reliance  they
    place upon him.

14. At the error of law hearing, the arguments focused on whether  the  FtT
    had failed to consider and apply Section 55  and  the  welfare  of  the
    partner's daughter correctly.

15. Mr Graham, on behalf of the appellant, argued that the FtT  had  failed
    to engage with the overwhelming evidence concerning  the  psychological
    impact on the partner's daughter including in particular the report  of
    Dr Latif. He submitted that the appellant plays an  important  part  in
    her life. He is known to the school as a "relevant person" who collects
    her from school. Mr Graham also commented that the FtT  had  speculated
    that the High Court would allow the daughter to leave the UK but  there
    was no basis for this finding.

16. Mr  Staunton  argued  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  Mr  Graham's
    submissions amount to no more than a disagreement with findings the FtT
    was entitled to make. The FtT set out at paragraph [21]  a  summary  of
    the psychological report. It even identified an  error  in  the  report
    (the FtT states that the report writer was in error when it stated  she
    had never been to India) which highlights that the report  was  engaged
    with fully. The best interests  of  the  partner's  daughter  were  not
    ignored and the FtT made a clear reference to Section 55. The  FtT  has
    considered  all  of  the  relevant  facts  and   formed   a   view   on
    proportionality having considered all aspects of the case including the
    trauma suffered by the partner and partner's daughter.

Error of Law

17. For the reasons set out below, I find that the  FtT  erred  in  law  by
    failing to properly consider the  best  interests  of  the  appellant's
    partner's daughter.

18. The Supreme Court  in  Zoumbas  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2013] 1 WLR 3690 considered the interplay between the  best
    interests of a child and Article 8 ECHR. It set out seven principles:
          a. The best interests of a child are  an  integral  part  of  the
             proportionality assessment under Article 8 ECHR;
          b. In making that assessment, the best interests of a child  must
             be a primary  consideration,  although  not  always  the  only
             primary consideration; and the child's best interests  do  not
             of themselves have the status of the paramount consideration;
          c. Although the best interests of a child can  be  outweighed  by
             the  cumulative  effect  of  other  considerations,  no  other
             consideration can be treated as inherently more significant;
          d. While different judges might approach the question of the best
             interests of a child in different ways, it is important to ask
             oneself the right questions in an orderly manner in  order  to
             avoid the risk that the best interests of  a  child  might  be
             undervalued when other important considerations were in play;
          e.  It  is  important  to  have  a  clear  idea  of   a   child's
             circumstances and of what  is  in  a  child's  best  interests
             before one asks oneself whether those interests are outweighed
             by the force of other considerations;
          f. To that end there is no substitute for a  careful  examination
             of all relevant factors when the  interests  of  a  child  are
             involved in an Article 8 assessment; and
          g. A child must not be blamed for matters for which he or she  is
             not responsible, such as the conduct of a parent.

19. I have kept the above listed seven principles in mind when  considering
    the approach taken by  the  FtT  in  this  appeal  to  the  appellant's
    partner's daughter.

20. This is a case in  which  there  is  a  well  evidenced  and  important
    relationship between the appellant and his partner's  daughter.  It  is
    also a case in which, if the appellant is removed from the  UK,  it  is
    unlikely that his partner and her daughter will follow him to India  as
    they are both UK citizens and there is a  Court  Order  preventing  the
    partner's daughter leaving the UK for more than 28 days.

21. In considering the  best  interests  of  the  partner's  daughter,  the
    relevant question therefore is the affect on her if  the  appellant  is
    removed and she and her mother remain in the UK without  him.  The  FtT
    erred in law by failing to address this question or indeed to formulate
    with any degree of specificity or clarity, and with  reference  to  the
    evidence before it, what  in  fact  were  the  best  interests  of  the
    daughter.

22. There was a psychological report before the  FtT,  the  conclusions  of
    which were not challenged, advising  that  the  daughter  would  suffer
    considerably if separated from the appellant (the psychologist  refers,
    inter alia, to the daughter being at significant  risk  of  depression,
    anxiety, sleep difficulties and nightmares and going through a grieving
    process). Even though the FtT,  in  the  body  of  its  decision,  made
    reference to this report, it was not given any weight or  consideration
    in the context of forming a view on the best interests of the daughter.
    This too amounts to an error of law.

Remaking the decision

23. As recognised by the parties and the FtT, this is a  case  that  cannot
    succeed  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and   which   turns   on   the
    proportionality of removal under Article 8.

24. In considering proportionality  my  starting  point  is  the  partner's
    daughter's best interests. Relevant to this is that:
          a. she has been the victim of extremely traumatic events  in  her
             early life and  she  feels  close  to  and  supported  by  the
             appellant;
          b. she would suffer significantly if separated from the appellant
             (as set out in a psychological report the conclusions of which
             have not been challenged);
          c. she is not allowed to leave the  UK  for  more  than  28  days
             without a Court Order; and
          d. she is a British Citizen.

25. Taking these factors into account, I  find  that  the  daughter's  best
    interests are served and promoted by (a) her remaining in the  UK;  and
    (b) the appellant remaining in the family unit with her and her  mother
    in the UK. Accordingly, it is  my  finding  that  it  is  in  the  best
    interest of the daughter for the status quo to be preserved;  i.e.  for
    the appellant to remain in the UK.

26. Having made this finding in respect of the daughter's best interests, I
    now turn to the public interest  in  the  appellant's  removal.  In  so
    doing, I consider Section 117 of the 2002 Act.
          a.  Section  117B(1)  states  that   maintenance   of   effective
             immigration control is in the public interest. In  considering
             this requirement, I bear in mind that the appellant is  unable
             to satisfy the Immigration Rules and overstayed his  leave  to
             remain in the UK. It is clearly in the interest  of  effective
             immigration control that a person who cannot meet, and who has
             intentionally disregarded, the Immigration Rules (becoming  an
             overstayer) should be removed.
          b. Section 117B(2) states that it is in the public interest for a
             person to speak English. The  FtT  noted  that  the  appellant
             required  an  interpreter.  Mr  Graham  submitted   that   the
             appellant had studied in  English  and  a  negative  inference
             should not be drawn from the appellant preferring to  use  his
             native language in the stressful setting of  a  hearing.  That
             may be the case, but  the  appellant  has  failed  to  provide
             evidence to support that he is able to speak English.
          c. Section 117B(3) stipulates that it is in the  public  interest
             for a person to be financially independent. The appellant  has
             not  provided  any  evidence  to  show   he   is   financially
             independent.
          d. Section 117B(4) requires that little  weight  be  given  to  a
             private  life  established  when  a  person  is  in   the   UK
             unlawfully. By the time the appellant met his partner  he  was
             in the UK unlawfully.

27. Given the appellant's poor immigration history, failure to satisfy  the
    Immigration Rules and failure to satisfy any  of  the  public  interest
    considerations stipulated in 117B there is a strong public interest  in
    his removal.

28. There is, however, a strong countervailing interest in his remaining in
    UK because his doing so is in  the  best  interests  of  his  partner's
    daughter. In the balancing exercise I treat the daughter's interest  as
    a primary interest but one that it is not paramount and can nonetheless
    be outweighed by other considerations.

29. It is important to bear in mind that this is not a case  where  removal
    of the appellant will result in a UK child having to leave the UK.  The
    appellant's partner's evidence, as set out in her witness statement, is
    that it would be impossible for her and her daughter to  live  anywhere
    other than the UK. The daughter cannot, in  any  event,  leave  the  UK
    without a Court Order.  Accordingly, removing the appellant from the UK
    will more likely than not result in the separation of a family unit but
    not in a UK child having to move abroad.

30. The effect on the partner's daughter of this separation is discussed in
    detail by the expert psychologist Dr Latif, who concludes that it  will
    result, inter alia, in anxiety and  psychological  distress.  Dr  Latif
    sets out in her  report  a  range  of  psychological  difficulties  she
    believes the daughter will face if the appellant is removed,  including
    depression, anxiety and sleep. She refers  to  there  being  long  term
    consequences.   The  conclusions  made  by  Dr  Latif  have  not   been
    challenged by the respondent. Although there are some minor  errors  in
    the report (at paragraph [19] of the  report,  for  example,  Dr  Latif
    mistakenly states that the daughter has never been to India)  and  some
    of the conclusions could be open to challenge, in the  absence  of  any
    such challenge having been made, I accept Dr Latif's conclusions.

31. This is a case where the scales in the proportionality  exercise  weigh
    heavily on both sides. On the one hand, there is a  clear  and  weighty
    public interest in  the  appellant,  whose  relationships  were  formed
    whilst  in  the  UK  unlawfully  and  who  has  intentionally  breached
    immigration law, being removed. On  the  other  hand,  the  uncontested
    expert evidence is that the appellant plays an important  role  in  the
    life of a young girl who has a very traumatic  background  (because  of
    her natural father) and that the appellant's removal could have serious
    negative implications for her. Weighing these interests, and bearing in
    mind the weight that must be attached to the welfare of a child, I find
    that, on balance, and taking all the evidence that was before  the  FtT
    into consideration, removing the appellant from the  UK  would  not  be
    proportionate and would be contrary to Article 8.

Decision
 a. The appeal is allowed.
 b. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of law.
 c. I remake the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  by  allowing  the
    appellant's appeal.
 d. An anonymity order is made.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 29 November 2015              |

