
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41443/2014
                                                               IA/41445/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 13 August 2015                    |On 9 November 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                                     NHO
                                     NA
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For  the  Appellant:      Mr  A  Pipe,  Counsel  instructed  by  Gracefields
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Gribble dated 3 February 2015 which refused the asylum and human rights
    claims of the applicant and her minor child.

 2. The background to this matter is that after  coming  to  the  UK  as  a
    student the appellant, a Nigerian national,  married  another  Nigerian
    national by proxy. They had a daughter together. She  and  her  partner
    separated and in 2011 the appellant  applied  for  a  prohibited  steps
    order preventing her husband from removing their child from her care or
    from the UK. The husband then applied for contact and this was  granted
    on a limited basis. He attended for one contact  session  in  2013  but
    thereafter had no contact at all with the appellant  or  the  daughter.
    The appellant heard he had gone back to Nigeria.

 3. The appellant  claimed  asylum  as  she  feared  that  she  would  face
    mistreatment from her husband on return to Nigeria. Her claim was based
    on threats made to her by her husband  after  she  prevented  him  from
    having unsupervised contact with their daughter.  He said that he would
    "get her" when she returned to Nigeria and obtain assistance  from  his
    family in doing so. On another occasion he had said that if she did not
    agree that he should take their child to live with him he would  "deal"
    with her. She had no immigration status at that time  and  the  husband
    had also threatened her by stating that if she did  not  agree  to  his
    having contact with his daughter he would inform  the  Home  Office  in
    order to have her and her daughter  deported  so  that  he  could  take
    custody of the child.

 4. The appellant also maintained that her daughter would face the risk  of
    female genital mutilation (FGM) if returned to  Nigeria  as  it  was  a
    practice followed  by  her  husband's  family.  He  had  mentioned  the
    practice during her pregnancy. It was not a matter that formed any part
    of the prohibited steps or contact  order  proceedings  in  the  Family
    Court at any time, however, not being mentioned until May 2014.

 5. Judge Gribble did not find that either the appellant  or  her  daughter
    would be at risk of any form of mistreatment from the father or  anyone
    else in Nigeria if they returned.  She also found that the  appellant's
    daughter would not be at risk of  Article  3  ECHR  mistreatment  as  a
    result  of  developmental  delays  she  suffered   having   been   born
    prematurely. The decision also refused the Article 8 claim.

 6. To my mind the points raised in the written grounds of appeal  are  not
    far from  those  described  in  the  head  note  of  the  case  of  VHR
    (unmeritorious grounds) Jamaica [2014] UKUT 00367 (IAC) which states:
         "Appeals should not be mounted on the basis of a litany of forensic
         criticisms of  particular  findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
         whilst ignoring the basic legal test which  the  appellant  has  to
         meet."

 7. The appellant here maintains that she would be at risk from her husband
    if returned to Nigeria. As found by  Judge  Gribble  and  not  disputed
    before me, it was the appellant's  evidence  that  there  had  been  no
    contact from the husband for over two years.  The husband's threats  to
    her had been made after they had separated and she had taken action  to
    prevent him from having unsupervised contact with the  child.  Although
    provision had been made by the Family Courts he did not pursue  contact
    with the child after one contact session in January 2013.

 8. The appellant's evidence about FGM was that  the  father  made  passing
    comments to it on one or two occasions when she was pregnant, had later
    "laughed it off" and stated that "it's not a  big  thing"  ([28]).  She
    accepted that the fact that she had not undergone FGM was not a concern
    to her husband [34]. As above, it was not something that the  appellant
    ever raised as a concern at any time in the Family  Court  proceedings.
    She also accepted that although country evidence  and  her  own  expert
    report referred to her ethnic group  practising  FGM  this  was  not  a
    universal practice, her own parents had not agreed with it and she  had
    not undergone FGM or been  threatened  with  it  ([24],[42],[37]).  Her
    ethnic group "would support her in respect of FGM for her  daughter  if
    she could stay somewhere" [37].

 9. Concerning the FGM claim, First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Gribble  at  [52]
    placed significant weight on the appellant's evidence  at  the  hearing
    which "at its highest suggests there was a throwaway remark made by the
    Father during the First  Appellant's  pregnancy  which  was  not  taken
    seriously by her". At [53] Judge Gribble  found  that  FGM  was  not  a
    genuine concern to the appellant as if that was so it was not  credible
    that  she  would  not  have  mentioned  it  during  the  Family   Court
    proceedings. She did not accept the appellant's  explanation  that  she
    did not mention FGM earlier as she thought that  the  prohibited  steps
    order was sufficient protection. Judge Gribble did not find it credible
    that no mention of FGM was made until the appellant's appeal  statement
    dated 22 May 2104.

10. The appellant also stated that her mother remained in Nigeria  but  her
    husband had not tried to contact her mother to find out where  she  and
    the daughter were and did not know where  her  mother  lived  in  Lagos
    ([38],[49]). Judge Gribble also found that the appellant had not  given
    consistent evidence  as  to  the  financial  support  provided  by  her
    husband, his whereabouts in Nigeria and whether he  intended  her  harm
    ([43],[44], [63]). Her credibility was undermined  where  she  had  not
    claimed asylum earlier ([65]).

11. All of those findings were entirely open  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge and were not the subject of a direct challenge before me.

12. When considered against those matters, the grounds  of  appeal  do  not
    have sufficient materiality.  The grounds first challenge  the  finding
    of Judge Gribble at [53] that:
         "I do not believe the First Appellant when she says  she  told  her
         Solicitor and was advised not to mention it  [FGM],  Solicitors  in
         family work have safeguarding responsibilities.  FGM is a crime  in
         the UK and I do not accept that if the Solicitor was aware  it  was
         an issue, they would  have  not  made  it  the  primary  issue  and
         involved Social Services and the Police."

13. The appellant maintains that she did not state at the hearing that  she
    told her solicitor about the risk of FGM but was told not to mention it
    to either CAFCASS or the  family  courts.   She  relies  on  a  witness
    statement from the barrister who  represented  her  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing.

14. I accept that the appellant did not  say  that  her  solicitor  in  the
    Family Court proceedings had advised her not to  mention  the  risk  of
    FGM. In the context of the other findings as to why there was  no  real
    risk to the child of FGM this is not a  material  matter,  however.  It
    remained open to the First-tier Tribunal to find  that  not  mentioning
    FGM during those  proceedings,  whatever  the  reason,  undermined  the
    appellant's claim that she believed this to be a real risk.  The  judge
    was equally entitled to find that the  claim  of  a  risk  of  FGM  was
    undermined by  the  father  having  made  no  attempt  to  contact  the
    appellant or her child from January 2013 onwards even though the Family
    Court had authorised access. There  is  the  further  matter  that  the
    appellant only mentioned a risk from  the  ex-partner's  aunts  at  the
    hearing stating only then that they would have a significant degree  of
    influence on whether the daughter was subjected to  FGM  or  not.   The
    First-tier Tribunal Judge was also entitled at [59] to place weight  on
    the fact that the appellant's own evidence about  the  practice  within
    her tribe, the Igbo, the same as her  husband,  differed  significantly
    from the country evidence presented,  the  appellant  not  having  been
    subjected to FGM.

15. There were therefore numerous reasons why the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    did not find that the appellant's daughter would be at risk of  FGM  on
    return.  Those findings were not tainted by  the  misrecording  of  the
    appellant's evidence as regards whether she was advised by a  solicitor
    to talk about FGM during the family court proceedings.

16. The grounds go on to challenge the finding of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    at [54] that "the First Appellant appeared not to have cooperated  with
    CAFCASS". That finding was open to Judge  Gribble  where  the  material
    before her showed that the appellant had not responded to two  attempts
    by CAFCASS to contact her.  Further, the judge  indicates  specifically
    at  [54]  that  this  was  "a  side  issue"  and  properly   read   the
    determination does not show that she placed significant weight  on  the
    point. It mischaracterises the decision to state that it shows that she
    was biased against the appellant or took the side of her ex-partner  in
    the family proceedings.  The challenge contained in paragraph 6 of  the
    grounds of appeal has no merit therefore.

17. The grounds go on at paragraph 7 to allege that the First-tier Tribunal
    misrecorded and then placed weight on evidence concerning  whether  the
    ex-partner was living with his aunts who would wish to carry out FGM on
    the daughter. The appellant maintains that she  did  not  say  that  he
    lived with his aunts. It remains the case that the appellant's evidence
    about the aunts was introduced only on the day of the hearing  and  was
    rejected at [57] for that reason. There can be  no  objection  to  that
    finding.  Even accepting that the judge was mistaken as to this part of
    the appellant's evidence, there was good reason to reject the  evidence
    about the aunts where it was provided so late and any  mistake  is  not
    material, certainly not in the context of all the  other  reasons  that
    led to the adverse credibility finding and finding of no  risk  to  the
    appellant and her daughter.

18. At the hearing Mr Pipe characterised  the  written  grounds  as  really
    containing three main challenges, the first  to  the  approach  to  the
    evidence from CAFCASS, the second  to  the  judge's  recording  of  the
    appellant's evidence and the third being the  assessment  of  the  best
    interests of the child.

19. As I have found above, the First-tier Tribunal Judge was not  incorrect
    or  "irrational"  to  conclude  that  the  appellant  had  not   always
    cooperated with CAFCASS given what is stated in their reports as to her
    failure to respond to contact from them on two occasions.  Mr Pipe also
    sought to argue that the judge acted improperly at [55] in finding that
    the appellant had encouraged her ex-partner to send threatening  emails
    in order to support her claim and protect her immigration status.   The
    difficulty there is that the allegation is recorded on the face of  the
    documents from the Family Court proceedings and where that is so it was
    open to the First-tier Tribunal Judge to place weight  on  it.  I  have
    dealt above with the First-tier Tribunal Judge's mistakes  as  to   the
    appellant's oral evidence.

20. The final aspect of the challenge concerned the  manner  in  which  the
    First-tier Tribunal approached the first appellant's daughter  who  has
    had developmental difficulties because  of  her  premature  birth.  The
    grounds allege that the First-tier Tribunal did not properly assess the
    best interests of the child where an  assessment  of  her  relationship
    with her cousins in the UK was not included.  I did not find that could
    be a strong argument where, here, it was clearly in the best  interests
    of the child, still quite young, to remain  with  her  mother  wherever
    that may be and there being little evidence  of  particular  closeness,
    dependency or importance in her relationships outside of that with  her
    mother.

21. The grounds also allege that the First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  take
    into account the evidence about the  difficulties  experienced  by  the
    appellant's daughter but that cannot be right where the judge sets  out
    specifically at 12 to 14 all of the evidence that she took into account
    which included that from the child's school and  her  medical  records.
    The First-tier Tribunal Judge was not obliged to adjourn  in  order  to
    await the outcome of further assessment by the local authority  of  any
    special educational needs where, at the time of  the  hearing,  it  was
    entirely speculative as to what those might be and the  child  had  not
    received speech therapy for approximately a year by that time.

22. For all of those reasons I did not find that the grounds had merit  and
    did not find that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  showed
    material error.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not  disclose  an  error  on  a
point of law and shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   [pic]    Date: 3 November 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
