
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41088/2013
                                                               IA/41104/2013
                                                               IA/41114/2013
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 30th April 2014                            |on 2nd June 2014             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   A N C P
                                    S R P
                                    K A P
                         (Anonymity order in force)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Mills - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent: In person.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a determination
        of First-tier Tribunal Judge D S Borsada, promulgated on 6  January
        2014, in which he allowed the appeals of this family  unit  against
        the decision to remove them from  the  United  Kingdom  made  under
        section 10 Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 and dated  19  September
        2013.


     2. ANCP was born in September 1971, SRP in October  1964  and  KAP  in
        November 2004. They are a family  unit  of  a  mother,  father  and
        daughter and are either citizens of Jamaica  or  entitled  to  such
        status. No family member has legal status or a right to  remain  in
        the United Kingdom.


     3. ANCP entered the UK in 2002 lawfully as a student. Further  periods
        of leave were granted until February 2007 after which she became an
        overstayer. In 2009 she made an application to remain in the United
        Kingdom on the  basis  of  human  rights  alongside  the  remaining
        appellants which was refused in May 2010. A subsequent  application
        was refused in September 2013 resulting in the removal direction.


     4. SRP entered the UK in 2002 as a visitor. His visa was valid for six
        months but he then overstayed and only resurfaced when  he  claimed
        to be the dependent partner of ANCP in the 2009 application.


     5. Having considered the submissions and available evidence the  Judge
        sets out his findings which can  be  summarised  in  the  following
        terms:


     i.   Neither ANCP nor SNP attempted  to  hide  their  poor  immigration
     history and SNP was particularly candid in admitting that  he  and  his
     family wanted to remain in the UK because  they  would  have  a  better
     life here  [8].


     ii.  They have a stable, close, and settled family and private life  in
   the            UK. KAP has  been  brought  up  in  a  stable  and  secure
   environment  by                her  parents  and  is  making  significant
   progress socially and                 academically as  indicated  in  the
   school reports. Miss Norman's                 submissions concerning  the
   likely  profound  nature  of  social                    integration   and
   difficulty both emotionally and culturally/socially of                her
   living   outside   this   country    were    accepted.    Evidence    was
   provided  of  KAP  suffering  eczema   which   is   accepted   as   being
   serious and that it  will  be  aggravated  in  a  hot  climate.   Country
     information indicates that levels of violence in Jamaica are relatively
              high and that difficulties that KAP  will  experience  in  the
   education           system were noted as were submissions  that  problems
   could arise as               a result of KAP being an outsider which,  it
   was inferred, could lead              to her being bullied or  ostracised
   [8].


     iii. The Judge stated he was required to consider the case in  relation
   to             the Immigration  Rules,  section  55,  and  the  case  law
   relating to the              cases outside the framework  of  the  Rules.
   Neither ANCP nor SNP             had demonstrated  that  they  should  be
   allowed to remain in the UK.              The Judge also agreed that none
   of the exceptions that did not relate              to their child applies
   to either of them and although they claimed to              have very few
   family   ties   in   Jamaica,   they   had    not    done    enough    to
   demonstrate that they  had  severed  all  social  and  cultural  ties  in
     circumstances in which they  spent  the  majority  of  their  lives  in
     Jamaica. In relation to the article 8 ECHR it was not  considered  that
     either ANCP or SNP  had  demonstrated  any  disproportionality  in  the
   decision [9].


     iv   KAP has lived in the UK for nine  years  and  has  no  social  and
   family              ties to Jamaica. The Respondent has not  sufficiently
   considered the               welfare of the child in relation  to  either
   section 55 of the 2009 Act or             relevant case law.  It  is  the
   profound effect that such removal would            have  on  her  private
   life   that   is   the   key   to   the   whole   case   which   is   not
   warranted.  Removal  will  result   in   the   child   being   profoundly
   damaged  both  in  times  of  emotional,  education   and   psychological
   development taking into account all the evidence [10].


     v.   In relation to article 8 ECHR, interference with KAP's rights will
              be wholly disproportionate having regard to  the  impact  upon
   her in              relation to private life.  The case is not  made  out
   in respect of her            family life as  she  will  be  returning  to
   Jamaica with her parents.                 Under the Immigration Rules  an
   individual such as KAP can                properly  apply  for  leave  to
   remain taking into account all seven          years  residency,  even  if
   they previously lack status.   The  Judge                 considered  the
   exceptionality test under Appendix FM and                   considered it
   to be entirely unreasonable for her to leave the UK for               the
   reasons  given.  ANCP  and  SRP   are   therefore   entitled   to   leave
   under the Rules for this reason too [11].


     6. The Secretary of State's challenge can be summarised as follows:


     i.   The Judge erred in finding that KAP had no  social,  cultural,  or
          family ties to Jamaica when she will be removed with  her  parents
     who spent a substantial proportion of their lives in Jamaica. She  will
          therefore have the ties within the loving  and  supportive  family
          provided by her parents.


     ii.  The Judge gave undue weight to  the  child's  best  interests  and
   failed              to consider the  parents  immigration  histories  and
   failure to meet the              requirements of the Immigration Rules.


     7. Leave to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Davey  on
        the basis it was arguable that the Judge focused upon the period of
        time in the United Kingdom rather than the proper range of  factors
        and that in relation to consideration of the best interests of  the
        child,  the  Judge  makes  no  reference  to  the  public  interest
        considerations especially when it  was  shown  that  KAP's  parents
        removal is proportionate.



Error of law


     8. I find that the Judge has erred in finding that KAP has  no  social
        or cultural ties to Jamaica.  There is merit in the  argument  that
        such ties as she will have, even though she has  not  travelled  to
        that country previously, will be with her parents. The proposal  is
        to remove the family group as one and so in Jamaica she will not be
        alone or abandoned but within the care of what was found  to  be  a
        loving parental unit. This does  not,  however,  detract  from  the
        strength of ties she currently has in the United Kingdom  which  is
        part of the assessment required by 276 ADE (vi) of the Rules.


     9. The fact KAP may have been in the United Kingdom for nine years  is
        not determinative, in isolation.  The SSHD's position is  that  the
        Immigration Rules incorporate section 55 and the starting point, as
        the Judge identified, was to consider whether the members  of  this
        family can satisfy the requirements of the Rules.  The  family  and
        private life  elements  of  the  claim  had  to  be  considered  in
        accordance with the guidance  to  be  found  in  the  cases  of  MF
        (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192, the High Court in Nagre [2013] EWHC
        720 (Admin) and by the Upper Tribunal in Gulshan [2013]  UKUT  640,
        as confirmed by Shahzad (Art 8: legitimate aim) [2014]  UKUT  00085
        (IAC).  These judgments have made it clear  that  the  question  of
        proportionality must be looked at in the context of the Immigration
        Rules with no need to go on to a specific assessment under  Article
        8 if it is clear from  the  facts  that  there  are  no  particular
        compelling or exceptional circumstances requiring that course to be
         taken. This approach has been further confirmed by  the  Court  of
        Appeal in the more recent case of Haleemundeen v SSHD  [2014]  EWCA
        Civ 558. The Judge's statement that he had to consider  the  rules,
        followed by section 55, followed by article 8 ECHR is  therefore  a
        misdirection in law as it  is  only  if  there  are  compelling  or
        exceptional circumstances requiring an assessment under  article  8
        to be undertaken outside the  Rules  that  this  exercise  need  be
        undertaken.


    10. It is not suggested KAP is able to succeed  on  the  basis  of  her
        family life as that is with her parents and will continue  whatever
        the outcome. Hers is a claim based on her private life in  relation
        to which it is necessary to consider the provisions of 276ADE which
        state:


              276ADE (1). The requirements to be met  by  an  applicant  for
leave to remain on                      the grounds of private life  in  the
UK are that  at  the  date  of                             application,  the
applicant:

                       (i) does not  fall  for  refusal  under  any  of  the
grounds in Section  S-LTR                      1.2  to  S-LTR  2.3.  and  S-
LTR.3.1. in Appendix FM; and

                       (ii) has  made  a  valid  application  for  leave  to
remain on the grounds of                     private life in the UK; and

                       (iii) has lived continuously in the UK for  at  least
20 years (discounting                   any period of imprisonment); or

                       (iv) is under the age  of  18  years  and  has  lived
continuously  in  the  UK                        for  at   least   7   years
(discounting any period of  imprisonment)  and  it                     would
not be reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the UK; or

                       (v) is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years  and
has spent at                    least half of his life  living  continuously
in the UK (discounting any                        period  of  imprisonment);
or

                       (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged  18  years
or above, has lived                     continuously  in  the  UK  for  less
than 20 years (discounting any period                      of  imprisonment)
but   has   no    ties    (including    social,    cultural    or    family)
with the country to  which  he  would  have  to  go  if  required  to  leave
              the UK.

              276ADE (2). Sub-paragraph (1)(vi) does not apply, and may  not
be  relied  upon,                      in  circumstances  in  which  it   is
proposed to return a person to a third                     country  pursuant
to Schedule 3 to the Asylum  and  Immigration                     (Treatment
of Claimants, etc) Act 2004."



    11. It is accepted by Mr Mills this is a 'best interest' case and  that
        this is the determinative factor.  The Judge in allowing the appeal
        under EX 1 in isolation is contrary to the  finding  of  the  Upper
        Tribunal in Sabir (Appendix FM - EX.1  not  free  standing)  [2014]
        UKUT 63 (IAC) as this is an element that must be considered as part
        of the Rules generally.


    12. In relation to the findings regarding the impact upon KAP on return
        Mr Mills submitted that the Judge had not adequately  reasoned  his
        findings and had just accepted counsel's submissions.


    13. Paragraph 276 ADE (iv) is met in terms of KAP having  been  in  the
        United Kingdom for a period in excess of seven  years  and  so  the
        question is whether it  can  be  implied  from  a  reading  of  the
        determination that the Judge found it not  reasonable  in  all  the
        circumstances to expect her to leave the UK.


    14. The Judge sets out the reasons why he considers KAP should  not  be
        expected to leave the UK in paragraph 8 which  is  based  upon  the
        adverse impact upon her of having to go to a country of  which  she
        has no experience of living in, in which at least at the outset she
        will be an outsider, that her medical condition could be aggravated
        in a hot climate, and that she would  have  great  difficulty  both
        emotionally and culturally living outside the United Kingdom.


    15. Submissions made by an advocate are not evidence  and  a  Judge  is
        required to do more that  just  state  that  such  submissions  are
        accepted.  Findings must be made on the evidence to enable a reader
        of the determination to understand what aspects  of  the  case  are
        accepted and which are rejected and proper reasons  given  for  the
        conclusions reached.  The issue in this appeal is whether there was
        adequate material in the bundle to support the findings made. It is
        accepted Jamaica is a country affected by gang  violence  but  that
        does not necessarily mean that all children are likely to face such
        difficulties on return. In the bundle at pages 234 is  a  reference
        to the UNICEF November 2009 report regarding children indicating  a
        number of issues facing children in Jamaica including:


              i.  Violence and abuse.


              ii. More than 2000 children living in institutions deprived of
   parental                care.


              iii.     Inadequate services and  opportunities  the  children
   with disabilities.


              iv. About 7% of 15 to 17-year-old children working.


              v.  One in five children being born to a teenage mother.


              vi. Poor educational outcomes, especially  among  boys,  which
   increase                the risk of intergenerational exclusion.


              vii.     Adolescence having insufficient access to information
   skills  and                    services  for   HIV/AIDS   knowledge   and
   prevention, increasing the                risk of infection.


              viii.    Many children lacking opportunities for learning  and
   life skills at                   home.


    16. It is not established that KAP is likely to find herself in such  a
        situation as a result of the strong parental support  she  has.  In
        relation to educational facilities it is  not  established  on  the
        evidence that KAP  cannot  be  educated  in  Jamaica  although  the
        education system and resultant opportunities may be less than those
        available to her in the United Kingdom.


    17. The letter from the GP dated 9th December 2013 refers to eczema and
        dermatitis for which KAP uses creams to enable her to undertake day-
        to-day  activities.  The  GP  states  he  or  she  has  been  told,
        presumably by one of KAP's parents, that heat may cause aggravation
        by way of itching and irritation as will exposure to sunlight,  but
        it is not established that appropriate medical treatment  will  not
        be available in Jamaica.


    18. The reports from the school in the UK suggest a high percentage  of
        attendance and a child who appears to be performing reasonably well
        educationally although in  some  subjects  such  as  English  often
        requires additional assistance. It appears from the  evidence  that
        KAP has a network of friends  within  the  school  and  with  other
        family members living in the United Kingdom.  Paragraph 23  of  her
        mother's witness statement refers to KAP struggling at  school  and
        sometimes requiring additional help from the teachers and  a  claim
        that if returned to Jamaica she will not have such  assistance  and
        may be  subject  to  physical  punishment  which  still  exists  in
        Jamaica.  The absence of additional support for children  who  need
        it has not been established on the evidence  although  if  corporal
        punishment is still used and there is a  real  risk  of  the  child
        being subjected to that as a result  of  educational  difficulties,
        this mitigates against it being found to be reasonable for  her  to
        be returned  to  face  such  consequences  which  result  not  from
        deliberate bad behaviour but difficulty in coping in an educational
        environment.


    19. Whilst this question has to  be  determined  by  reference  to  the
        Immigration Rules, guidance on the  correct  outcome  can  properly
        still be obtained from the ECHR case law such as SC (Article 8 - in
        accordance with the law) Zimbabwe [2012] UKUT 00056 (IAC) in  which
        the  Tribunal  held  that  the  absence  of  strong  countervailing
        factors, residence of 8 years in the United Kingdom with a child is
        likely to make removal at the end of that period not  proportionate
        to the legitimate aims in this case.


    20. In E-A(Article 8  -  best  interests  of  child)  Nigeria[2011]UKUT
        00315(IAC) (Blake  J)  the  Tribunal  held  that  (i)  The  correct
        starting point in considering the welfare and best interests  of  a
        young child would be that it is in the best interests of a child to
        live with and be brought up by his or her parents, subject  to  any
        very strong contra-indication. Where it is in the best interests of
        a child to live with and be brought up by his or her parents,  then
        the  child's  removal  with  his  parents  does  not  involve   any
        separation of family life.(ii) Absent other factors, the reason why
        a period of substantial residence as a child may become  a  weighty
        consideration in the balance of competing considerations is that in
        the course of such time roots are put down, personal identities are
        developed, friendships are formed  and  links  are  made  with  the
        community outside the  family  unit.  The  degree  to  which  these
        elements of private life are forged and therefore the weight to  be
        given to the passage of time will depend upon  the  facts  in  each
        case. (iii)During a child's very early years, he  or  she  will  be
        primarily focused on self and the caring parents or guardian.  Long
        residence once the child is likely to have formed ties outside  the
        family is likely to have greater impact on his or her  well  being.
        (iv)Those who have their families with  them  during  a  period  of
        study in the UK must do so in  the  light  of  the  expectation  of
        return. (v)The Supreme Court in ZH(Tanzania)[2011] UKSC 4  was  not
        ruling that the ability of a young child to readily adapt  to  life
        in a  new  country  was  an  irrelevant  factor,  rather  that  the
        adaptability of the child in each case must be assessed and is  not
        a conclusive consideration on its own.


    21. In EM and Others (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT 98  (IAC)  the
        Tribunal held  that  in  the  absence  of  countervailing  factors,
        residence of over 7 years with children  well-integrated  into  the
        educational system in the United Kingdom, is an indicator that  the
        welfare of the child favours regularisation of the status of mother
        and children.


    22. In this case KAP has lived in this country for nine years such that
        her focus is both within the family and outside on her friends  and
        her education. There is no evidence  to  suggest  that  KAP  cannot
        adapt to life in a new country as many children and parents move or
        are posted overseas. I find  that  although  there  are  issues  of
        concern which are understandable in relation to  any  family  being
        moved there is no one factor that indicates KAP cannot be returned.
         It is the accumulation of factors  that  were  considered  by  the
        Judge that appear to have been determinative of his  decision  that
        it was not reasonable in all the circumstances  to  expect  KAP  to
        have  to  relocate  to  Jamaica.   Although  some,  including   the
        Secretary of State, may consider this an overly  generous  decision
        it cannot be said to be  a  finding  outside  the  range  of  those
        findings that it was  permitted  for  the  Judge  to  make  on  the
        evidence.


    23. The weight to be given to the evidence was a matter for  the  Judge
        and his finding is that  KAP  is  entitled  to  succeed  under  the
        Immigration  Rules,  which  are  the  Secretary  of   State's   own
        assessment of what needs  to  be  shown.  The  implication  in  the
        grounds that the conduct of the parents  should  be  considered  as
        part of the assessment  of  the  child  fails  to  acknowledge  the
        principle established in ZH (Tanzania) that children should not  be
        punished for the failings of their parents and the fact it was  not
        established before the First-tier Tribunal that any such conduct is
        a sufficient countervailing factor such as  to  override  the  best
        inertest finding.


    24. As KAP succeeds in her own right her parents immigration history is
        not relevant for they, as her primary carers, have been found to be
        entitled to remain in line.


Decision

    25. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    26. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.  I
        continue that order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 30th May 2014



