
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/41419/2014
                                                               IA/41097/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st September 2015                |On 3rd September 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM


                                   Between

                               Mr Ahmad Usman
                            Mr Umer Javed Chattha
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr M Blundell, Counsel instructed by M & K
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.   This is the appeal against  a  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  C  Burns,  who,  on  24th  February  2015,   dismissed   both
    appellants' appeals against decisions by  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    refuse their Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) applications.

2.   The first appellant was born on 5th July 1986  and  is  a  national  of
    Pakistan. The second appellant was born on 30th July 1978 and is also a
    national of Pakistan. On 02 August 2014 they made joint applications to
    extend their leave to remain in the United Kingdom pursuant to the Tier
    1 (Entrepreneur) category of  the  points-based  scheme.   The  refusal
    decisions, both of which are dated 29th September 2014, were  based  on
    the fact that the requirements of paragraph 41-SD of Appendix A to  the
    Immigration Rules had not been met.

3.   Paragraph 41-SD(c)(i) of Appendix A set out requirements  that  had  to
    be present in a letter from the relevant financial institution  holding
    funds that were to be used in  the  proposed  business.  Paragraph  41-
    SD(c)(i)(10) required the letter from the financial institution holding
    funds in the name of a third party to confirm that the third party  had
    informed the institution of the amount of money  it  intended  to  make
    available, and to note that the institution was not aware of the  third
    party having promised to make that money available to any other person.
    Paragraph  41-SD(c)(ii)(6)  required  that  a  letter  from   a   legal
    representative had to clearly show that a declaration  from  the  third
    party provider of funds was signed and valid.

4.   It is not disputed that these requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    were not met when the applications were submitted  to  the  respondent.
    The appellants, however, maintain that, pursuant to paragraph 245AA  of
    the Immigration Rules, the Secretary of  State  should  have  requested
    this missing information to be provided to them.

5.   Paragraph 245AA(a) indicates that all specified documents must be
    provided and that the respondent will only consider documents submitted
    after the applications where they are submitted in accordance with
    subparagraph (b). Subparagraph (b) indicates that, if an applicant has
    submitted specified documents which, inter alia, do not contain all of
    the specified information, the respondent may contact the applicant or
    his representative in writing, and request the correct documents.
    Subparagraph (c) indicates that documents will not be requested where a
    specified document has not been submitted or where the respondent does
    not anticipate that addressing the omission or error referred to in
    subparagraph (b) would lead to a grant because the application will be
    refused for other reasons.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

6.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissed the appeals on the  basis  that
    there was no obligation on  the  Secretary  of  State  to  request  the
    missing information under paragraph 245AA.  The  Judge  emphasised  the
    discretionary nature  of  the  paragraph.  The  Judge  noted  that  the
    respondent did not exercise her discretion and that the respondent  was
    not obliged to do so. The Judge concluded that it was  appropriate  for
    the respondent to award no points under Appendix A.

Discussion

7.    The  only  basis  identified  by  the  respondent  for  refusing   the
    applications related to missing information in two specified documents.
    The respondent did not identify any  other  reason  for  rejecting  the
    applications. In these circumstances the appellants  both  fell  within
    the terms of paragraph 245AA(b) as individuals  who  could  potentially
    have benefited from an exercise of discretion in their favour.

8.   In relation to Mr Chattha's  decision,  his  refusal  letter  makes  no
    reference to paragraph 245AA at all.  This  is  concerning  because  it
    strongly suggests that the Secretary of State has not directed her mind
    to the possibility of exercising her discretion.  There  is  simply  no
    indication that the respondent was aware that she had a  discretion  in
    relation to  the  missing  information.  In  circumstances  where  this
    appellant fell within the terms of paragraph 245AA the failure  of  the
    respondent to consider whether to exercise her discretion  renders  the
    decision unlawful on the basis that she failed to  take  account  of  a
    relevant  consideration;   alternatively,   that   she   fettered   her
    discretion. The Judge's failure  to  engage  with  this  very  apparent
    unlawfulness constitutes a material error of law.

9.   In relation to the appeal of Mr Usman, the respondent's  decision  does
    make reference to the discretion under paragraph  245AA.   The  refusal
    letter reads:

         "In  making  the  decision  to  refuse  your  application  we  have
         considered paragraph 245AA which explains the actions that  we  may
         take if specified documents are not submitted with an application."

10.  I first note that all  specified  documents  were  submitted  with  the
    applications.  The  discretion  within  paragraph  245AA  will  not  be
    exercised if there are missing documents, unless the omitted  documents
    form part of a sequence.  The  reference  to  paragraph  245AA  in  the
    refusal letter is therefore materially inaccurate. Moreover, the  issue
    before the respondent and the Judge was not about missing documents but
    about missing information from documents that were provided.

11.  Mr Clarke argued that, having regard to the wording  and  structure  of
    paragraph 245AA, the respondent was under no duty to give  reasons  for
    her  refusal  to  exercise  her  discretion.  He  submitted  that   the
    discretion contained within paragraph 245AA was very wide and noted the
    absence of any authority indicating that reasons had to  be  given  for
    the refusal of the respondent to exercise her discretion.

12.  I do not accept these submissions. I note firstly that the  respondent,
    through the almost universal use of the Reasons For Refusal Letters, is
    used to giving detailed reasons for immigration decisions. I cannot see
    in principle any reason  why  the  giving  of  reasons  in  respect  of
    immigration applications should not include the giving of  reasons  for
    the exercise or withholding of the exercise of discretion conferred  by
    the immigration rules. I next note that there is nothing in the wording
    of paragraph 245AA expressly or implicitly  preventing  the  respondent
    from giving reasons. The giving of reasons for the failure to  exercise
    a discretion, in the  particular  context  of  paragraph  245AA,  would
    entail no onerous duty on the respondent. Moreover, as Mr Clarke noted,
    the respondent's discretion contained within paragraph 245AA  is  of  a
    relatively wide nature. There is therefore all the more reason for  the
    respondent to explain why she chose not to exercise her  discretion.  A
    duty to  give  reasons  ensures  that  the  appellants  know  that  the
    discretion has been lawfully exercised, one way or another.  I  finally
    note that the manner in which the respondent exercises  her  discretion
    ought to be conducted in a rational and fair manner.  In  circumstances
    where  the  appellants  meet  the  requirements  for  the  exercise  of
    discretion, the respondent is under a duty to explain why  she  chooses
    not to exercise that discretion in their favour.

13.  It is not clear to anyone reading her decision  why  the  Secretary  of
    State decided not to exercise her discretion in Mr Usman's  favour.   I
    regard this as a public law failure by the Secretary of State  to  give
    adequate reasons rendering her decision unlawful. The  Judge's  failure
    to engage with this unlawfulness constitutes a material error  of  law.



14.  I allow the appeals to the extent that they are remitted  back  to  the
    Secretary of State for lawful decisions to be made in relation to  both
    applications.

Notice of Decision

The appeals  are  both  allowed  and  the  appellants'  applications  remain
outstanding until lawful decisions are made by the respondent.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]    02 September 2015
Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed these appeals and because  fees  have  been  paid  or  are
payable, I have considered making fee awards and have decided to make  whole
fee awards because the respondent acted unlawfully by  failing  to  consider
exercising her discretion in relation to Mr Chattha and by failing  to  give
any reasons for the refusal to exercise her discretion  in  relation  to  Mr
Usman.


[pic]    02 September 2015
Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
