
IAC-TH-LW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41392/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 April 2015                             |On 6 May 2015                 |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        ms Amika Kimonia Farquharson
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. D. Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr. C. Talacchi, Counsel.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a respondent appeal but I shall henceforth refer to the parties
    in the original terms detailed in the decision of Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Cohen following a hearing at  Taylor  House  on  30  June
    2014.

 2. No application for anonymity has been made  in  these  proceedings  and
    there is no reason why such an order should be made.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica.  She appealed against a decision
    of the respondent dated 3 September 2013 to refuse her application  for
    leave to remain on the grounds that removal would not place the  United
    Kingdom in breach of its obligations under the Human  Rights  Act  1998
    and to give directions under Section 10 of the Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 1999 for her removal from the United Kingdom.

 4. The appellant's appeal was allowed by Judge Cohen.  He did so under the
    Immigration Rules, the EEA Regulations and on human rights grounds.  He
    found that the appellant had four children in the United Kingdom.   Two
    of those children are British citizens and  that  the  appellant  is  a
    single mother with sole responsibility for her children.  They  have  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship,  but  it  would  appear  from  the
    decision  that  no  other  person  has  any  responsibility  for  these
    children.

 5. The respondent sought permission to appeal.  This was initially refused
    by the First-tier Tribunal, but  on  2  February  2015  permission  was
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede who found at paragraph 3 of  her
    reasons that:-

         "3.  It is arguable that the judge erred in  his  consideration  of
             the requirements of the Immigration Rules, both  with  respect
             to  Appendix  FM  and   paragraph   276ADE,   and   that   his
             consideration of Article 8 outside the Rules was  affected  by
             that arguable error."

    Thus the appeal came before me today.

 6. Mr. Clarke, whilst  relying  on  his  grounds  of  appeal  and  without
    conceding anything acknowledged that  albeit  there  may  be  technical
    errors within the judge's decision, given  the  factual  matrix  found,
    they would not be material.

 7. Mr. Talacchi did not resist that submission and urged me to  allow  the
    judge's decision to stand.

 8. I find that although there are technical errors  within  this  decision
    (for example by making reference to the Immigration (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006) they are not material.

 9. On the factual matrix found it was inevitable this appeal would succeed
    and the conclusions of the judge were therefore open to be made in  all
    the circumstances.

Notice of Decision

10. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

11. I do not set aside the decision.



Signed        Date 5 May 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard


