
IAC-AH-SAR-V1
                                   [pic]`

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41910/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21st January 2015                          |On 2nd February 2015          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              IDA PATRICIA ELPA
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Krushner of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a determination of Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Birk promulgated on 30th July 2014.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and I will refer to her as the claimant.

 3. The claimant is a national of the Philippines born 29th  December  1988
    who applied for leave to remain in the United Kingdom to enable her  to
    continue to reside with her husband, Marlon Pusikit Ante (the  Sponsor)
    who is a British citizen.

 4. The application was refused on 26th September 2013 and a decision  made
    to remove the claimant from the United Kingdom.

 5. In giving reasons for refusal the Secretary of State considered section
    EX.1 of Appendix FM and  found  that  EX.1(a)  did  not  apply  as  the
    claimant did not have a child in the United Kingdom.

 6. In considering EX.1(b) it was accepted that the claimant had a  genuine
    and  subsisting  relationship  with  her  British  partner,   but   the
    application  was  dismissed  as  the  Secretary  of  State   found   no
    insurmountable obstacles to family life with  that  partner  continuing
    outside the United Kingdom.

 7. The claimant's private life was considered with reference to  paragraph
    276ADE with the Secretary of State finding that the  claimant  did  not
    satisfy any of the requirements in that paragraph.

 8. The claimant's appeal was heard by Judge Birk (the judge) on 16th  July
    2014.  By the time of the appeal hearing, the claimant had given  birth
    on 22nd December 2013.   The  judge  found  that  section  EX.1(a)  was
    satisfied, the claimant  was  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with a child who was in the United Kingdom, and who  is  a
    British  citizen.   The  appeal  was  therefore   allowed   under   the
    Immigration Rules.  The judge did not  go  on  to  consider  Article  8
    outside the rules.

 9. This prompted the Secretary of State to apply for permission to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal.  In summary it was contended that the judge  had
    considered section EX.1 as freestanding which was not the case.   If  a
    claimant did not  meet  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules,
    compelling circumstances need to be established  for  the  purposes  of
    Article 8.  As the claimant had failed to meet the requirements of  the
    Immigration Rules, it was not clear  from  the  determination  on  what
    basis the judge found that there were compelling circumstances to merit
    allowing an appeal under Article 8 of the 1950 European  Convention  on
    Human Rights (the 1950 Convention).

10. It was submitted that the judge had failed to provide adequate  reasons
    why the claimant's circumstances were either compelling or exceptional.

11. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Ransley who gave the following reasons for granting permission;

         "The determination is so full of material inconsistencies  that  it
         is irrational.  The judge noted [at 9 and  11]  that  it  had  been
         conceded on behalf of  the  Appellant  that  section  EX.1  is  not
         freestanding   and   it   needs   a   gateway;   the   Respondent's
         representative had submitted that at the date  of  the  application
         the Appellant could not meet the financial requirements of Appendix
         FM although there is evidence now that this can be met.  The  judge
         found [at 16] that the Appellant met EX.1(a)(i)(cc) and (ii) of the
         Rules.  At [21] the judge stated 'I find that that the  Immigration
         Rules under paragraph R-RLTR.1.1(d) are met and that paragraph EX.1
         applies.  The refusal was therefore in accordance with the law  and
         the Immigration Rules'.  The judge  [at  24]  stated  that  as  the
         Appellant has shown that  she  meets  the  Immigration  Rules  with
         regard to Article 8 under Appendix FM there was  no  need  for  the
         judge to proceed to consider Article 8 in any other sense.  In  the
         Decision section the judge allowed the appeal under the Immigration
         Rules and dismissed the appeal under the Human Rights Convention".

12. Directions were subsequently issued making provision for there to be  a
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal  to  decide  whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

13. Mr Mills conceded at the outset that the application for permission was
    misconceived and did not  disclose  any  material  error  of  law.   Mr
    Krushner, not surprisingly, had nothing to add.

14. I found that the determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
    contain material errors of law and should stand.  I indicated  I  would
    issue a written decision giving reasons.

My Conclusions and Reasons

15. Mr Mills was entirely correct in making the  concession.   The  grounds
    seeking permission did not refer to irrationality,  although  this  was
    mentioned in the grant of permission.  There is a high  threshold,  and
    in my view it certainly could not be said that this  determination  was
    irrational.

16. There are some typing errors, for example  in  the  first  sentence  of
    paragraph 11, and the final sentence of paragraph 21,  the  word  "not"
    has been missed out which alters the meaning of the  sentences.   These
    are not however material errors.

17. The judge did not consider EX.1 as freestanding and  acknowledged  this
    in paragraphs 9 and 21.  The Secretary of State considered EX.1 in  the
    reasons for refusal letter dated 26th September 2013.  At that time the
    claimant  did  not  have  a  child,  and  therefore  EX.1(a)  was   not
    applicable.  The Secretary of State considered EX.1(b)  accepting  that
    the claimant had a genuine and subsisting relationship with her British
    partner, but concluded that there were no insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family life with that partner continuing outside the United Kingdom.

18. By the time of the First-tier Tribunal hearing the claimant  had  given
    birth and the judge noted that the Secretary of State  in  the  refusal
    letter had not contended EX.1 should not be considered,  and  correctly
    went on to consider whether the claimant could succeed under EX.1.   It
    is not the case that EX.1 was treated as  freestanding  either  by  the
    Secretary of State or the judge.  The judge did not err on this issue.

19. I am somewhat surprised that the  Secretary  of  State  relied  in  the
    grounds contained in the application for  permission  to  appeal,  upon
    Gulshan, and the contention that the judge had not made it  clear  what
    compelling circumstances existed to  merit  allowing  an  appeal  under
    Article 8, and that permission was granted on this ground.

20. The judge did not consider Article 8  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.
    There is therefore no question of the judge having to explain why there
    were compelling circumstances to merit  allowing  the  appeal  on  that
    basis.  The appeal was allowed under the Immigration  Rules,  therefore
    the judge did not go on to consider Article 8 outside the Rules, as was
    recorded at paragraph 24 of the determination.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.  The appeal of the Secretary  of  State  is
dismissed.

Anonymity

No order for anonymity was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There has  been
no  request  for  anonymity  and  the  Upper  Tribunal  makes  no  anonymity
direction.



Signed        Date 21st January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the determination of the First-tier Tribunal  stands,  so  does  the  fee
award.



Signed        Date 21st January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

