
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number IA/41333/2013
      IA/41340/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Decision & Reasons promulgated
On 12 December 2014    On 15 December 2014


                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         (1) Noah Olumde Okunromade
                     (2) Olubusola Olanrewaju Okunromade
                         (Anonymity orders not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr. L. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondents:   Ms. M. Hannan of Corban Solicitors.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. These are linked appeals against the decisions of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Juss promulgated on 8 July 2014, allowing Mr and Mrs Okunromade's
    appeals against the Secretary of State's decisions dated 4 October 2013
    to refuse to vary leave to remain and to remove each of them  from  the
    UK.

 2. Although before me the Secretary of State is the appellant and  Mr  and
    Mrs Okunromade are the respondents, for the sake  of  consistency  with
    the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter  refer
    to Mr and Mrs Okunromade as the First Appellant  and  Second  Appellant
    respectively, and the Secretary of State as the Respondent.

Background

 3. The Appellants' personal details and immigration histories are a matter
    of record on file, and are to a substantial extent, reproduced  in  the
    cover sheet to the Respondent's bundle before the First-tier  Tribunal,
    and in the body of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  It  is
    unnecessary to reproduce those histories herein: I make reference as is
    incidental for the purpose of this Decision.

 4. The First Appellant made an application for indefinite leave to  remain
    on 30 October 2012 on the basis of having resided  in  the  UK  for  10
    years, having first entered on 22 September 2002. The Second  Appellant
    made a similar application on 2  April  2013.  Both  applications  were
    refused with reference to paragraph 276A  because  there  had  been  an
    interruption in the periods of leave enjoyed by the Appellants  between
    31 January 2006 and 18 April 2006.

 5. The Appellants appealed to the IAC.  Their  appeals  were  allowed  for
    reasons set out in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal,  and  with
    particular reference to the circumstances of their  children  who  were
    born in the UK on 24 April 2004 and 22 November 2006. In respect of the
    older child there was evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  that  he
    had made an application for registration  as  a  British  citizen  (see
    determination at paragraph 17), and  the  Judge  characterised  him  as
    being "on the cusp of being  granted  British  nationality"  (paragraph
    20).

 6. The Respondent sought permission to appeal. Permission  to  appeal  was
    initially refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Denson on 1 August  2014
    on the basis that he considered the application to have been  made  out
    of time and he refused to extend time.  However,  on  29  October  2014
    Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek determined that the application had been
    made 'in-time', and further granted permission to appeal.

Consideration

 7. At the commencement of the hearing before me Mrs Hannan brought  to  my
    attention that the Appellants' son had been  registered  as  a  British
    citizen on 6 June 2014, and provided the original (and copies)  of  his
    Certificate of Registration. I pause to  note  that  such  registration
    occurred between the date of the hearing  before  Judge  Juss  (28  May
    2014), and the promulgation of his determination (9 July 2014).

 8. In light of this development - fully anticipated by  Judge  Juss  -  Mr
    Tarlow, in recognition  of  the  inhibiting  effect  of  the  grant  of
    citizenship on any argument based on the reasonableness of expecting  a
    child to leave the UK, without withdrawing the  Respondent's  challenge
    indicated that he wished to do no more than rely upon  the  grounds  as
    drafted in support of the application for permission to appeal.

 9. I  have  carefully  considered  the  Respondent's  grounds:  I  am  not
    satisfied that they demonstrate  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    materially erred in his approach to the Appellants' appeals.

10. The First-tier Tribunal Judge recorded in his determination that it was
    conceded on behalf of the Appellants that they could  not  satisfy  the
    requirement of 10 years  lawful  continuous  residence,  and  so  their
    applications had been appropriately refused under the Immigration Rules
    (determination at paragraph 7). The Judge accordingly, identified  that
    the Appellants relied upon Article 8 (paragraph 7), and in this context
    also identified that they could not succeed  under  the  provisions  of
    Appendix FM, and so necessarily had to rely  upon  a  consideration  of
    Article 8 outside the parameters of the Rules (paragraph 22).

11. The Judge found the First Appellant to have  been  a  credible  witness
    (paragraph 20) , and accepted that he had been in the UK for  10  years
    and had two children who were born and brought up here with the  eldest
    being 10 and "on the cusp of being  granted  British  nationality".  In
    respect of the children the Judge had very particular regard to section
    55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration   Act   2009   and
    jurisprudence in respect of 'best interests' (paragraphs 23-25).

12. The Judge addressed the first two  of  the  Razgar  questions  (without
    expressly so identifying them) at paragraph 27, and  answered  them  in
    the  Appellants'  favour.  It  seems  to  me  that  such  answers  were
    inevitable and I do not understand the Respondent to dispute  as  much.
    The Judge also at paragraph 27 answered the third  Razgar  question  in
    the affirmative - "I accept the interference is in accordance with  the
    law".

13. Perhaps more controversially, the  Judge  answered  the  fourth  Razgar
    question negatively - "it is not necessary in a democratic  society  in
    the interests of the rights and freedoms of others, and the maintenance
    of immigration control". Be that as it may,  in  the  alternative,  the
    Judge  also  addressed  his  mind  to  the  fifth  Razgar  question   -
    proportionality  -  and  concluded  that  "the  interference   is   not
    proportionate to the legitimate  public  end,  that  is  sought  to  be
    achieved in circumstances where the children have been  here  for  over
    seven years, are settled in this country, are doing well at school, and
    do not know  life  in  Nigeria  and  speak  English  as  their  primary
    language".

14. Complaint is  made  that  the  Judge  failed  to  have  regard  to  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(iv) in considering the  private  lives
    of the children. Emphasis is placed by the Respondent in the grounds on
    the 'reasonableness test' now to be found in  276ADE(iv),  and  it  was
    submitted that the Judge had failed to have regard to this provision as
    a relevant consideration.

15. It seems to me that the 'reasonableness test' is no more than  an  echo
    of the proportionality test - appropriately incorporated  into  a  rule
    that is seeking to give effect to the private life aspect of Article 8.
    In substance the Judge's observations on proportionality  at  paragraph
    29 of the determination would readily inform  a  consideration  of  the
    reasonableness test. I am unable  to  accept  on  the  facts  of  these
    particular cases that having  had  regard  to  proportionality  it  may
    sustainably be argued that the  Judge  materially  erred  by  not  also
    having regard to reasonableness under paragraph 276ADE.

16. Moreover, in this context I note that  the  reasonableness  test  under
    276ADE(iv) arises by reason of an amendment  to  the  Rules  which  had
    effect from 13 December 2012. Prior to  the  amendment  the  rules  was
    simply drafted as a requirement that the applicant be "under the age of
    18 years and [have] lived continuously in the UK for at least  7  years
    (discounting any period of imprisonment)". The application  herein  was
    made prior to that amendment. The Judge, of course, was not  concerned,
    directly with an application under 276ADE(iv) but, it is  suggested  by
    the Respondent, should have had regard to such a provision as  part  of
    evaluating the typical benchmark in  an  Article  8  case  involving  a
    child. Mr Tarlow acknowledged that in circumstances where the  relevant
    application by the Appellants had been made prior to the  amendment  to
    the rule, any reliance  upon  the  'reasonableness  test'  subsequently
    incorporated into the rule was weakened.

17. In all the circumstances I find no substance in this line of  challenge
    as indicative a material error of approach by the First-tier Tribunal.

18. Nor am I attracted to the pleading to the effect that the Judge  failed
    to have regard to the  parents'  immigration  status  when  determining
    proportionality or reasonableness in respect of the children.

19. It  is  to  be  noted  that  the  Appellants  have  an  extremely  good
    immigration history. Although  there  is  a  brief  gap  in  continuity
    following on from the rejection of an application and the time taken to
    submit an alternative application and secure favourable decision, it is
    to be noted that the grant of leave, subsequent to  that  irregularity,
    and the subsequent grants of  successive  leaves  thereafter,  are  all
    powerfully indicative that the  Respondent  had  never  considered  the
    brief interruption to be a matter of significant concern in immigration
    terms. Moreover, it is the case that the Appellants' immigration  leave
    only  came  to  a  conclusion  by  reason  of  the  rejection  of   the
    applications herein. The Second Appellant was still studying  when  she
    made her application for indefinite leave to remain, and but for making
    that application would have been in a position  to  apply  for  further
    leave as a student. In my judgement there is  nothing  adverse  in  the
    immigration  histories   that   should   weigh   significantly   in   a
    proportionality balance either specifically in respect of the children,
    or more generally in respect of the Appellants and their family.

20. Further in this context although the consideration of Judge  Juss  pre-
    dated the coming into  force  of  the  amendments  to  Part  5  of  the
    Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  introduced  by   the
    Immigration Act 2014 at sections 117A-117D, I note by  way  of  general
    observation that it  cannot  be  said  of  these  Appellants  or  their
    children that private life has been established in the  UK  at  a  time
    when they were here unlawfully, or even with precarious status.

21. Moreover, whilst recognising section 117B was not of direct application
    before the First-tier Tribunal, I  also  note  in  respect  of  section
    117B(2) that the Appellants and their children speak  English;  and  in
    respect of section 117B(3) that at all relevant  times  the  Appellants
    have been self-supporting, and indeed provided  substantial  supporting
    evidence as to their employment and financial soundness (e.g.  mortgage
    documents). These factual  circumstances  substantially  undermine  the
    Respondent's submission that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  materially
    erred in failing to have regard to effective immigration control  as  a
    facet of legitimate state interest in the economic  well-being  of  the
    country. This point is further undermined by the fact  that  the  Judge
    did refer to "the legitimate public end that is sought to be  achieved"
    (paragraph 29) immediately after having referenced "the maintenance  of
    immigration control" (paragraph 28). On the facts  of  this  particular
    case I see no merit in this line of challenge which Mr Tarlow  declined
    to develop before me.

22. In all such circumstances I reject the Respondent's  challenge  to  the
    decisions of the First-tier Tribunal. I find that the decisions of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge contained no material errors of law and stand
    accordingly.

Notice of Decision

23. The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  contained  no  material
    error of law and stand.

24. Appeal IA/41333/2013 remains allowed.

25. Appeal IA/41340/2013 remains allowed.



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     12 December 2014
