
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM/SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/41541/2014
                                                IA/41548/2014, IA/41554/2014
                                                IA/41563/2014, IA/41570/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26th January 2016                 |On 18th February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                            mlf (first Appellant)
                            lf (SECOND Appellant)
                            af (THIRD Appellant)
                          mlf(2) (FOURTH Appellant)
                           af(2) (FIFTH Appellant)
                           (anonymity ORDERS MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Miss E Rutherford (Counsel instructed by Cartwright
                    King Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. This is the appeal of all  five  Appellants,  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Butler hereinafter
    "the  judge")  promulgated  on  13th  February  2015,  dismissing  each
    Appellant's  appeal  against  decisions  of  the  Respondent  of   23rd
    September 2014 to curtail leave and to remove them from the UK  by  way
    of directions.

 2. I have decided to make anonymity orders with respect to each  Appellant
    on the basis that three of them are minors and that one of them is said
    to be at risk of female genital mutilation if returned to  the  Gambia.
    I consider the appeal raises sensitive issues such that  the  interests
    of all five Appellants are best served by such an order being made.

 3. Briefly, by way of background, MLF, who is a female, and LF, who  is  a
    male, are adults, are married to each other and are the parents of  the
    remaining three Appellants.  As to immigration history, MLF entered the
    UK on 3rd May 2008 having obtained entry clearance as a  student.   She
    has subsequently obtained further grants of leave, on a similar  basis,
    the last period of leave having been granted up to 16th  January  2014.
    The remaining Appellants all entered the UK in June 2010 as  dependants
    of MLF and they too were last granted leave up to  16th  January  2014.
    On 23rd December  2013,  and  therefore  within  the  currency  of  the
    previous grants of leave, MLF applied for indefinite leave to remain as
    a Tier 2 (General) Migrant and applications were made, in line, by  all
    of the other Appellants as  dependants.   However,  those  applications
    were all refused by the Respondent on the basis that MLF had received a
    caution on 26th November 2012 "for beating her  children",  such  that,
    given that the caution had been issued within the 24 month period prior
    to the date the application was decided,  a  mandatory  refusal  ground
    under paragraph 332(1C)(iv) of  the  Immigration  Rules  applied.   So,
    MLF's application was  refused  and  the  remaining  applications  were
    refused in line.  Decisions were also made, at the same  time,  and  as
    indicated above, to curtail leave and to remove each Appellant.

 4. Notices of Appeal  were  lodged  with  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    Grounds of Appeal, with respect to each  Appellant,  were  in  somewhat
    generalised  terms  its  being  asserted   that   each   decision   was
    incompatible with rights under the European Convention on Human  Rights
    (though no specific Article of  the  ECHR  was  specified),  that  each
    decision was not in accordance with the law and  that,  in  each  case,
    discretion ought to have been exercised differently.   Thereafter,  the
    solicitors acting for the five Appellants lodged a bundle of  documents
    with the First-tier Tribunal which included witness statements  of  the
    two adult Appellants, a range of  documents  said  to  be  relevant  to
    issues under Article 8 of the ECHR, some  background  country  material
    certain of which concerned the prevalence of female genital  mutilation
    in the Gambia and the country guidance decision in K and  Others  (FGM)
    The Gambia  CG  [2013]  UKUT  00062  (IAC).   That  documentation  was,
    according to a date stamp, received by the First-tier Tribunal on  18th
    December 2014.

 5. The hearing of the five appeals (they were  all  heard  together)  took
    place on 16th January 2015.  It appears that neither the judge nor  the
    Home Office Presenting Officer  who  had  attended  that  hearing,  had
    expected there to have been any argument under Article 3  of  the  ECHR
    regarding the concern that one of the  Appellants,  an  infant  female,
    might be subjected to female genital mutilation upon return.  The judge
    commented at paragraph 8 of the determination;

         "At the hearing, the Appellants also included a claim under Article
         3, namely that the fifth Appellant would  be  subjected  to  female
         genital mutilation if she had to return to the Gambia".

 6. It is also  apparent  that  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  had
    suggested to the judge that, presumably on the basis of  short  notice,
    the Article 3 argument ought not to be dealt with.   That  is  apparent
    from what the judge said at paragraph 30  of  the  determination  which
    was;

         "I have not considered the Article 3 argument and  submissions.   I
         accept Mr Khalfey's argument that it would not be in the  interests
         of justice in doing so given that the Respondent has had no time to
         consider  this  ground  of  appeal.   Accordingly,  I  consider  it
         appropriate to remit this to the Respondent  for  consideration  of
         whether she accepts or opposes this ground of  appeal.   I  do  not
         consider it necessary to make further directions as the Appellants'
         case is clear.  A further hearing will be listed to  consider  this
         ground of appeal."

 7. The judge, then, limited consideration of the arguments to  those  made
    with respect to the Immigration Rules and Article 8 of  the  ECHR.   In
    resolving those the judge said this;

         "21. The first and second  Appellants  gave  credible  evidence  in
             relation to the caution explaining that  the  culture  in  The
             Gambia was to beat children  when  they  were  naughty.   They
             acknowledged they could not do this in the  UK  and,  although
             the children were placed in care temporarily, they  were  back
             with them and there was no further plan in place in respect of
             them.

         22.  Paragraph 322 of the Rules does  not  give  the  Respondent  a
             discretion regarding the  general  Grounds  for  Refusal.   It
             refers to the grounds  on  which  applications  for  leave  to
             remain are  to  be  refused  and  the  caution  is  caught  by
             paragraph 322(1C)(iv).   As  such,  I  cannot  find  that  the
             refusal on this ground is not  in  accordance  with  the  law.
             Accordingly, the appeal must be dismissed on this  ground.   I
             do not accept Miss Rutherford's submission that Section  85(4)
             of  the  Nationality,  Immigration   and   Asylum   Act   2002
             effectively gives me the option to consider the fact that,  at
             the time of the hearing, more than 24 months has elapsed since
             the caution, therefore, that the requirements of the Rules are
             now satisfied.

         23.  In relation to the Article 8 Ground of Appeal, I must consider
             the interests of the children  since  these  are  relevant  in
             assessing proportionality.

         24.  Section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
             2009 provides that, in making  any  immigration  decision  the
             Secretary of State must have regard to the need  to  safeguard
             and promote the welfare of children who are in the UK.

         25.  In ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4, Lady Hale noted that  a
             child's interests were a primary  consideration  but  not  the
             primary consideration.   She  further  stated  that  the  best
             interests of children could  be  outweighed  by  other  strong
             factors.  In  Azimi-Moayed  and  Others  (decisions  affecting
             children: onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197 (IAC),  the  Upper
             Tribunal said the  starting  point  in  determining  the  best
             interests of children is that they  should  be  with  both  of
             their parents.

         26.  I bear in mind that the third, fourth and fifth Appellants are
             all in full-time education in the UK and doing well at school.
              They will have undoubtedly  developed  a  private  life  with
             their friends at school.  On the other  hand,  the  third  and
             fourth Appellants began their education in  The  Gambia.   The
             first Appellant in her application said, 'my children are  not
             fluent in English as this is not their first language'.   This
             suggests there would be little difficulty in adapting to  life
             in  The  Gambia  where  they  would  be  able  to  communicate
             effectively.   The  refusal  letter  notes  that   the   fifth
             Appellant is young enough to be able to adapt easily  to  life
             there with the support of her family.

         27.  Miss Rutherford did not rely  on  the  right  to  respect  for
             family life, presumably because it is evident  that  it  would
             not be interfered with  if  the  family  was  removed  to  The
             Gambia.  I find that the best interests of the children are to
             be with both of their parents whether that will be in  the  UK
             or The Gambia.

         28.  The issue is whether the  interference  with  the  Appellants'
             private lives outweighs the public interest in relation to the
             legitimate aim of maintaining effect immigration  control  and
             in relation to the economic well-being of the UK.

         29.  Having considered all the circumstances in the round,  I  find
             that the Appellants have not satisfied  the  burden  of  proof
             upon them that it would not be proportionate to  remove  them.
             I bear in mind that the children and the second Appellant have
             been in the UK for a comparatively short period  of  time  and
             they should have little difficulty in adjusting to life in the
             country of their birth.  The general  Ground  for  Refusal  of
             their application is a  mandatory  ground  and  outweighs  the
             respect to their private lives and any interference with their
             private lives is proportionate to the public interest referred
             to in Article 8(2).  The appeal on  human  rights  grounds  is
             dismissed."

 8. The judge then went on to say, at paragraph 30, the words  I  have  set
    out above, by way of explanation as to why the Article 3 arguments were
    not to be dealt with in the determination.

 9. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought on behalf of  all
    five Appellants.  The grounds, in summary, were to the effect that  the
    judge had erred in failing to properly  consider  the  submission  that
    with respect to the Immigration Rules  the  relevant  24  month  period
    should be taken as being from the date of the caution to  the  date  of
    the appeal hearing; had erred in purporting  to  remit  the  Article  3
    issue to the Secretary of State when there was no power to do  so;  had
    made a factual error capable of translating into an  error  of  law  by
    failing to realise that the three minor Appellants had a  good  command
    of the English language; had failed to  consider  a  range  of  matters
    relevant to the Article 8 issues and had, in particular, failed to give
    any consideration to the risk of female genital mutilation when dealing
    with Article 8.

10. Permission to appeal was initially refused by a Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal but was granted by a Judge of the Upper Tribunal on  2nd  July
    2015.  The salient part of the grant reads as follows;

         "The Grounds of Appeal are not arguable in relation to  the  First-
         tier  Tribunal's  findings  relating  to  paragraph  322   of   the
         Immigration Rules for the same reasons given  by  Designated  Judge
         Garratt when he initially refused permission to appeal.  However, I
         find that the Grounds of Appeal are arguable  in  relation  to  the
         First-tier Tribunal's treatment of the  Article  3  claim.   It  is
         difficult to see how the First-tier Tribunal could properly  assess
         the best interests of the children without considering this  issue.
         If the Respondent considered that proceeding with  this  new  issue
         might cause unfairness the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  should  have
         considered  whether  an  adjournment  was  necessary  rather   than
         purporting to remit the matter to the Respondent (which  the  judge
         had no power to do in any event).  For these reasons it is at least
         arguable that the judge's findings relating to  Article  8  may  be
         flawed".

11. The Respondent lodged a "Rule 24" response in which  it  was  contended
    that, on a proper reading of Regulation 30 of  the  determination,  the
    judge had not remitted to the Respondent for the Article 3 claim to  be
    considered but, rather, had  "adjourned  the  appeal  on  that  aspect,
    whilst making a decision under the Rules and Article 8", such  that  he
    had decided there would be a further hearing which would be limited  to
    a consideration of the Article 3 claim only.  It was said that that was
    a permitted course of action and did not amount to  any  procedural  or
    other form of error.

12. The matter came before me so that it could be considered whether or not
    the judge had erred in law and, if so, what should  follow  from  that.
    Representation  was  as  stated  above  and  I  am  grateful  to   both
    representatives for their assistance.

13. Miss Rutherford indicated that she would take what she described as the
    "pragmatic  course"  of  not  pursuing  the  arguments  concerning  the
    Immigration Rules.  I think it was appropriate for her  not  to  do  so
    and, in  particular,  would  observe  that  the  wording  of  paragraph
    322(1C)(iv)  does,  on  my  reading,  clearly  contemplate   that   any
    conviction or caution bites if it was received within a  period  of  24
    months up to the date the relevant application was  decided  under  the
    Rules. However, in the circumstances, I need not say  anything  further
    about that argument.  She did, though, rely  upon  the  other  grounds.
    Mrs Pettersen, it is fair to say, did not energetically seek to  resist
    the contention that the judge had erred in consequence of a failure  to
    consider the  arguments  surrounding  female  genital  mutilation  when
    deciding the Article 8  issues.   Given  Mrs  Pettersen's  conciliatory
    stance, discussion moved on to the question  of  the  remaking  of  the
    decision.  Miss Rutherford urged me to  remit  to  the  First-tier  and
    suggested, if I was to  do  that,  I  might  wish  to  make  directions
    limiting the scope of the rehearing to the human  rights  issues.   Mrs
    Pettersen did not oppose that suggestion.

14. I am satisfied that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve
    errors of law such that the determination must be set aside.  I explain
    why below.

15. The first thing I would have to say, in this context, is that it  seems
    to me that neither the judge nor the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer
    ought to have been caught by surprise  when  Miss  Rutherford,  at  the
    hearing before the judge, sought to pursue Article  3  arguments  based
    upon the risk  of  female  genital  mutilation  to  the  female  infant
    Appellant.  I note, in this context though, that  Miss  Rutherford,  in
    her Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal, did seem to suggest  that,
    at the hearing before the judge, she had made an  application  to  vary
    the Grounds of Appeal.  If so, I do not  think  that  would  have  been
    strictly necessary given that the very wide wording of the,  admittedly
    rather uninformative Grounds of Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, were
    drafted sufficiently widely to encompass  Article  3  arguments.   More
    importantly, though, as indicated, the Appellants' bundle of  documents
    filed for the purposes  of  the  hearing  before  the  judge  contained
    witness statements of both adult Appellants which contained  references
    to the risk of female genital mutilation to the  relevant  child.   For
    example, the witness statement of MLF addressed the issue at  paragraph
    16 of her statement and the witness statement of LF addressed the  same
    issue at paragraphs 15 and 16.  That bundle was received by the  First-
    tier Tribunal something in the order of a month before the date of  the
    hearing.  I would assume that the bundle was sent to  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officers' Unit around the same  time.   I  fully  appreciate
    that the witness statements did not contain  a  great  deal  of  detail
    regarding the claimed risk of female genital mutilation and it might, I
    suppose, be thought to be surprising that a matter  of  such  potential
    importance and gravity was  not  addressed  in  somewhat  more  detail.
    Nevertheless, the concerns the two adult  Appellants  claimed  to  have
    about this were sufficiently addressed for it to have been  clear  that
    there was likely to be some argument about it at  the  hearing.   There
    was  also,  as  I  have  indicated,  the  background  country  material
    regarding the issue and the country guidance determination  which  also
    addresses it.

16. It seems to me, then, that even if Miss Rutherford  did  think  it  was
    necessary for her to apply to amend the grounds, there  was  sufficient
    material before the judge and before the Home Office Presenting Officer
    to have enabled them to have realised that arguments  regarding  female
    genital mutilation were likely to be canvassed at  the  appeal  hearing
    whether falling within the ambit of Article 3, Article 8  or  both.   I
    appreciate that judges and, perhaps,  Presenting  Officers  too,  often
    only have the opportunity of seeing and reading  documentation  shortly
    prior to an appeal hearing  even  where  that  documentation  is  filed
    significantly in advance of the hearing  date.   It  is  understandable
    that errors are made.  Nevertheless, it does seem to  me  that  in  the
    above circumstances the  judge  did  err,  however  understandably,  in
    thinking that the female genital mutilation issue had only been raised,
    for the first time, at the hearing, when that was plainly not the case.
     As such, the judge did err in my view in declining to deal with it.

17. I am also satisfied that the judge erred in dealing with the Article  8
    arguments, which encompassed an assessment as to what was in  the  best
    interests of the children, without addressing the issue of the risk  of
    female genital mutilation to  the  female  infant  Appellant.   As  was
    suggested in the grounds, it is really very difficult to see how a full
    assessment of the best interests of that particular  child  could  have
    been undertaken without deciding what risk might await her upon return.
     In this context, it does not seem to me that the sort of risk  claimed
    could be said to be exclusively an Article 3 issue as opposed to, also,
    a part of the Article  8  issues.   I  appreciate  that  that  directly
    impacts upon the arguments surrounding one Appellant only but it  seems
    to me that it, inevitably, would have a knock-on effect with respect to
    the Article 8 claims of the other Appellants because, of course, if one
    Appellant could not safely be returned to The  Gambia  but  the  others
    were so returned, that would lead to a separation  of  siblings  and  a
    separation of two parents from an infant child.

18. In light of the above, it does seem to me that the determination of the
    First-tier Tribunal has to be set aside.

19. As to how the decision ought to be remade, my first thoughts  had  been
    that the case should remain within the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the  basis
    that, since  Miss  Rutherford  was  abandoning  the  Immigration  Rules
    arguments, that part of the determination could be preserved such  that
    not everything which  the  judge  had  decided  was  being  set  aside.
    However, I was ultimately persuaded that  remittal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was the proper course of action.  That is because the bulk  of
    the issues in dispute will have to  be  re-decided,  there  will  be  a
    requirement for  extensive  fact-finding  regarding  the  human  rights
    arguments and, in particular, those relating to the risk of harm to the
    female child Appellant, because the First-tier Tribunal  is  an  expert
    fact-finding body and because remittal will  not  unnecessarily  reopen
    the Immigration Rules arguments, bearing in mind that I am able to give
    directions  concerning  the  scope   of   the   First-tier   Tribunal's
    consideration of the appeal upon remittal.  The directions follow.

Directions to the First-tier Tribunal upon Remittal

 A. The appeal shall be heard by a Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  other
    than Judge Butler at the Birmingham Hearing Centre with a time estimate
    of three hours.

 B. The hearing which will take place consequent upon  this  remittal  will
    address human rights arguments under Article 3 and  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights only.  The  part  of  the  original
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal dealing with the appeals under  the
    Immigration Rules shall stand.

 C. If either party wishes to  file  further  witness  statements,  further
    background material or other documentary evidence, then this should  be
    put in the form of an indexed and paginated bundle, with a schedule  of
    essential reading if appropriate, filed with  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and served upon the other party at least five working days prior to the
    date which will be fixed for the next hearing.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved errors of law  and  is  set
aside.  The case is remitted to a new  and  differently  constituted  First-
tier Tribunal so that the decision may be remade.

Anonymity

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any family member.  This direction applies  both
to the Appellant and  to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

