

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/41528/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |            Decisions and Reasons    |
|                                         |Promulgated                          |
|On 13 July 2015                          |            On 14 August 2015        |
|                                         |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between


                                SANDEEP PATEL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S. Bellara, counsel instructed by Edward Alam &
Associates
For the Respondent:    Miss A. Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    The appellant appealed against  the  respondent's  decision  dated  01
    October 2014 to refuse to extend his leave to remain as  the  dependent
    of a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant and to remove him from the UK  by
    way of directions made under section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Symes  allowed  the
    appeal in a decision promulgated on 05 March 2015. The  respondent  was
    granted permission to appeal against the decision. In a decision  dated
    11 June 2015 I found that the decision involved the making of an  error
    on a point of law and I set aside the First-tier Tribunal decision. The
    appeal now comes before the Upper Tribunal to remake the decision.

Decision and reasons

2.    The appellant entered the UK on 23 July 2010 with entry  clearance  as
    the dependent partner of a PBS migrant that was valid  until  10  April
    2011. At the time his wife, Mantaben Sandeepkumar Patel,  was  studying
    in the UK. The immigration rules allowed her to apply for  her  partner
    to accompany her while she studied. The appellant's wife continued  her
    studies and they were granted further leave to remain until  18  August
    2014.

3.    On 01 July 2013 the immigration rules were  amended  to  restrict  the
    number of students who were allowed to have family members with them in
    the UK (HC 244). Only  students  who  were  studying  at  post-graduate
    level, who were sponsored by  recognised  bodies  or  on  a  particular
    scheme would be permitted to apply for their  partner  to  remain  with
    them (paragraph 319C).

4.    On 01 August 2014 the appellant applied for further  leave  to  remain
    as a dependant. Although his wife was granted further leave  to  remain
    as a Tier 4 (General) Student until 22 December  2015  the  appellant's
    application was refused in a notice of decision dated 01  October  2014
    because his wife was not a government sponsored  student  and  was  not
    studying at a Higher Education Institute. She proposed to study for one
    year towards a Diploma  in  Healthcare  Management  (Level  7)  at  the
    International College of  Professional  Studies  Ltd.  She  is  due  to
    complete the course at the beginning of August 2015.

5.    At the hearing before Judge Symes it was accepted that  the  appellant
    did not meet the requirements of  the  immigration  rules  but  it  was
    argued that requiring the appellant to leave the UK while his wife  was
    still  studying  would  separate   the   family   and   amount   to   a
    disproportionate breach of their rights under Article 8 of the European
    Convention. The appellant does not seek to argue that the family should
    remain on a longer-term basis.

6.    Judge Symes identified relevant authorities to  support  the  argument
    that private life is a wide concept that  can  encompass  a  number  of
    aspects of a person's life: see Niemitz v Germany [2992]  ECHR  80.  He
    also noted that in the past the Tribunal has found that  a  significant
    course of professional study might, in  certain  circumstances,  engage
    the right to private life: see CDS (PBS "available": Article 8)  Brazil
    [2010] UKUT 00305.

7.    The obiter comments made by Lord Carnwarth  at  paragraph  57  of  the
    Supreme Court decision in Patel and Ors v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72 made  the
    point that the essential character of the right to private life must be
    engaged for the right to be protected under Article 8. However, it  was
    not a central argument  before  the  Supreme  Court  and  the  relevant
    authorities were not considered. Although Lord Carnwarth made a general
    statement that Article 8 does not on the face of it protect a right  to
    education, as has been pointed out in other cases, the right to private
    life is sufficiently broad to include a number of aspects of a person's
    life.

8.    What is clear is from  more  recent  authorities  such  as  Nasim  and
    Others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 00025 is that the right to private  life
    is only likely to be engaged in student cases if there  are  compelling
    circumstances.  The  impact  of  section  117B  of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 also serves to emphasise  that  private
    life issues arising when a person's immigration  status  is  precarious
    are likely to be given little weight when assessing the proportionality
    of an immigration decision.

9.    It is clear from Judge Symes' summary of the evidence that the  family
    has invested a considerable amount in the sponsor's course of study  in
    the UK. It is no doubt of real importance to the appellant's wife  that
    she completes her course of study. It is understandable  that  she  did
    not want to abandon the course and return to India with her husband and
    their young child, or in the alternative, have to  choose  to  continue
    the course but face a period of separation from them.

10.   However, the course of study that she was following  was  not  of  the
    kind that the Tribunal envisaged might be of sufficient seriousness  to
    engage the fundamental operation of Article  8.  In  CDS  (Brazil)  the
    Tribunal considered that a course of professional  study  over  a  long
    period of time might engage the operation of Article 8 cumulatively but
    made clear that there was no 'human  right'  to  come  to  the  UK  for
    education. It emphasised that Article  8  did  not  provide  a  general
    discretion to dispense with the requirements of the immigration rules.

11.   In this case the appellant's wife  was  granted  leave  to  remain  in
    order to study a relatively short course of one year. Although no doubt
    a useful qualification it was not a significant course of  professional
    study such as medicine or law. While they invested money in the  course
    it does not seem to have been a course of study  of  such  significance
    that it was likely to  reach  the  threshold  to  engage  rights  under
    Article 8. The appellant's wife is due to complete the  course  at  the
    beginning of August 2015. At the date of the hearing she was  about  to
    finish the course and will therefore be in  a  position  to  return  to
    India with her husband and child. Returning to India  with  her  family
    before the expiry of her leave would no longer impact on her  education
    and it would therefore be reasonable to expect her to return  with  the
    appellant.

12.   Although the appellant's wife has leave to remain  until  22  December
    2015 the additional few months do not go to the core of  any  potential
    Article 8 rights because they were granted in order to allow  time  for
    her to tie up her affairs following the completion of her  course.  The
    fact that she has leave to remain for a few more months entitles her to
    remain in the UK but does not necessarily amount to a right  to  remain
    with her family. If she now has to leave the UK in  order  to  continue
    her family life with the appellant and her  young  child  it  will  not
    interfere with her education. They are now in a position to  return  to
    India as a family unit. If his wife does need to tie  up  some  of  her
    affairs before leaving any separation  is  only  likely  to  be  for  a
    minimal period of time and is therefore unlikely  to  impact  on  their
    family life  or  the  best  interests  of  their  young  child  in  any
    significant way. For these reasons  I  conclude  that  removal  of  the
    appellant in consequence of the decision would not interfere  with  his
    right to family life, or his wife's right to private life as a student,
    in a sufficiently grave way as to engage the  operation  of  Article  8
    (questions (i) & (ii) of Lord Bingham's five stage approach in Razgar v
    SSHD [2004] INLR 349).

13.   Even if I am wrong in relation to the issue of whether  Article  8  is
    engaged I find that the circumstances of this case do not disclose  any
    compelling circumstances that  would  render  the  appellant's  removal
    disproportionate: see SSHD v SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387. In general
    terms the appellant may consider it unfair that the rules were  changed
    to restrict the number of students who  were  allowed  to  remain  with
    their partners when he had already been in the  UK  for  several  years
    with his wife. However, it is not unfair in  legal  terms  because  the
    respondent is entitled to change the rules as long  as  any  unfairness
    caused by the changes is not disproportionate. There is no evidence  to
    show that it is disproportionate on the facts of  this  case.  For  the
    reasons given above any perceived unfairness does not impact  on  their
    family situation as it stands at the hearing.

14.   While the appellant and his wife would no doubt prefer  to  remain  in
    the UK for the last few months of her visa, in circumstances where  she
    is about to complete the course, their desire to remain does not equate
    to a right to remain. For these reasons I conclude that the appellant's
    removal in consequence of the decision would be  proportionate  (points
    (iv) & (v) of Lord Bingham's five stage approach in Razgar).

15.   I conclude that the appellant does not meet the  requirements  of  the
    immigration rules and that his removal in consequence of  the  decision
    would not be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

DECISION

I remake the decision and DISMISS the appeal  under  the  immigration  rules
and on human rights grounds

Signed   [pic]   Date 10 August 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan




