
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41210/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard in Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11th  August 2014                          |On 20th August 2014          |
|Decision given orally                         |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON



                                   Between

                                ADEYEMI KOIKI

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Bradley, Solicitor, Peter Farrell Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss M O'Brien, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a national of Nigeria where he was born  26  September
    1981.  He has been granted permission to appeal the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Kempton who, for reasons given in  a  determination
    dated 2 February 2014, dismissed the appeal  against  the  respondent's
    decision refusing to  issue  a  derivative  residence  card  under  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006,  in  particular
    reg. 15A(4A)(a)(b) and (c), and  (7b)(i).   The  appellant  had  sought
    recognition as the primary carer of his wife  Tracy  Koiki,  a  British
    citizen.  The judge concluded at [20] that she  did  not  consider  the
    appellant had made out a prime facie case to show that he is the  carer
    of his wife within the meaning of  the  Regulations  and  EU  law.  The
    appellant had also relied on grounds  under  Article  8  of  the  Human
    Rights Convention.

 2. At [23] of her determination she indicated

         "I do have the locus to consider that Rule in the context  of  this
         peal and would have been willing to do  so.   However,  considering
         the issue further, I believe that a new application with much  more
         objective information in relation to the children and the effect of
         them on the removal of the appellant requires to be submitted.   At
         present, on the basis of the information before me,  I  cannot  say
         with any accuracy what is in the best interests of the children."

 3. Permission to appeal has been granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  MacLeman
    in response to grounds that the judge had failed to make a decision  on
    the best interests of the children and  had  failed  to  determine  the
    Article 8 grounds.

 4. The background facts are that  the  appellant  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom  as  a  student  on  15  October  2004.   Although  he  applied
    unsuccessfully for an extension of leave to remain  he  was  successful
    when on 4 March 2006 the Secretary of  State  granted  leave  until  31
    October 2009.

 5. The appellant then made a further application for leave  to  remain  as
    the spouse of a settled person which was refused on 15  December  2011.
    A number of applications for a derivative right or residence card  were
    made in 2012, the most recent being on 11 October that year  which  led
    to the decision under appeal dated 18 September  2013.   That  decision
    was a refusal to issue a derivative  residence  card  in  pursuance  of
    Regulation 15A(4A)(a),(b) and (c)  and  (7)(b)(i)  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 6. In the accompanying Reasons for Refusal Letter the respondent explained
    why she contended the appellant had not satisfied the  criteria  for  a
    derivative right of residence.  She also explained  that  consideration
    had not been given to whether the appellant's removal from  the  United
    Kingdom would breach Article 8 and indicated that  a  decision  not  to
    issue a residence card did not  require  the  appellant  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom if he could otherwise demonstrate  he  had  a  right  to
    reside under the regs.

 7. The respondent continued her reasons in the anti-penultimate  paragraph
    in these terms:

         "Reg. 26 of the EEA Regulations 2006 can close a  right  of  appeal
         against this decision.  However this does not  mean,  that  if  you
         chose to appeal you will be  entitled  not  remain  in  the  United
         Kingdom whilst the appeal is being considered."

 8. The First-tier Tribunal Judge declined to make a decision on Article  8
    grounds although she considered she had the locus to do so.  She  could
    not say with any accuracy  what  was  in  the  best  interests  of  the
    children.

 9. In the course of argument before me today  I  invited  the  parties  to
    address  me  on  the  issue  whether  the   First-tier   Tribunal   had
    jurisdiction in the light of the limitation on the right of  appeal  in
    the 2006 regulations despite the indication by the Secretary  of  State
    that such a course was available. I gave Mr Bradley  time  to  consider
    the point which arose because the appellant had sought a derivate right
    of residence card in respect of an adult.  Reg. 26(3A) provides:

         "If a person claims to be a  person  with  a  derivative  right  of
         residence he might not appeal under these regs. unless he  produces
         a valid national  identity  card  issued  by  an  EEA  state  or  a
         passport, and either -

         (a)  an EEA family permit; or

         (b)      proof that -

             (i)  where the person claims to have  a  derivative  right  of
                  residence under reg. 15A(2), he is a direct  relatives  or
                  guardian of an EEA national who is under the age of 18;

             (ii)     where the person claims to have a derivative right of
                  residence under reg. 15A(3), he is the  child  of  an  EEA
                  national;

             (iii)    where the person claims to have a derivative right of
                  residence under reg. 15A(4), he is a  direct  relative  or
                  guardian of a child of an EEA national;

             (iv)     where the person claims to have a derivative right of
                  residence under   reg. 15A(5), he  is  under  the  age  of
                  Article 8 and is a dependant of a  person  satisfying  the
                  criteria in (i) or (ii)"

10. Mr Bradley argued that the appellant did have a right of appeal because
    he was a direct relative of his wife's children by virtue of  his  role
    as stepfather, and in the alternative as a guardian. I am not persuaded
    that despite this argument the appellant is able to establish  that  he
    is a direct relative in the light of  the  manner  such  relatives  are
    characterised in regulation  7.    His  role  as  a  stepfather  is  an
    informal one and the evidence does not establish that he has status  as
    a guardian. It is undisputed that there has  been  no  formal  adoption
    proceedings and therefore he is unable to come within the  category  of
    direct relative which might otherwise be the case.

11. Mr Bradley also argued that pursuant  to  s.92  of  the  2002  Act  the
    appellant was entitled to a  forum  in  order  to  rely  on  Article  8
    grounds.  This too does not avail him.  This is not a statutory  appeal
    triggered by s.82 of the 2002 Act.  It is  an  appeal  under  the  2006
    regulations.

12. In the light of these matters my  conclusion  is  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal never had jurisdiction to determine the appeal  and  that  the
    Secretary of State was misconceived in  explaining  the  appellant  had
    this  opportunity.   My  conclusion  is  that  the  Tribunal  erred  in
    proceeding to determine the appeal at all.  Its decision is  set  aside
    and of no legal effect.

13. Accordingly the appeal by  the  appellant  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed since it is seeking to challenge a decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal which it had no jurisdiction to make.


Signed                                  Date 19 August 2014
[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson


