
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/41113/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 January 2015                             |On 26 January 2015           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                           ENDURANCE OMON AMILEGBE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr J Khalid, instructed directly by the appellant
For the Respondent: Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The  appellant,  a  national  of  Nigeria,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
  Tribunal against the decision of the Secretary of  State  to  refuse  her
  application for leave to remain on the basis of his  private  and  family
  life in the UK outside the Immigration Rules. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
  Buckwell  dismissed  the  appeal  and  the  appellant  now  appeals  with
  permission to this Tribunal.

Background

2. The appellant entered the UK on 30 September 2006  with  entry  clearance
  as the dependant of a work permit holder. Her leave was  valid  until  20
  August 2007 and she  was  subsequently  granted  discretionary  leave  to
  remain valid from 10 December 2009 until 10  December  2012.  The  claims
  that she married a Nigerian national on 11  June  2012  in  the  UK.  Her
  husband, also a Nigerian national, entered the UK on  23  September  2004
  with leave to  enter  as  a  student  until  14  December  2005  and  was
  subsequently granted extensions of stay as a student until  31  May  2010
  and a further extension of stay as a Tier 1 Post-study  Migrant  from  24
  June 2010 until 24 June 2012.

3. On 6 December 2012 the appellant applied for leave to remain in  the  UK.
  Her husband was named on the  application  form  as  her  dependant.  The
  Secretary of State considered  the  application  under  Appendix  FM  and
  paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules. The Secretary of State refused
  the application on 7 August 2013 on the basis that the appellant did  not
  meet the requirements of Appendix FM as she did not meet the requirements
  of the Immigration Rules in terms of her relationship  and  she  did  not
  have a parental relationship with a qualifying child. She  did  not  meet
  the requirements of paragraph 276ADEas she had not been resident  in  the
  UK for 20 years and had spent 16 years in her home country before  coming
  to the UK. Further, it was not accepted that she had  lost  all  ties  to
  Nigeria.

4. It is claimed that the appellant's husband obtained a law degree  and  is
  working with a firm of solicitors. The couple claim to have a son who was
  born in the UK on 14 October 2013. The appellant's case  is  that  whilst
  her grandparents, uncles, aunts and cousins live in Nigeria  her  parents
  live in the UK and she sees them frequently. She also has five  siblings,
  including her twin sister, and a cousin-brother living in the UK.  It  is
  her case that it would be difficult for her to find work in  Nigeria  and
  she did not want to return there.

5. The appellant gave evidence at the hearing but  the  First-tier  Tribunal
  Judge took into account the fact that her  husband  neither  submitted  a
  witness statement nor attended the hearing  and,  despite  submitting  an
  unsigned and undated statement, her sister did not  attend  the  hearing.
  The Judge did not accept as credible the claimed relationship between the
  appellant and her husband  but  accepted  the  relationship  between  the
  appellant and the child. The Judge concluded that the appellant fails  to
  meet the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  that  the  public
  interest outweighs the factors favouring the appellant and her family.

Error of Law

6. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal contend that the Judge  erred
  in considering the appellant to be an overstayer  [25]  whereas  she  had
  limited leave to remain when she made the current application. It appears
  from the immigration history set out in the respondent's  bundle  and  by
  the First-tier Tribunal Judge at paragraph 2  that,  when  she  made  the
  application the subject of this appeal on 6 December 2012, the  appellant
  had Discretionary leave to  remain  until  10  December  2012.  Mr  Avery
  submitted that the appellant was an overstayer in the past  but  accepted
  that she was not an overstayer at the date of the hearing.

7. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did therefore make a  mistake  of  fact  in
  saying that the appellant is an overstayer. Mr Khalid submitted that this
  was a material error as it would have been the  starting  point  for  the
  Judge and had an effect  on  the  Judge's  eventual  decision.  Mr  Avery
  submitted that the error was not material as there is nothing to indicate
  that this was a factor in  the  decision,  also  there  was  very  little
  evidence before the Judge to support the Article 8 claim so  the  Judge's
  conclusions are therefore sustainable.

8. I find that the Judge accurately  set  out  the  appellant's  immigration
  history in paragraph 25 where he made  the  mistake  as  to  her  current
  status. He clearly appreciated that the appellant was previously  granted
  three years Discretionary leave to remain having  had  immigration  leave
  for a temporary period before that. It is clear from reading the whole of
  paragraph 25 and the proportionality exercise set  out  at  paragraph  27
  that the Judge did not  attach  weight  to  the  appellant's  immigration
  status and that the mistake was not therefore a material one.

9. The grounds of appeal further contend that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
  did not give adequate consideration to the best interests of the child in
  accordance with section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration
  Act 2009. Mr Avery submitted that there was very little  evidence  before
  the Judge as to the child. He submitted that the child was very young and
  there was no question of him being integrated into  the  UK  on  his  own
  account. He submitted that there was  no  evidence  as  to  his  father's
  circumstances and that, in the absence of any other evidence,  the  Judge
  could not have reached any conclusion  other  than  that  it  is  in  the
  child's best interests to be with his mother. Mr  Khalid  submitted  that
  the consequence of this decision is that the family will be separated  as
  the appellant's husband has a separate application.

10. There was no evidence before the Judge as to the  appellant's  husband's
  status apart from her assertion in oral evidence  that  he  has  his  own
  appeal pending [10]. It is not clear to me why  the  First-tier  Tribunal
  Judge said that the respondent has a duty to consider the best  interests
  of the child [26][31] without referring specifically to his own.  However
  I find that the Judge had insufficient evidence before  him  to  reach  a
  conclusion other than that which he did, that it is in the  child's  best
  interests to be with his mother. There was no evidence as to  the  nature
  of the husband's claimed application or appeal or as to its  progress  or
  indeed as to whether the appellant  or her son are his dependants for the
  purposes of that appeal. In the absence of such evidence the Judge  could
  not have concluded that the family would be separated as  claimed  by  Mr
  Khalid.

11. The grounds of appeal  further  contend  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
  Judge erred in concluding that the decision to remove  the  appellant  is
  proportionate. Mr Khalid submitted  that  the  Judge's  finding  that  he
  doubted the credibility of the relationship with her husband  was  harsh.
  He submitted that the appellant's witness statement said that  the  child
  was the product of that relationship. However the  only  evidence  before
  the Judge as to the relationship was the appellant's statement  and  oral
  evidence. There was no evidence from the appellant's husband.  There  was
  no birth certificate for the child. I find that in  light  of  the  scant
  evidence before him it was open to the First-tier Tribunal Judge to doubt
  the credibility of this relationship.

12. Mr Khalid submitted that the Judge failed to  consider  the  appellant's
  private and family life. However there was no evidence before  the  Judge
  from the appellant's  parents.  There  was  only  an  unsigned  statement
  purporting to be from her sister and there was nothing from her  husband.
  The  main  evidence  before  the  Judge  was  therefore  the  appellant's
  statement and oral evidence. It is clear that the Judge took  account  of
  this evidence in reaching his conclusions.

13. At the hearing Mr Khalid submitted that the Judge erred  in  failing  to
  consider whether the appellant could meet the requirements  of  paragraph
  276ADE, in particular whether she could establish that she had no ties in
  Nigeria. He relied on the decision in Ogundimu (Article 8  -  new  rules)
  Nigeria [2013] UKUT 00060 (IAC). Mr Avery submitted that  this  alleged
  error was not in the grounds of appeal. Mr Khalid pointed  out  that  the
  appellant was not legally represented before the First-tier  Tribunal  or
  in drafting the grounds of appeal. However  Mr  Khalid  accepted  on  the
  basis of the appellant's instructions that the grounds of appeal had been
  drafted by a 'legal friend' of the appellant. I do not  therefore  accept
  that she did not have legal advice in drafting the grounds of  appeal  or
  that this ground could not have reasonably been raised then.

14. In any event, even had the Judge  considered  paragraph  276ADE,  it  is
  clear that the evidence before the Judge was that the  appellant  was  in
  Nigeria before she came to the UK in September 2006 [2] [16] and that she
  has grandparents, uncles, aunts and cousins in Nigeria [11].  She  claims
  to be married to a Nigerian man who appears to have no status in the  UK.
  The appellant's oral evidence to the Judge was that it would be difficult
  for her to have similar employment in Nigeria to that she had in the  UK.
  The Judge noted that the appellant emphasised in her  oral  evidence  the
  lack of opportunity she would have in Nigeria [24]. Further, there was no
  evidence as to the appellant's husband's family  in  Nigeria.  Overall  I
  find that there was insufficient evidence before the  Judge  to  reach  a
  finding that the appellant had no ties in Nigeria.

15. I have considered the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision  as  a  whole
  and I find that the decision to dismiss the appeal was one which was open
  to him on the basis of the evidence before him.

Conclusion:

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error on point of law.


Signed
                       Date: 26 January 2015

A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal











