
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Numbers: IA/41649/2014

                                            IA/41655/2014

                                            IA/41657/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 12 May 2016                            |On 20 May 2016                   |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before:


                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

|           |        GG                                      |(First appellant)|
|           |RM                                              |                 |
|           |JMC                                             |(Second          |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)                          |appellant) (Third|
|           |                                                |appellant)       |
|        And                                                                   |
|           |    SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT  |                 |
|           |                                                |Respondent       |


                               ANONYMITY ORDER


    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) and given that these proceedings involve a child,  I
    make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a  Court  directs
    otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any  form  of  publication
    thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellants.


    This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure  to
    comply with this  direction  could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
    proceedings.


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Thoree, of Thoree & Co Solicitors
For  the  Respondent:     Ms  A  Brocklesby-Weller,   Senior   Home   Office
Presenting Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are nationals of Bolivia. The  first  appellant  is  the
    wife of the second appellant. They arrived in the United Kingdom on  21
    February 2006 with leave as visitors valid until 21 August  2006.  They
    have remained without leave since. The third appellant  is  their  son,
    born in the United Kingdom on 26 May 2006.

 2. The appellants have been  granted  permission  to  appeal  against  the
    decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Kelly who, in  a  decision
    promulgated on 6 October 2015, dismissed their appeals on human  rights
    grounds (Article 8) against decisions of the respondent, each dated  29
    September 2014, to remove them from the United Kingdom  having  refused
    their applications of 3 September 2013  for  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom on the basis of their rights under  Article  8.  As  the
    respondent issued separate decisions in respect of each appellant which
    each appealed, there are three appeals in this case.

 3. The key issue before the Upper Tribunal is whether the judge materially
    erred in law in reaching his finding that it  would  be  reasonable  to
    require the third appellant to leave  the  United  Kingdom.  The  third
    appellant has speech and learning difficulties. The period of the third
    appellant's residence in the United Kingdom was 7 years 3 months as  at
    the date of the application for leave, 8 years 3 months as at the  date
    of the respondent's decision, 9 years 4 months as at the  date  of  the
    judge's decision and nearly 10 years as at  the  date  of  the  hearing
    before me.

The respondent's decision

 4. The respondent's reasons for refusing the appellants' applications  for
    leave are  set  out  in  a  decision  letter  addressed  to  all  three
    appellants dated 29 September 2014 (hereafter the "Reasons for refusal"
    letter or "RFRL"). The respondent refused the applications because  she
    considered that  the  appellants  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM and  para  276ADE  of  the  Statement  of  Changes  in  the
    Immigration  Rules  HC  395  (as  amended)   (hereafter   referred   to
    collectively as the "Rules" and individually  as  a  "Rule")  and  that
    there were no features of their case justifying a grant of leave  under
    Article 8 outside the Rules.

The judge's decision

 5. The issue before the judge was whether the  third  appellant  satisfied
    the requirements of para  276ADE(iv)  outside  the  Rules.  Under  para
    276ADE(iv), it was necessary for the third appellant to show that he is
    under the age  of  18  years,  he  had  lived  in  the  United  Kingdom
    continuously  for  at  least  7  hours  (discounting  any   period   of
    imprisonment) and that it would be reasonable to expect  him  to  leave
    the United Kingdom.

 6. The only factual issue before  the  judge  in  relation  to  the  third
    appellant was whether it would be unreasonable to expect him  to  leave
    the United Kingdom.

 7. Before the judge, it was conceded  on  the  behalf  of  the  appellants
    (paras 20 and 21 of the judge's decision) by Counsel who  appeared  for
    them before the judge (Mr. J Rene) that the first and second appellants
    do not qualify for leave to remain under Appendix  FM,  either  on  the
    basis of their relationship with each other or as the  parents  of  the
    third appellant. Mr. Rene accepted on behalf of the appellants that the
    outcome of the appeals of the first and second appellants was likely to
    turn  on  the  reasonableness  or  otherwise  of  requiring  the  third
    appellant to leave the United Kingdom.

 8. The judge nevertheless found, at para 39  of  his  decision,  that  the
    first and second appellants do not satisfy  the  requirements  of  para
    276ADE. He found that there were no very significant obstacles to their
    reintegration in Bolivia. He noted that they had spent the majority  of
    their lives living in Bolivia and that they speak the native  language.
    At para 36 (in connection with his assessment of the third  appellant's
    case) and at para 39 (in connection with his assessment  of  the  first
    and second appellants' cases under  para  276ADE),  he  rejected  their
    claim to have no friends or relatives living in Bolivia.

 9. The judge directed himself  on  the  applicable  law  at  paras  14-19,
    reminding himself, inter alia, of the guidance  in  relevant  case  law
    (Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 74, SS (Congo)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387,  Sunasee
    [2015] EWHC 1604, Razgar [2004]  Imm  AR  203  and  that  there  is  no
    requirement of 'exceptionality', pursuant to Huang [2007] UKHL 11), the
    burden and standard  of  proof,  the  provisions  of  s.117A-D  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the "2002 Act"),  section
    55 of the Borders, Citizenship & Immigration Act 2009 and ZH (Tanzania)
    (FC) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 24).

10. At para 38, the judge concluded that it would be reasonable to  require
    the third appellant to leave the UK. He gave his reasons at  paras  23-
    38, which read:

            "23. In assessing the  reasonableness  of  requiring  the  third
              appellant to leave the  United  Kingdom,  I  am  required  by
              Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship & Immigration Act 2009
              to treat the third appellant's best interests  as  a  primary
              consideration. I also take into account the guidance given by
              the higher courts in cases such as Azimi-Moayed  [2013]  UKUT
              00197 (IAC) and EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874.

            24.  In EV (Philippines),  the  Court  of  Appeal  set  out  the
              factors to be taken into account and held that  the  Tribunal
              was concerned with how emphatic an answer falls to  be  given
              to the question: is it in the best interests of the child  to
              remain in the UK? The longer the child  has  been  here,  the
              more advanced or critical the stage  of  her  education,  the
              looser the ties with the country in question,  and  the  more
              deleterious the consequences of her return, the  greater  the
              weight that falls on  one  side  of  the  scales.  If  it  is
              overwhelmingly in the child's best interests that she  should
              not return, the need to maintain immigration control may well
              not tip the balance. By  contrast,  if  it  is  in  the  best
              interests to remain, but only on balance (with  some  factors
              pointing the other way), the result may be the opposite.

            25.  In the balance on the other side, there falls to  be  taken
              into account the strong weight to be given  to  the  need  to
              maintain immigration control in  pursuance  of  the  economic
              well-being of the country. As such the immigration history of
              the parents may also be relevant.

            26.  In considering the best interests of the  third  appellant,
              I attach very significant weight to the fact that he has  now
              been in the United Kingdom for more than nine years, a period
              of time substantially in excess of the seven-year period that
              is  recognised  by  immigration  law   as   being   of   such
              significance. He was born in the United Kingdom on  26th  May
              2006 and has never lived outside of the country. I  therefore
              accept that he regards the United Kingdom as his home and has
              substantial ties to this country.

             27.   The  higher  courts  have  made  it  clear  that  greater
              significance is likely  to  attach  to  time  spent  in  this
              country by a child when  the  child  is  of  school  age  and
              therefore  developing  ties  and  attachments   outside   the
              immediate family unit than to the equivalent time spent by  a
              child of pre-school age. In this case,  the  third  appellant
              has been attending nursery and  school  for  more  than  five
              years and it is clear from the letter  that  he  himself  has
              written, as well as from his school reports, that he had made
              many friends in this country. It is also clear  that  he  has
              hobbies and interests in addition to his academic studies. He
              attends  Taekwon-Do  lessons  and  also  classes  in  acting,
              singing and dance.

            28.  I also note that the third appellant is  receiving  ongoing
              support from his school's Speech and Language Therapy service
              as he had exhibited difficulties in his development in  these
              areas.

            29.  Taking all of these matters into account, I  find  that  it
              is in the best interests of the third appellant to remain  in
              this country. However, that is not the end of the matter. The
              best interests of the third appellant must be  treated  as  a
              primary consideration, but they are not  paramount  and  they
              can be outweighed by other factors.

            30.  In assessing the reasonableness of requiring the  appellant
              to leave the country, I am entitled to take into account  the
              poor immigration history of the parents.  They  came  to  the
              United Kingdom in 2006 with leave to remain for a maximum  of
              six months but  they  never  returned  to  their  country  of
              origin. I find that they were dishonest in applying  to  come
              here as visitors when  it  was  plainly  their  intention  to
              remain in the United Kingdom on  a  longer  term  basis.  The
              first appellant admitted in her evidence that she intended to
              obtain leave to remain as a student once she got here and she
              has provided documents  in  respect  of  an  application  for
              student  leave  that  she  made  in   2006.   However,   this
              application  was  refused  on  7th  November  2006  and   the
              respondent advised the first appellant at that time that  she
              should leave the  country  without  delay  as  she  would  be
              committing an immigration offence if she remained  here.  Yet
              the appellants chose to ignore this advice and did nothing to
              regularise their immigration statistics for many years. It is
              plain that they were intentionally seeking to lie  low  until
              they had been in this country long enough to make a  credible
              human rights application. I find  that  this  conduct  weighs
              very heavily against them even though I am  also  mindful  of
              the fact that the third appellant should not be punished  for
              the misconduct of his parents.

            31.  As stated above, I find that, in the absence of  all  other
              considerations, it would be in  the  best  interests  of  the
              third appellant to continue living in this country.  However,
              I also find that his health and well-being are unlikely to be
              compromised to a substantial degree by a move to Bolivia.  He
              would be moving there as  part  of  a  family  unit  and  his
              parents would be able to assist him in adjusting to life in a
              new country. I note from the reasons for refusal letter  that
              the  respondent's  research  suggests   that   there   is   a
              functioning education system in Bolivia  and  there  is  also
              provision  for  children  with  learning  difficulties.   The
              appellants have  not  produced  any  evidence  that  suggests
              otherwise.

            32.  Whilst I accept that the third appellant has  benefited  in
              the past from additional support with  speech  and  language,
              and that he could no doubt benefit from further input in  the
              future, I do not regard such treatment as being essential  to
              his   future   health   and   well-being.   I   note    that,
              notwithstanding his difficulties with speech and language, he
              is able to attend a mainstream school and  appears  from  his
              school reports to  be  making  good  academic  progress.  His
              school report of 3rd July 2014 states  that  he  is  becoming
              more confident in his  speaking  and  that  his  reading  has
              improved over the last year along with his general  literacy.
              He is able to perform in amateur theatrical productions and I
              note that he obtained high marks in his musical  theatre  and
              choral speaking examinations. All of this  suggests  that  he
              would be able to continue to make good developmental progress
              in Bolivia,  especially  with  the  ongoing  support  of  his
              parents.

            33.  I have considered the handwritten  letter  written  by  the
              third appellant in which he explains that he loves  his  life
              in this country and has many good friends  here.  However,  I
              also take into account that he is still very young  and  that
              he has not yet embarked upon  his  secondary  education.  His
              education has not yet reached  a  critical  stage  where  any
              interruption to it could seriously jeopardise his future life
              chances. As stated above, I find  that  the  third  appellant
              would be able to continue to make good academic  progress  in
              Bolivia and is  young  enough  to  be  able  to  develop  new
              friendships and interests there.

            34.  I have read with care the report of  Mr.  Juan  Lema  dated
              5th March 2015. However, I note that this report was prepared
              at the instigation of the first and second appellants for the
              specific purpose of obtaining evidence as to the impact  that
              moving to Bolivia might have on the third appellant.  I  also
              note that it relies solely on information that was  given  to
              Mr Lema by the appellants themselves rather than being  based
              on an independent assessment of the third appellant. In fact,
              it appears that Mr Lema did not meet the third  appellant  at
              all prior to preparing his report. I therefore find that this
              report is entirely self-serving  and  I  attach  very  little
              weight to it.

            35.  The first and second appellants suggested  that  the  third
              appellant is unable to  speak  Spanish  and  would  therefore
              struggle to  adapt  to  life  in  Bolivia  for  this  reason.
              However, I do not accept this evidence. The first and  second
              appellants are both fluent Spanish speakers  and  I  find  it
              highly likely that the  third  appellant  has  in  fact  been
              brought up in a home where Spanish has been spoken on a  very
              regular basis, if not as the primary language.  I  also  note
              the report of Ms Daly, a Speech and Language Therapist, dated
              10th January 2012, which states that: "[the third  appellant]
              speaks three languages - German, English and Spanish".

            36.  The first appellant suggests that her family no longer  has
              any ties to Bolivia. Given that she and her husband  grew  up
              in Bolivia and have lived and worked there for most of  their
              adult lives, I do not accept this evidence. Whilst  I  accept
              that the first appellant's mother and sisters may  be  living
              in Germany now, I find that they  are  likely  to  have  many
              other  relatives  and  friends  who  remain  in  Bolivia.   I
              therefore find that the first appellant has  been  untruthful
              about the family's ties to Bolivia in an effort to strengthen
              their Article 8 claim.

            37.  The first and  second  appellants  were  both  employed  in
              Bolivia before coming  to  the  United  Kingdom.  Whilst  the
              airline for whom they worked is no longer operating, they did
              not provide any convincing reason as to why  they  could  not
              seek alternative employment on their  return  to  Bolivia.  I
              note from the report of Mr Lema that the first appellant  has
              a degree in tourism in Bolivia and it would therefore be open
              to her to once again seek employment in the tourism industry.
              The  first  and  second  appellants  have   been   supporting
              themselves by undertaking  various  cash-in-hand  jobs  since
              they came to  the  United  Kingdom.  I  find  that  they  are
              resourceful individuals who could seek work on their return.

            38.  When I consider all of the evidence in the  round,  I  find
              that it would be reasonable to require the third appellant to
              move to Bolivia with  his  parents.  I  find  that  his  best
              interests  in  remaining   here   are   outweighed   by   the
              respondent's legitimate  interest  in  maintaining  effective
              immigration control. The third appellant has  no  immigration
              status in this country and nor do his  parents.  His  illegal
              presence  here  is  placing  an  additional  strain  on   the
              education services of this country at a time  when  they  are
              already over-stretched."

11. Having concluded that the appellants do not satisfy the requirements of
    para 276ADE, the judge said (at para 40) that he found that  there  are
    no additional features of the appellants' case that  have  not  already
    been reflected in his assessment of their  case  under  the  Rules  and
    which might lead to a grant of leave outside the Rules.

The grounds

12. Although the grounds take issue with the judge's finding that the first
    and second appellants "are likely to  have  many  other  relatives  and
    friends who remain in Bolivia", they do so only in connection with  the
    judge's  assessment  of  that  issue   in   his   assessment   of   the
    reasonableness of requiring the third appellant  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom. They do not take issue with his finding  that  the  first  and
    second appellants do not satisfy the requirements of para  276ADE,  nor
    do they take issue with his decision to  dismiss  the  appeals  of  all
    three appellants on the basis of Article 8 claims outside the Rules. At
    the hearing, no issue  other  than  the  judge's  finding  that  it  is
    reasonable for the third appellant to leave the  United  Kingdom  under
    para 276ADE(iv) of the Rules was challenged, this being the only  issue
    raised in the grounds when read as a whole.

13. The grounds contend that the judge materially erred in law in  reaching
    his finding that it would be reasonable  for  the  third  appellant  to
    leave the United Kingdom as follows:

    i)      The judge's finding at para 32, that  he  did  not  regard  the
        support or treatment that  the  third  appellant  received  in  the
        United Kingdom with speech and language as being essential  to  his
        future health and well-being, was  "an  incredible  finding"  given
        that his speech and language will no doubt have an  impact  on  his
        ability to further his studies. It was wholly wrong to say that  it
        not 'essential to his future health and well-being'.

    ii)     The judge erred in his assessment of the report of Mr. Lema. He
        was incorrect to say that Mr. Lema had not met the third  appellant
        because the report clearly states that the third appellant attended
        the session with Mr. Lema on 6 March 2015 with the first appellant.
        Furthermore, the judge was wrong to question  the  content  of  the
        report simply because it had been prepared at  the  instigation  of
        the first and second appellants. Given that the respondent does not
        engage in obtaining such reports and that the burden of proof is on
        the appellants, it is materially wrong to simply disregard a report
        from a medical professional on the basis of who had instigated  the
        report. It is contended that the very nature of the report  demands
        that the information is obtained not only from the person concerned
        but where the person concerned is a minor, a parent  would  provide
        the necessary information.

    iii)    The judge speculated at para 36 when he said that the first and
        second appellants are likely  to  have  many  other  relatives  and
        friends who remain in Bolivia.

    iv)      The  judge  erred  in  finding  at  para  38  that  the  third
        appellant's illegal presence was placing an  additional  strain  on
        the educational services of this country at a time  when  they  are
        already over-stretched because no evidence was  placed  before  the
        judge about the state of the educational  services  in  the  United
        Kingdom. He therefore engaged in speculation.

Request for adjournment

14. Prior to the hearing, the appellants requested an  adjournment  of  the
    hearing on the ground that the third appellant will shortly be able  to
    apply to become a British citizen, having  lived  continuously  in  the
    United Kingdom since his birth on 26 May 2006. The adjournment  request
    was refused.

15. Mr Thoree renewed his application for the hearing to  be  adjourned  on
    the same ground. I  refused  the  request.  The  fact  that  the  third
    appellant will shortly be able to apply for British citizenship is  not
    relevant to the issue before me, i.e. whether the judge had  materially
    erred in law.

Submissions

16. Mr Thoree relied upon JO and others (section 55  duty)  Nigeria  [2014]
    UKUT 00517 (IAC). He submitted that, at para 32, the  judge  speculated
    in finding that the third appellant would be able to  obtain  treatment
    in Bolivia and he had failed to consider  the  best  interests  of  the
    third appellant. He speculated in reasoning that the first  and  second
    appellants  have  the  same  expertise  as  those  who  are   currently
    professionally providing the third appellant with  support.  The  third
    appellant would have to  start  all  over  again  in  Bolivia.  He  has
    difficulties even in the United Kingdom,  the  country  of  his  birth.
    There was no evidence that the third appellant would be able to receive
    the same level of treatment in Bolivia.

17. The judge erred in assessing the report of Mr Lema. He  wrongly  stated
    that Mr Lema had not met the appellant. This factual error tainted  his
    findings at paras 26-29 of his decision. Mr  Lema's  report  does  show
    that Mr Lema had spoken  to  the  third  appellant.  It  was  therefore
    incorrect for the judge to say that the information was provided to  Mr
    Lema by the first appellant. Furthermore, given his finding that it was
    in the best interests of the third appellant to remain in the  UK,  the
    judge's decision might have tipped in the third appellant's  favour  if
    he had not made the factual error.

18. The judge erred in taking into account the immigration history  of  the
    first and second appellants. In this respect,  Mr  Thoree  relied  upon
    para 41 of PD and Others (Article 8  -  conjoined  family  claims)  Sri
    Lanka [2016] UKUT 00108 (IAC) where the Upper Tribunal  said  that  "it
    has been frequently stated that a child's best interests should not  be
    compromised on account of the misdemeanours of its parents".

19. Mr Thoree submitted that the judge had failed to take into account  the
    fact that the third appellant was a qualified child under s.117B(6)  of
    the 2002 Act. The test of reasonableness has  a  lower  threshold  than
    that of insurmountable obstacles. The only factor that went against the
    third appellant was the poor immigration history of his parents.

20. In response, Ms Brocklesby-Weller asked me to bear in mind that Mr Lema
    had  considered  whether  the  third  appellant  could   benefit   from
    intervention by 'Bright Futures'. Mr Lema decided  that  there  was  no
    role for 'Bright Futures' because the third appellant was not suffering
    from a mental health disorder. She submitted that the judge was correct
    to say that the information provided to Mr Lema had emanated  from  the
    first appellant. In any event, there was nothing to show that  Mr  Lema
    had the necessary expertise to assess the availability  of  support  to
    the third appellant in Bolivia or the impact on the third appellant  of
    being returned to Bolivia. She submitted that the judge was entitled to
    find that the report was of little assistance. In any event, the report
    of Mr Lema states matters that had already been taken into  account  by
    the judge.

21.  Ms  Brocklesby-Weller  drew   my   attention   to   the   fact   that,
    notwithstanding the fact that the  RFRL  raised  the  issue  about  the
    availability of treatment for  the  third  appellant  in  Bolivia,  the
    appellants had  not  produced  evidence  to  the  judge  to  show  that
    treatment for the third appellant would not be  available  in  Bolivia.
    The judge did not speculate in stating that the third  appellant  would
    be able to access services in Bolivia that were akin  to  the  services
    that he receives in the United Kingdom.

22. Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted that, at paras  31  and  32,  the  judge
    explained the reasons why he found that the  third  appellant's  health
    and well-being are unlikely to be compromised to a  substantial  degree
    by a move to Bolivia. He explained that the third appellant was in good
    health and would be moving to Bolivia as part of a family unit with his
    parents who would be able to assist him to adjust to life  in  Bolivia.
    He said that there was provision in Bolivia for children with  learning
    difficulties. He said that the third appellant appeared  to  be  making
    good academic progress.

23. Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted that the judge did  not  err  in  taking
    into  account  the  immigration  history  of  the  first   and   second
    appellants. The question ultimately was whether it was unreasonable  to
    expect the third appellant to leave the United Kingdom. It was relevant
    to take into account that the appellants did not have a right to be  in
    the United Kingdom, pursuant to EV (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ
    874.

24. I reserved my decision.

Assessment

25. In my judgement, the judge did not err in law when he said at  para  32
    of his decision, that he did not regard  the  support  that  the  third
    appellant has been receiving in the  United  Kingdom  with  speech  and
    language was essential to his future health and well-being. At para 31,
    he said, that the third appellant's health and well-being are  unlikely
    to be compromised to a substantial degree by a move to a Bolivia. It is
    a fact that, whilst it is unfortunate  that  the  third  appellant  has
    learning difficulties and needs assistance with  speech  and  language,
    this is not  a  life  threatening  or  other  similar  serious  medical
    condition. The judge  was  considering  how  deleterious  the  move  to
    Bolivia would be, in relation to the third appellant's need for support
    with speech and language. He decided that it is unlikely that the  move
    would compromise the third  appellant's  health  and  well-being  to  a
    substantial degree, given that there is a functioning education  system
    in Bolivia, that there is also provision in Bolivia for  children  with
    learning difficulties, that the third appellant would have the  support
    of his parents and that he has done well in the United Kingdom and made
    good academic progress.

26. I reject the submission that the judge speculated in assuming that  the
    first and second appellants  have  the  same  expertise  as  those  who
    currently provide the third appellant with speech and language support.
    The reality is that, as parents, they will be able to provide  whatever
    support they can provide as parents,  as  opposed  to  experts  in  the
    provision of speech and language support. There is nothing to show that
    he assumed that they would be  able  to  provide  speech  and  language
    support as experts in that field. Nonetheless, they can provide support
    as parents, which is not to be considered of  nil  value  just  because
    they do not have expertise in providing support in speech and  language
    support.

27. Mr Thoree submitted that the third  appellant  would  not  be  able  to
    obtain treatment at the same level in Bolivia. This simply ignores  the
    fact that the appellants did not place any  such  evidence  before  the
    judge. The judge drew attention to the fact that the RFRL  stated  that
    there was a functioning education system in Bolivia and  provision  for
    children with learning difficulties and that the  appellants  have  not
    provided any evidence to suggest otherwise.

28. When read as a whole, paras 31 and 32 of the  judge's  decision  are  a
    full and fair assessment of the third appellant's situation with regard
    to his need for speech and language support and  the  potential  impact
    upon him of a move to Bolivia, based on the evidence  that  was  before
    the judge. In my judgement, the judge was fully entitled to  find  that
    the  third  appellant  would  be  able  to  continue   to   make   good
    developmental progress in Bolivia, with  the  ongoing  support  of  his
    parents.

29. I turn to the challenge to the judge's finding at  para  36,  that  the
    first and second appellants are likely to have many other  friends  and
    relatives in Bolivia.

30. I reject the submission that the judge had speculated when he made this
    finding. He heard and saw the first and  second  appellants  give  oral
    evidence. Plainly, he did not  find  them  credible.  For  example,  he
    rejected the evidence of the first appellant that the  third  appellant
    was unable to speak Spanish, pointing out that  this  was  inconsistent
    with the letter from Ms Daly, a speech and language therapist, who said
    that the third appellant speaks three languages, including Spanish.  In
    my judgement, the judge was fully entitled to find, on the whole of the
    evidence including the fact that the first and  second  appellants  had
    lived in Bolivia for most of their adult lives and bearing in mind that
    he heard and saw them give oral evidence, that it was likely that  they
    have many other relatives and friends who remain in Bolivia.

31. I turn to the judge's finding at para 38  that  the  third  appellant's
    illegal presence was placing an additional burden  on  the  educational
    services of this  country  at  a  time  when  they  are  already  over-
    stretched. I reject the submission that the judge  speculated  when  he
    made this finding, given that knowledge that the  educational  services
    of the country are over-stretched is in the public domain.

32. The next point is whether the judge erred in law in taking into account
    the immigration history of the first and  second  appellants.  I  agree
    with Ms Brocklesby-Weller that it was relevant for the  judge  to  take
    into account the fact that the appellants did not have a right to be in
    the UK, pursuant to the judgment in EV (Philippines). There is  nothing
    in PD and others to the contrary. In any event, it is not the case that
    the judge considered that the best interests  of  the  third  appellant
    were compromised on account of the misdemeanours of his parents,  given
    that he specifically said, in the final sentence of para 30,  that  the
    third appellant should not  be  punished  for  the  misconduct  of  his
    parents. When read as a whole, it is plain that all the  judge  did  at
    para 30 was to take note of the  reality  that  the  first  and  second
    appellants had a poor immigration history. If he had  omitted  to  take
    any account of their immigration history, he would  have  been  leaving
    out of account a relevant consideration.

33. Mr Thoree also submitted that the judge had failed to take into account
    the fact that the third appellant is a qualified child  under  s117B(6)
    of the 2002 Act.  S.117B(6) and the relevant part of the interpretation
    section, s.117D, state:


                  117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable
    in all cases

                 (6)   In the  case  of  a  person  who  is  not  liable  to
              deportation,  the  public  interest  does  not  require   the
              person's removal where-

                        (a)    the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
                   parental relationship with a qualifying child, and

                             (b)  it would not be reasonable to  expect  the
    child to leave the United Kingdom.

         117D Interpretation of this Part
     1) In this Part -


            "Article 8" means Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human
              Rights;


            "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of 18 and
              who -


                 (a)   is a British citizen, or,
                 (b)   has lived in the United  Kingdom  for  a  continuous
              period of seven years or more

34. Thus, there is nothing in s117B(6) which obviates the need to  consider
    whether it is reasonable to expect a  qualifying  child  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom. There is therefore nothing at all in this argument.

35. I turn finally to Mr Lema's report.

36. I accept that the judge misunderstood the evidence before him  when  he
    said that it appears that Mr Lema had not met the third appellant  when
    he prepared the report, given that Mr Lema prepared his  report  on  14
    March 2015 and that, in his opening paragraph, he said: "I  am  writing
    to confirm our discussion on Friday 6th of March  when  you  came  with
    your son for an initial assessment".

37. The judge also said that the  report  relied  solely  upon  information
    provided by the appellants, by which he obviously meant the  first  and
    second appellants given that the report was addressed to the first  and
    second appellants and that the point the judge was making is that there
    had been no independent assessment of the third appellant.

38. I have read Mr Lema's report carefully. There is nothing in the  report
    that specifically states that the third appellant had been  interviewed
    by Mr Lema. It is clear from some parts of the report that  information
    was provided by the  first  appellant  or  the  second  appellant,  for
    example:

    i)      In the second paragraph, it states: "In our meeting, you talked
        about your current concerns about [the  third  appellant]  and  you
        explained ..." (my emphasis).

    ii)     In the third paragraph, it states:  "...  as  well  as  talking
        about [the third appellant's] school life,  we  also  talked  about
        other aspects of his life that might  be  causing  him  stress  and
        upset" (my emphasis).

    iii)    In the fourth paragraph, it states: "It was also  helpful  that
        we could talk about [the third appellant's]  developmental  history
        and all the significant changes/events that have  happened  in  his
        life" (my emphasis).

    iv)     In the final paragraph on the second page  of  the  report,  it
        states: "No history of cutting, overdosing  or  self-harm  but  you
        have noticed him withdrawing and  feeling  insecure  and  at  times
        angry ..." (my emphasis).

39. I accept that there  are  other  parts  of  the  report  which  do  not
    specifically state or otherwise indicate that  the  information  stated
    therein came from the first and second  appellants.  For  example,  the
    second and fourth paragraphs on the second page of the report state:

            "[The third  appellant's]  first  language  was  German  as  you
        started to talk to him in your mother tongue. As you were the  main
        bread winner [the third appellant] used to stay  with  his  father,
        who speaks Spanish but as you said is a 'man of few words' so  [the
        third appellant] did not learn much  Spanish.  He  started  walking
        when he was thirteen months old...

            ...

            [The third appellant] is a very busy and  active  boy.  He  does
        music at school and he also takes Tae kwondo (yellow belt). Mondays
        he goes swimming. He still meets friends from nursery  even  though
        the majority go to different schools. He loves building Lego and is
        very creative. He gets certificates  and  stickers  from  the  head
        teacher very frequently."

            (my emphasis)

40. It is plainly the case that the information in  the  second  paragraph,
    underlined above, cannot have been given by the third appellant. Whilst
    I accept that the nature of  the  information  in  some  parts  of  the
    report, for example, that contained in  the  fourth  paragraph  on  the
    second  page  (quoted  above)  could  have  been  derived  by  Mr  Lema
    interviewing the third appellant, I have concluded that the  judge  was
    entitled to draw the inference from the report that  Mr  Lema  did  not
    derive his information from the third appellant notwithstanding that he
    (the third appellant) was present,  given  that  the  report  does  not
    specifically state that the third appellant was  interviewed  and  that
    there are statements of information in the report  that  are  expressly
    attributed to the parents or could  only  have  been  provided  by  the
    parents.

41. I have therefore concluded that the fact that the  judge  misunderstood
    the evidence when he said that Mr Lema  had  not  even  met  the  third
    appellant  when  he  prepared  his  report  is  not  relevant.  He  was
    nevertheless entitled to draw the inference from the  contents  of  the
    report that the information provided in the report had  been  given  by
    the first and second appellants, and that it was not derived by Mr Lema
    independently interviewing the third appellant.

42. In any event, even if I am wrong  about  this,  I  reject  Mr  Thoree's
    submission that the judge's decision  may  have  tipped  in  the  third
    appellant's favour if the judge had not made the errors as  to  whether
    Mr Lema had met the third appellant  and  whether  information  in  the
    report was  obtained  by  interviewing  the  third  appellant.  I  have
    concluded that any such errors (even if the judge made them,  which  is
    not the case) are not material to the outcome. I  have  concluded  that
    the judge was nevertheless fully entitled to place very  little  weight
    on the report for the following reasons:

    i)      Mr Lema is  a  Family  and  Systemic  Psychotherapist  who  was
        considering  whether  the  third   appellant   might   benefit   by
        intervention by 'Bright Futures'. He and his  colleagues  concluded
        that "there is not a role for us at this present  moment  regarding
        treatment as [the third appellant] has not a mental health issue."

    ii)     Accordingly, it was not Mr Lema's task to assess the impact  on
        the third appellant of being required to leave the United Kingdom.

    iii)    Whilst I have noted that Mr Lema recognised  that  feelings  of
        anger and oppositional behaviour in  the  third  appellant  may  be
        attributed to his being forced to leave the United Kingdom and said
        that: "Research shows that it is lonely being  a  stranger  in  the
        classroom or even in a  new  neighbourhood,  even  more  in  a  new
        country, and youngsters can suffer  distress  from  being  uprooted
        from familiar places and faces, ...", the fact is that he  was  not
        asked to assess the impact on the third appellant of being required
        to leave the United Kingdom and he did not do so. He  merely  spoke
        in general terms as the sentence I have  just  quoted  demonstrates
        and that he said in the preceding paragraph that  "...  [the  third
        appellant's] development can be affected in a very negative way..."
        (my emphasis), not that it would be affected or that it was  likely
        to be affected.

    iv)     Importantly, although the report refers to the third  appellant
        having feelings of anger and displaying oppositional behaviour,  Mr
        Lema and his colleagues concluded that he did  not  have  a  mental
        health issue and there  was  no  role  for  their  organisation  at
        present.  He  suggested  two  books  that  the  first  and   second
        appellants might find it useful to read.  The only  inference  that
        can be drawn from this is that any impact on the third appellant of
        being required to move to Bolivia was not serious enough to warrant
        intervention.

    v)      Furthermore, Mr Lema did not profess to have expertise  on  the
        availability of treatment  in  Bolivia  for  children  who  require
        speech and language support.

43. For all of the above reasons, I have concluded that the judge  did  not
    materially err in law. The appellants' appeals to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    are therefore dismissed.

      Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    any error on a point of law.  The  appellants'  appeals  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal are therefore dismissed.




[pic]

Signed                                             Date: 15 May 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill

