
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41894/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22 April 2014                              |On 28 May 2012014            |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                             niphaporn chaichin

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant who is a national of Thailand where she was  born  on  13
    January  1979  appeals  with  permission  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge K Miller who for  reasons  given  in  his  determination
    dated 3 March 2014 dismissed the appeal against the decision  dated  30
    September 2013 refusing to issue a residence card.

 2. The appellant had applied for that card as an extended family member of
    a Spanish national, Mario Lorenzo.  She had come to the United  Kingdom
    on 8 March 2004 with entry clearance as a student and remained in  this
    category until 2009 when she  applied  for  a  work  permit  which  was
    refused.  The respondent informed her that she was no  longer  entitled
    to remain in 2010.  Her application for a residence card  is  dated  29
    January 2013.

 3. The respondent refused the application because she  was  not  satisfied
    with the  evidence  provided  that  the  appellant  was  in  a  durable
    relationship.  She also referred to Appendix FM  and  paragraph  276ADE
    but reached no decision on whether the appellant  could  succeed  under
    the new Rules on the basis that no  valid  application  for  Article  8
    consideration had been made.

 4. The grounds of appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  include  the  ground
    that, inter alia, the respondent's decision was incompatible  with  the
    appellant's rights under ECHR.  No specific Article is  identified  and
    no specific basis on  which  it  was  contended  that  there  would  be
    interference is advanced.

 5. The judge gave detailed reasons why he did not consider  the  appellant
    was able to succeed based on the claimed durable relationship.  He  was
    in no doubt that the appellant and Mr Lorenzo were good friends but did
    not accept that they were any more than this or that their relationship
    was such that they could be described as unmarried partners.

 6. The grounds of challenge argue that the judge erred  in  two  respects.
    The first is that the judge failed to take into consideration material,
    verbal and documentary evidence adduced before the First-tier Tribunal.
     The second is that the judge erred in failing to consider Article 8.

 7. As to the first ground it is argued that the judge could have reached a
    different conclusion on  consideration  of  the  relationship  and  had
    failed to refer to the witness statements  by  the  appellant  and  his
    spouse nor the evidence of a Mr Supakit Tangpanlert.

 8. In granting permission to  appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Andrew
    observed that there was no  reference  at  all  to  Article  8  in  the
    determination and thus found there was an arguable error of law.

 9. There was no appearance by the appellant at the hearing before me.  Her
    solicitors had written to the Upper Tribunal  on  17  April  explaining
    that due to the appellant's financial situation and an insufficiency of
    funds, she wished to rely on the submissions  made  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the further grounds submitted for permission to appeal.  I
    therefore proceeded in her absence.

10. As to the first ground, I accept Mr Melvin's submissions that there  is
    no  merit.   The  determination  refers  to  the  bundle  of  documents
    including the relevant statements and sets out the oral testimony  from
    the appellant, Mr Lorenzo and Mr Tangpanlert.   Having  regard  to  the
    judge's careful assessment of the  evidence,  there  is  no  reason  to
    believe the judge did not have full regard to the evidence  before  him
    and  I  am  not  persuaded  that  this  ground  is  any  other  than  a
    disagreement with a  conclusion  legally  open  to  the  judge  on  the
    evidence.  As the grounds themselves state, the judge could  have  come
    to a different conclusion on his  consideration  of  the  relationship.
    But the fact is he did not do so  and  did  not  err  in  reaching  the
    conclusion that the parties had not established a durable  relationship
    under the Regulations.

11. I turn to the second ground.  It is correct as accepted by  Mr  Melvin,
    that the judge did not reach a conclusion on the Article 8 grounds.  He
    could not be criticised for failing to do so if all that he had  before
    him was the barest  of  challenges  in  the  grounds  of  appeal.   The
    appellant's statement however provides marginally more detail:

         "I request the Tribunal to  consider  my  established  private  and
         family life in the United Kingdom and the respondents requiring  me
         to leave the United Kingdom will be in breach of  my  rights  under
         Article 8 of ECHR."

12. I conclude that the appellant  was  entitled  to  a  decision  on  that
    ground.  To that limited extent I consider the judge erred in law.  The
    decision dismissing the appeal is set aside  which  I  now  proceed  to
    remake.  There is no new evidence before me that  was  not  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The appellant has chosen not to attend the  Upper
    Tribunal and she must accept that my decision can only be made  on  the
    evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal.

13. I am not satisfied that the appellant is able to rely on any  protected
    family life in the United Kingdom.  The only basis on which she  sought
    to do so was in respect of a relationship which the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge gave valid reasons for concluding was not a durable one and  thus
    not family life.  This leaves the issue of whether the appellant has  a
    protected private life.

14. The Immigration Rules have now been amended to include a basis on which
    a private life can lead to a grant of  leave  to  remain  at  paragraph
    276ADE.  In the appellant's case the relevant question is  whether  she
    has lived continuously in the United Kingdom for at least twenty  years
    or in the alternative whether she has lived here continuously for  less
    than twenty years but  has  no  ties  (including  social,  cultural  or
    family) with Thailand.

15. There is no dispute that the appellant has  lived  here  for  only  ten
    years.  Of those ten years, some three/four have  been  without  lawful
    leave to remain.  There is no evidence that the appellant has lost ties
    with her country of origin and I am not therefore persuaded that she is
    able to succeed under paragraph 276ADE.

16. The Tribunal in Gulshan (Article 8 -  new  Rules  -  correct  approach)
    [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) observed at 24(b):

         "After applying the requirements of the Rules, only  if  there  may
         arguably be good grounds for granting leave to remain outside  them
         is it necessary for Article 8 purposes to go on to consider whether
         there are  compelling  circumstances  not  sufficiently  recognised
         under them: Nagre; ..."

    The absence of any evidence by the appellant that there are  compelling
    circumstances  which  are  not  sufficiently   recognised   under   the
    architecture  of  paragraph  276ADE  leads  me  to  conclude  that  the
    appellant is unable to succeed on discrete Article 8 grounds.

17. By way of summary therefore, the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    contained an error of law only insofar as it failed  to  determine  the
    Article 8 ground.  I remake the decision  in  order  to  consider  that
    ground.  On the evidence before me I am not satisfied  that  ground  is
    made out; article 8 is not engaged.  I therefore dismiss the appeal.






Signed
                                                      Date 23 May 2014
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

