
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41941/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 February 2015                   |On 16 March 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                sherber peter
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Rana, Counsel instructed by SS Basi & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen of St Lucia, born on 7  September  1976  and
    she appealed against the decision of the respondent dated 30  September
    2013 to refuse to vary her leave to remain in the UK and  the  decision
    to  remove  her  under  Section  47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.  The appellant made  her  application  on   human
    rights grounds.

 2. The appellant made a further application on 11  December  2013  on  the
    basis that she had been continually resident in the UK for a period  of
    ten years following her entry to the United Kingdom on  14  June  2003.
    The Secretary of State asserted that the later application was void.

 3.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Petherbridge  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal.  At paragraph 11 the judge recorded that if an application  was
    varied before a decision was made the appellant would  be  required  to
    complete the necessary prescribed form to vary her application.  If the
    application was varied post-decision it would be open to the  appellant
    to  submit  further  grounds  to  be  considered  at  appeal.  Once  an
    application had been decided it ceased to be an application  and  there
    was no longer any application  to  vary  under  Section  3C(5)  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971.

 4. The judge stated at paragraph 12 that the  appellant's  representatives
    conceded that there was no appeal before him in respect of the decision
    of 8 April 2014 and that the appellant's appeal fell to  be  determined
    only under paragraph 276ADE of HC 395 as amended.

 5. The judge at paragraph 41 stated that he accepted that -

         "She had formed a private life and had been resident in the UK  for
         over ten years.  She has throughout that time been lawfully in this
         country, but at no time could she have had  any  other  expectation
         than that she was here as a student with limited leave  to  remain.
         Notwithstanding that the appellant  has  been  here  for  over  ten
         years,  she  has  obtained  little   in   the   way   of   academic
         qualifications, such as to encourage the thought that if  she  were
         allowed further leave to remain she would achieve  more  than  that
         which she has in the ten years that she has been here already".

 6. An application for permission to appeal was made on the basis  that  it
    was clear from paragraphs 9 to 12 of the  determination  of  the  judge
    that the issue  of  whether  he  had  jurisdiction  to  deal  with  the
    application dated 22 November 2013 was raised by counsel and dealt with
    him as a preliminary issue.  It was clear  from  paragraph  22  of  the
    determination Judge Petherbridge was referred by counsel to the Supreme
    Court decision in Patel and others [2013] UKSC 72.  This decision which
    approved the Court of Appeal case AS (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 1076 was  that  if  a  One-Stop
    Notice was served by the Home  Office  the  Tribunal  was  required  to
    consider and determine all issues raised by the appellant.   Thus  from
    the skeleton argument it was clear that counsel had  not  conceded  the
    point and  the  Tribunal  was  required  to  consider  the  appellant's
    application made on form SET(O) in respect of the long residence.

 7. The application for permission to appeal  was  granted  by  First  Tier
    Tribunal Judge Landes who  determined  that  there  was  force  in  the
    argument that the judge had not considered the  appellant's  ground  in
    relation to long residence.

 8. The matter came before me.

 9. At the hearing Mr Rana submitted that  the  appellant's  barrister  had
    submitted a statement to the Upper Tribunal confirming that  she  could
    not recall  making  a  concession  on  the  basis  of  the  ten  years'
    continuous residence point and indeed  paragraphs  22  and  24  of  the
    determination referred to Patel.  The whole point of citing  Patel  was
    the question in relation to the Section 120 notice.  As Mr Rana pointed
    out Patel confirms AS (Afghanistan) and NV  (Sri  Lanka)  [2010]  EWCA.
    Indeed I note that there is no time limit on  serving  a  Statement  of
    Additional Grounds in response to a Section 120 notice  or  indeed  any
    particular form in which it is to be served.  The  claim  of  10  years
    residence was an additional ground which needed to be decided.

10. The judge also recorded that the appellant's representative  relied  on
    her skeleton argument and submitted that the appellant had been in  the
    United Kingdom since 2003 and had  been  actively  studying.   She  had
    passed the Life in the UK  test  in  August  2012  and  said  that  the
    appellant was supported by a  number  of  friends  and  her  pastor  in
    respect of her application.  She had been a law abiding citizen and the
    judge recorded "she had never been unlawfully in  the  United  Kingdom"
    (paragraph 24).

Conclusions

11. As Mr Rana pointed out paragraph 95 of AS (Afghanistan) confirmed  that
    once grounds have been raised in response to a Section 120  notice  the
    Tribunal must deal with those grounds. There was a S120  notice  served
    in this particular case.  It is clear to me that the  appellant  raised
    the Grounds of Appeal in relation to the long residence  and  this  was
    not dealt with by Judge  Petherbridge.   Mr  Nath  submitted  that  the
    appellant was correct in respect of his submissions on the  120  Notice
    but the decision had not been decided by the Home Office.  It  was  for
    the Home Office to be the primary decision maker.

12. Mr Nath's argument was that the application  before  the  Secretary  of
    State was not that of a ten year's long residence and therefore it  was
    only considered under paragraph 276ADE.

13. However, as stated at paragraph 86 of AS (Afghanistan) if the Secretary
    of State chooses to serve a notice under Section 120 and he invites and
    requires the appellant to put forward any additional grounds  that  may
    be available to him and is not therefore restricted to the scope of his
    original application.

14. In this instance I find that Judge Petherbridge failed to consider that
    he had jurisdiction despite the issue of the concession as  raised  and
    had he gone on to consider the impact of the One-Stop Notice he had the
    ability to consider the appellant's  appeal  on  the  grounds  of  long
    residence.

15. It is clear from a reading of the decision that Patel UKSC  72  and  AS
    (Afghanistan) were relied  on  by  counsel.   Notwithstanding  that,  a
    concession can be made only in fact and not in law.

16. Patel identifies that "the initial application for leave to  remain  if
    made in time can later be varied to include  wholly  unrelated  grounds
    without turning it into a new  application  prejudicing  the  temporary
    right to remain given by the section".

    As stated by Sullivan LJ in AS

         "The appellants would have good reason to question the coherence of
         the statutory scheme if they were then to be told by the  AIT  that
         it had no jurisdiction to consider the additional ground that  they
         had been ordered by both the Secretary of State and the AIT to  put
         forward" [paragraph 99].

17. The appellant entered the UK on 14 June 2003 with entry clearance as  a
    student valid until 14 December 2003 and she was  subsequently  granted
    leave to remain as a student until her last leave to remain as a Tier 4
    (General) Student, valid until 4 September 2012, expired.

18. The appellant made a further application on Article  8  grounds  on  31
    August 2012 which was refused on 30 September 2013.   However, when the
    Home Office made the decision on 30 September 2013  the  appellant  had
    ten years' continual lawful residence in the United Kingdom.

19. I find that the objections of Mr Nath to the fact that  the  appellants
    did not make an application for ten years' residence is answered by the
    decisions of Patel and further MU (Statement of  Additional  Grounds  -
    long residence - discretion (Bangladesh) [2010] UKUT 442.

20. I was initially urged by Mr Rana to allow the appeal outright  until  I
    pointed out that paragraph 276B has a discretionary element  not  least
    that the appellant must satisfy paragraphs 276B(2) to (5).

21. The appellant submitted that she had submitted sufficient knowledge  of
    the English language and sufficient knowledge about life in the  UK  in
    accordance with Appendix KoLL.   The  appellant  stated  that  she  had
    submitted this evidence to the Secretary of State  although  there  was
    nothing on file and it was not produced to me at court.

22. For the reasons given above I find that there was an error of law and I
    set aside the decision of Judge Petherbridge and remake  the  decision.
    I find that the appellant has had at least ten years' continuous lawful
    residence in the United Kingdom and there did  not  appear  to  be  any
    public interest reasons why it would be undesirable for her to be given
    indefinite leave to remain on the ground of long residence. Bearing  in
    mind the discretionary element both the appellant's representative  and
    Mr Nath agreed that the matter should be returned to the  Secretary  of
    State for determination and I allow the appeal to this extent.

Notice of Decision

The decision is allowed to the extent outlined above.



Signed        Date 14th March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

