
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                  Appeal
Number: IA/41448/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 January 2016                             |On 20 January 2016            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

                          mr Henry Olushola Johnson
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Lams, (Counsel) instructed by the appellant's
                    solicitor's Legal Resource Partnership
For the Respondent:    Ms Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria.  He appeals against  a  decision
    made by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Stokes) (FtT) heard on 27  March
    2015 and in  a  decision  and  reasons  promulgated  on  24  June  2015
    dismissed the appeal on immigration and human rights grounds.

Background

2.   The appellant entered the UK on 11 June 2006 on  a  multi  entry  visit
    visa valid for six months.  On 2 June 2010  he  applied  for  leave  to
    remain under Article 8 ECHR which was refused on 1 July  2010  with  no
    right of appeal.  On 11 April 2012 he requested a reconsideration which
    was refused and an appealable decision was made to remove him from  the
    UK under Section 10 of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999.   The
    respondent refused the application with reference to  Appendix  FM  and
    paragraph 276ADE.  The respondent was not satisfied that the  appellant
    was in a genuine and subsisting relationship with  his  former  partner
    who was the mother of his two children born on  4  March  2007  and  17
    December 2009.  Further the respondent concluded that the appellant was
    unable to meet the requirements as a parent as he  did  not  have  sole
    responsibility for  his  children  who  were  living  with  his  former
    partner, and both she and the children were Nigerian nationals with  no
    valid leave in the UK.  Paragraph EX.1.(a) or (b) did not apply.

3.   On 27 March 2015 at the hearing it  was  known  to  the  FtT  that  the
    appellant's former partner and  the  two  children  had  made  separate
    applications for leave to remain and the  decisions  were  outstanding.
    Neither the appellant's former partner nor  his  children  attended  to
    give evidence at the hearing.

4.   For the sake of completeness, I set out the  procedural  events  up  to
    the time of the hearing before me.  On 1st June 2015 the appeal of  the
    appellant's former partner and children  was  heard  and  dismissed  on
    immigration and human rights grounds by the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge
    E Ruth) in a decision and reasons  promulgated  on  11  June  2015.  An
    application for permission to appeal  was  refused  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Reeds on  12  October  2015.   The  parties  were  appeal  rights
    exhausted.

Summary of First-tier Tribunal (Judge Stokes) Decision

5.   The FtT proceeded on the basis that the appellant was  unable  to  meet
    the requirements  for  leave  under  the  partner  route  and/or  under
    paragraph EX.1.(b).  The FtT further found that he could not  meet  the
    Eligibility  requirements  for  limited  leave  as  a  parent.   As  an
    overstayer he was in breach of Immigration Rules.  The FtT  found  that
    the appellant's eldest son, M, had not lived in the UK for seven  years
    preceding the date of application.  However as at the date  of  hearing
    he met the definition as a  "qualifying  child"  for  the  purposes  of
    Section 117 of the  Nationality  Immigration  &  Asylum  2002  Act  (as
    amended) ("2002 Act").  The FtT considered Article  8  outside  of  the
    Rules and factors relevant to the public interest [20].   At  [21]  the
    FtT specifically considered Section 117B(6) 2002 Act on the basis  that
    M was a  qualifying  child,  and  which  was  not  disputed,  that  the
    appellant had a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  his
    children.  The FtT considered the second limb  of  Section  117B(6)  as
    regards whether or not it would be reasonable for the child  to  return
    with the appellant to Nigeria.  In so assessing the FtT considered  the
    statutory guidance "UKBA Every  Child  Matters:  Change  for  Children"
    November  2009,  ZH  Tanzania,  Zoumbas  v  SSHD  [2013]  UKSC  74,  EV
    Philippines and Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ  874  and  principles  in
    Azimi-Moayed and Others (Decisions Affecting Children; Onward  Appeals)
    [2013] UKUT 197 IAC.  The FtT found that both children were settled  in
    primary school, their mother was their primary  carer  with  whom  they
    lived since their birth, they had  never  visited  Nigeria  and  had  a
    strong relationship with their paternal grandmother and other immediate
    family  who  they  visited  regularly  in  the  UK.   The   FtT   found
    inconsistencies in the evidence as to how much time the appellant spent
    with his children.  He had not lived with  them  for  the  majority  of
    their childhood.  The FtT concluded at [25]:

         "That  it  would  not  be  in  the  children's  best  interests  or
         reasonable to expect them to return to Nigeria with the  appellant.
         Their family and private life here  is  well-established  and  they
         would be separated from their mother, primary carer.  Their welfare
         is best served, therefore by remaining with her in the UK."

6.   The  FtT  considered  Article  8  with  reference  to  the  appellant's
    relationship with his adult half sibling Adebayo, for  whom  he  had  a
    caring role.  The FtT found that there was no family  life  as  between
    them as adults following Kugathas v SSHD [2003]  EWCA  Civ  31  [27]  -
    [29].

7.   At [30] the FtT took into account that the appellant  lived  unlawfully
    in the UK for eight years and had not met the  Immigration  Rules  with
    regard to family or private life.   He  produced  no  evidence  why  he
    should not be able to return to Nigeria where he lived prior  to  entry
    to the UK and where he had at least one family member.  The FtT  placed
    significant weight  on  the  public  interest  in  the  maintenance  of
    effective immigration controls.  It concluded that any interference  in
    his relationship with his half sibling Adebayo was  proportionate.   In
    considering Section 117 with respect to M, the  qualifying  child,  the
    FtT took into account Dube (ss.117A - 117D)  [2015]  UKUT  00090  (IAC)
    [32] and concluded that the interference was not disproportionate.  The
    FtT concluded that Article 8 was not engaged,  notwithstanding  that  M
    was a qualified child and the FtT found that  it  was  unreasonable  to
    expect the children to return to Nigeria with the appellant.

Grounds of Application for Permission

8.   The appellant argued that the FtT erred by failing  to  properly  apply
    Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act  arguing  that  there  was  no   public
    interest  in  removal  where  there  was  a  genuine   and   subsisting
    relationship with a qualifying child in respect of whom it was found to
    be unreasonable for the child to leave the UK with  the  appellant.  It
    was submitted that having so found the FtT was obliged to  have  regard
    to the statutory provisions and to allow the appeal.

Permission to Appeal

9.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  McDade
    on 9th October 2015 who found that there appeared to be an  absence  of
    consideration of Section 117B and therefore an arguable error of law.

Rule 24 Response

10.  Rule 24(4) Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  permits  for
    extensions of time:


         "If the respondent provides the  response  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
         later than the time required by paragraph (2) or by an extension of
         time allowed  under  Rule  5(3)(a)  (power  to  extend  time),  the
         response must include a request for an extension of  time  and  the
         reason why the response was not provided in time."

11.  At the hearing before me Ms Brocklesby-Weller sought to  admit  a  Rule
    24 response dated 5 January 2016.   The  respondent  had  not  received
    either the grounds of appeal or the decision permitting the application
    within the prescribed time limits.  She had made  urgent  enquiries  to
    obtain copies of the same and was in a position to prepare the response
    on the evening of 4 January 2016.   Mr  Lams  opposed  the  application
    arguing that the appellant would  be  prejudiced  because  firstly  the
    response opposed the appeal on the Section 117B(6) issue, but also  and
    more significantly it amounted to  a  cross-appeal  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent.  The respondent pursued  grounds  that  the  FtT  erred  in
    concluding that it would be unreasonable for the  appellant's  children
    to return to Nigeria following the principle in EG and NG (UT rule  17:
    withdrawal; rule 24: scope) Ethiopia [2013] UKUT  00143.   Further  the
    respondent argued  that  the  reasonableness  of  relocation  had  been
    determined by FtT (Judge Ruth) whose decision had been upheld by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Reeds and the appeals were rights  exhausted  as  at  23
    October 2015.

Decision re Rule 24 response

12.  I decided to admit the Rule 24  response.  I  was  satisfied  that  the
    respondent had  prepared  the  response  at  the  earliest  opportunity
    available to her.  I did not consider that the appellant  would  be  at
    all prejudiced as to the main ground of appeal in relation  to  Section
    117B(6).

13.  As to the cross-appeal I allowed time for  Mr  Lams  to  fully  address
    this issue before me. Indeed at the end of the hearing I asked  whether
    or not he wished to have a further  opportunity  in  which  to  provide
    written arguments in respect of the Secretary of State's  cross-appeal.
    He confirmed that he did not.  Mr Lams raised concerns that there  were
    two sets of appeal proceedings in respect of one family which  had  not
    been linked and that neither tribunal had heard evidence  from  all  of
    the family, yet each had reached opposing decisions in respect  of  the
    reasonableness of the children to return to Nigeria.

Error of Law Submissions

14.  Mr Lams expanded on  the  grounds  of  appeal  with  reference  to  the
    failure to apply Section 117(6).  He relied on the recent  decision  of
    Treebhawon and others (section 117B(6) [2015] UKUT  00674  (IAC)  where
    Section 117B(6) was treated   separately   from  the  other  provisions
    under Section 117 and the  Upper  Tribunal  concluded  that  where  the
    provisions of Section 117(6) were met this  was  determinative  that  a
    decision to remove an appellant would not be in  the  public  interest.
    Further that there was no  dilution  to  S.117B(6)  because  of   other
    factors under Section 117B(1) to (3).

15.   Mr Lams argued that the decision made  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Ruth ("the second decision") also failed  to  comply  with  Treebhawon.
    The resultant contradictory findings and conclusions reached by the two
    Tribunals  were  unsatisfactory  and  resulted  in  unfairness  to  the
    children whose best interests were of relevance given that  the  eldest
    had been in the UK for nine years.

16.  Ms Brocklesby-Weller relied on  the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  and
    submitted that the FtT had correctly relied on Dube  in  which  it  was
    concluded that consideration should be  given  to  all  of  the  public
    interest factors and that it was not an "a la carte menu".  She  argued
    that Section 117B(6) was not a trump card and that  all  other  factors
    with regards to public interest under Section 117 must  be  taken  into
    consideration albeit they were not exhaustive.  The  FtT  had  properly
    considered the relationship as between the appellant and  his  children
    in the context that he had access to them, he was not a pivotal  figure
    in their lives and there would be no adverse impact on their  lives  by
    his removal.  Whilst there was sufficient evidence to  show  a  genuine
    relationship between the appellant and his children, the FtT considered
    this in the context of the fact that they lived with their  mother  and
    the evidence as to the frequency of visits was not consistent.

17.   Ms Brocklesby-Weller argued  that  the  assessment  of  reasonableness
    made by the FtT disclosed an error  of  law.   In  chronological  terms
    although the appellant's hearing had taken place in  March  2015,  that
    decision was not promulgated until after  promulgation  of  the  second
    decision in which Judge Ruth decided that it was not  unreasonable  for
    the children to return to Nigeria with  their  mother.   That  Tribunal
    heard evidence from the mother and had extensive  documentary  evidence
    concerning the children (none of which was before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Stokes). It was arguable that  that  the  decision  of  FtJ  Ruth
    should take precedence or at least be taken into account.

18.  Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted that it was only in the  event  that  an
    error of law was found in the decision of  Ft  Judge  Stokes  that  the
    cross-appeal as regards reasonableness came into the forum.

19.  Mr Lams responded by  submitting  that  the  Presidential  decision  in
    Treebhawon took precedence over that of Dube.  There was a clear  error
    of law and Treebhawon was binding.  He further submitted that it  would
    be unfair to allow the second decision to  take  precedence  where  the
    appellant had not in fact been a party to those proceedings.   Mr  Lams
    conceded that the second  decision  could  be  taken  into  account  in
    consideration of the best interests of the children.

Discussion and Decision

20.  The appeal before me is in relation to  the  decision  and  reasons  of
    First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Stokes).  The  appellant,  who  has   two
    children, aged 8 and 5 years, born in the UK, and  his  former  partner
    are all citizens of Nigeria.  The FtT  found  that  the  appellant  had
    informal access to his children, although there was some  inconsistency
    in terms of the frequency of contact [25], it found that  there  was  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship. The FtT  found  that  the
    eldest child was a "qualifying child" under  Section  117B(6);  he  had
    lived in the UK for seven years.  The FtT  considered  where  the  best
    interests of the children lay and whether or not it would be reasonable
    for them to return to Nigeria in the event of the appellant's  removal.
    It is of note that the respondent in the  reasons  for  refusal  letter
    made reference to consideration of "best interests" under Section 55 in
    general terms, but did not engage in any specific consideration of  the
    best interests of the children, having regard to the fact that none  of
    family had lawful leave to remain in the UK and all  were  citizens  of
    Nigeria.  The respondent's view was that the children could  reasonably
    return to Nigeria without interference to their family lives.   I  take
    the view  that  at  the  time  the  FtT  heard  the  appeal  there  was
    uncertainty about the future of both children in light of the fact that
    the children were dependents on their mother's  application  which  was
    pursued separately.  Clearly there was no real prospect of  removal  of
    the children in the event of the appellant's  removal  to  Nigeria,  as
    their situation  would  be  dependant  on  their  mother's,  but  their
    circumstances were relevant to the appellant's family life. It ought to
    have been apparent to all concerned that the two  sets  of  proceedings
    ought to have  been  linked,  heard  and  determined  before  the  same
    Tribunal.  Sadly that did not happen.

21.   I  have  considered  the  arguments  made  by  Mr  Lams  as   to   the
    applicability of Section 117B(6)  following  Treebhawon   which  itself
    post dated the appeal. I do not find any error  of  law  in  the  FtT's
    approach.  The decisions of Treebhawon and Dube which was relied on  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Stokes are on an equal footing.   Furthermore
    the factual nexus in Treebhawon is entirely different from that in  the
    present appeal where the appellant has not lived as a family unit  with
    his former partner or children and his parental relationship  is  based
    on access visits. The FtT's approach  was  entirely  reasonable  as  it
    considered the impact on the appellant in the event that  the  children
    remained in the UK and found that family life could  be  maintained  by
    visits and communication. I am satisfied that  the  FtT  engaged  fully
    with the provisions of section 117B and in particular section  117B(6).
    The FtT balanced the public interest as against the  interests  of  the
    appellant and family members, and concluded that  there  was  a  strong
    public interest in the maintenance of a fair immigration control having
    taken into account that none of the family members had lawful status in
    the UK.  The fact that the eldest child  was  a  qualifying  child  and
    Section 117B(6)  was  met  was  relevant  as  a  part  of  the  overall
    consideration of  factors  for  and  against  public  interest  in  the
    appellant's removal.

22.  As I have found no material error of law in the  FtT  decision,  it  is
    not necessary for me to consider the secondary position put forward  by
    the respondent  as  regards  the  Tribunal's  findings  concerning  the
    reasonableness of the children returning to Nigeria.  That  matter  and
    the best interest of  the  children  have  been  fully  ventilated  and
    determined by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ruth and the appeal  rights  of
    the mother and children are now exhausted.

23.  As I have stated above ideally these proceedings  ought  to  have  been
    heard together. However as I indicated to Mr Lams  at  the  hearing,  I
    have given full consideration to the position of the children and I  am
    satisfied that there has been no resultant unfairness to them or to the
    appellant.  I am satisfied that their best interests  have  been  fully
    and fairly considered by the second Tribunal  that  concluded  that  it
    would not be unreasonable to expect them  to  return  to  Nigeria  with
    their mother upon whom they are dependent.

Notice of Decision

24.   I  find  no  material  error  of   law.    The   First-tier   Tribunal
    determination shall stand.  The appeal is dismissed.

     No anonymity order is made.





Signed                                  Date 19.1.2016

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.




Signed                                  Date  19.1.2016

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


