
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Ia/41059/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |            Decision and Reasons     |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 24 August 2015                      |            On 28 September 2015     |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MR IJAZ AHMAD

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Stephen Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Talacchi, Counsel, instructed by New Era
Immigration Ltd

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is not subject to an  anonymity  order  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.  Neither  party
    has invited me to make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI  2008/2698)  and  I
    have not done so.

 2. The appellant (hereafter the Secretary of State)  appeals  against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge ) allowing the  respondent's
    appeal against a decision taken on 26  September  2014  to  refuse  him
    leave to remain in the UK as the spouse of a person present and settled
    in the UK..

Introduction

 3. The respondent entered the UK on 18 March 2011 with entry clearance  as
    a Tier 4 student valid until 15 October 2012. His leave to remain as  a
    student was subsequently  extended  until  11  October  2014.  He  then
    applied for leave to remain on 9 July 2014 on the  basis  that  he  had
    married Mrs Nazia Iqbal ("the sponsor") on 2 November 2013 and they had
    been living together since then.

 4. The Secretary of State decided that the respondent could not  meet  the
    suitability requirements of Appendix FM because  he  had  obtained  his
    previous leave by deception as he had utilised a proxy test taker at an
    English language test on 22 August 2012. The respondent  did  not  meet
    the requirements of paragraph 276ADE of  the  Immigration  Rules  ("the
    Rules")  and  there  were  no  other  exceptional  circumstances   that
    warranted further leave to remain.

The Appeal

 5. The respondent appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an oral
    hearing at Taylor House on 16 March 2015.  He  was  represented  by  Mr
    Talacchi. The First-tier Tribunal found  that  the  burden  of  proving
    dishonesty fell on the Secretary of State and  the  evidence  submitted
    was insufficient. There was no direct evidence of a  fake  test  sitter
    being seen on the day of the test. There was no evidence from either of
    the analysists who it is implied listened to the relevant  voice  files
    and there was nothing in the spreadsheet submitted by the Secretary  of
    State which indicates whether the test result was declared invalid as a
    result of a  match  being  found  or  because  of  test  administration
    irregularities at the test centre.  It  was  important  that  the  full
    nature of the evidence was produced to prove the allegation. The  judge
    was therefore not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    suitability requirements of Appendix FM.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law  in
    finding that the Secretary of  State  had  failed  to  prove  that  the
    appellant had used deception. The witness statements detail extensively
    the investigation undertaken by ETS in the appellant's case, along with
    thousands of other applicants and  the  process  of  identifying  those
    tests found to be invalid. The appellant was identified  after  a  long
    and systematic investigation. The judge  gave  inadequate  reasons  for
    rejecting the evidence.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Cooper on
    2 July 2015. It was arguable that the judge erred  in  law  by  finding
    that the Secretary of State's evidence as sufficient at the very  least
    to provide a case for the appellant to answer and absent  any  innocent
    explanation to find that the dishonesty allegation was proved.

 8. Thus, the appeal came before me

Discussion

 9. Mr Whitwell submitted that there were  two  witness  statements  and  a
    spreadsheet before the judge. The language test provider clearly states
    that the test was invalid.

10. Mr Talacchi submitted that each ETS case will depend  on  the  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal. There was insufficient evidence to show
    that a false test sitter was used in this case. The  judge  made  sound
    findings of fact and the Secretary of State is just seeking to  reargue
    the matter already dealt  with  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  It  was
    conceded by the witness Mr Millington that the test may be  invalidated
    by administrative irregularity or a match identified and verified.  The
    respondent made his case clear at paragraph 31 of the  decision  -  the
    allegations have been successfully rebutted. There are no  findings  of
    fact about the respondent's evidence because the judge  just  found  at
    paragraph 35 that the burden of proof was upon the  respondent  and  it
    was not made out.

11. Mr Whitwell submitted in response that it is clear that this is a  case
    where the test was invalid - this  is  not  a  case  of  administrative
    irregularity. I accept Mr Whitwell's submission that it is  clear  from
    the evidence that the Secretary of State's  case  in  respect  of  this
    respondent is that the  test  was  invalid.  That  is  clear  from  the
    spreadsheet  and  therefore  there  is  no  issue  of  confusion   with
    administrative irregularity. The judge therefore erred in law in giving
    weight to an immaterial matter, namely lack of clarity  as  to  whether
    the Secretary of State relied upon invalidity  or  test  administration
    irregularities.

12. However, the burden of proof in relation to proving that the respondent
    had submitted a false document in his previous application for  further
    leave to remain was on the Secretary of State and must be discharged by
    cogent evidence on balance of probabilities. The real  issues  in  this
    appeal are whether the judge gave adequate reasons  for  rejecting  the
    evidence submitted by the Secretary of State and whether the judge  was
    entitled to reject the evidence submitted by  the  Secretary  of  State
    without making  any  findings  in  relation  to  the  evidence  of  the
    respondent.

13. The evidence submitted by the  Secretary  of  State  in  this  case  is
    effectively identical in terms of weight to that submitted in R (on the
    application of Gazi) v SSHD (ETS - judicial review) [2015] UKUT 327. In
    that appeal, expert evidence from Dr Harrison was submitted  on  behalf
    of the applicant. The  generic  evidence  from  Mr  Millington  and  Ms
    Collings was identical to that submitted in this case and is  helpfully
    summarised at paragraphs 6-15 of the decision. At paragraph 35  of  the
    decision, Mr Justice McCloskey said this,

    "In  my  view,  taking  into  account  Chapter  50  of  the  EIG,   the
    Respondent's evidence, summarised in Chapter II above,  was  sufficient
    to warrant the assessment that the Appellant's TOEIC had been  procured
    by deception and thus, provided an adequate foundation for the decision
    made under section 10 of the 1999 Act. True it is that, at this  remove
    and with the benefit of Dr Harrison's report, there may be grounds  for
    contending that said evidence is not infallible"

    Gazi was subsequently approved by the Court of Appeal  in  Mehmood  and
    Ali [2015] EWCA Civ 744. Both authorities  relate  to  judicial  review
    applications but I am satisfied that the analysis and conclusions of Mr
    Justice McCloskey are of general application to all ETS  appeals  where
    the Secretary of State relies upon the generic witness  statements  and
    an individual spreadsheet  relating  to  a  particular  appellant.  The
    reasons given by the  judge  at  paragraphs  33-35  of  the  First-tier
    decision are not strong and are partly based upon the  misunderstanding
    of the evidence set out at paragraph 11 above. I find  that  the  judge
    has given inadequate reasons for rejecting the evidence and that  is  a
    further material error of law.

14. It is common ground in this case  that  the  judge  did  not  make  any
    findings in relation to the respondent's  credibility.  The  respondent
    did not have the benefit of any supporting expert evidence and  so  his
    only route to rebut the evidence of the Secretary of State was his  own
    evidence. The failure of the judge to make any findings in relation  to
    that evidence is a further material error of law.

15. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  allow  the  respondent's
    appeal under the Immigration Rules involved the making of an  error  of
    law and its decision cannot stand.

Decision

16. Both representatives invited me to order a rehearing in the  First-tier
    Tribunal if I set aside the judge's decision. Bearing in mind paragraph
    7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statements I  consider  that  an
    appropriate course of action. I find that the errors of law infect  the
    decision as a whole and therefore the re-hearing will be de  novo  with
    all issues to be considered again by the First-tier Tribunal.

17. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    order the appeal to be heard again in the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined de novo by a judge other than the previous First-tier judge.

Signed        [pic]                 Date 25 September 2015


Judge Archer

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


