
[pic]
IAC-HW-MP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41182/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9th July 2015                     |On 11th August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             kate taiwo akindele
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Fijiwale, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No representation


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of  State,  however
    for convenience I shall now refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born on 24th December 1973.  She
    appealed against the decision of the Respondent  dated  30th  September
    2014 refusing her application based on her family and private  life  in
    the United Kingdom under Article 8 of ECHR.  Her appeal  was  heard  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal R L Head-Rapson on 13th February 2015.
     The appeal was allowed on human  rights  grounds  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 31st March 2015.

 3. An application for permission to appeal was lodged  by  the  Respondent
    and permission was granted by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Martin
    on 2nd June 2015.  The permission states that the judge may have  erred
    in that, despite quoting the law and applicable  Immigration  Rules  at
    great length, she has failed to consider them or explain why it is that
    a  mother  whose  children  are  permanently  in  care,  due   to   her
    mistreatment of them and who has supervised contact only four  times  a
    year, should succeed on Article 8 grounds.

 4. There is no Rule 24 response.

The Hearing

 5. The Appellant was not represented and did not appear for the  error  of
    law hearing.

 6. The Presenting Officer submitted that  the  cases  of  SS  (Congo)  and
    Others [2015] EWCA Civ 387 and Mrs Ronak Maniyka Dube  [2015]  UKUT  90
    (IAC) apply.

 7. The Presenting Officer refers to paragraphs 60 to 63 of the  First-tier
    Judge's determination.  In these paragraphs the judge  deals  with  the
    Immigration Rules but she makes no finding as to whether the  terms  of
    the Rules have been satisfied or not. The appellant's stand is that the
    terms of the Rules have been satisfied.

 8. At paragraph 65  the  judge  considers  Article  8  outside  the  Rules
    referring to the case of Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27  and  other  relevant
    cases.

 9. The Presenting Officer submitted  that  it  is  necessary  to  consider
    whether the Rules have been  satisfied  before  considering  the  claim
    outside the Rules.  I was referred to the said case of  SS  (Congo)  at
    paragraph 44.  This refers to Article  8  outside  the  Rules  and  the
    public interest question.  She submitted that the judge has  identified
    the Rules. She submitted that it is only if  the  terms  of  the  Rules
    cannot be met that it has to be considered  whether  there  is  a  good
    arguable case outside the Rules.  She submitted that there is an  error
    of law in the judge's determination as she has not made a finding as to
    whether the Rules have been satisfied.

10. The Presenting Officer submitted that with  regard  to  proportionality
    the judge has not properly considered public interest.  At paragraph 33
    in the said case of  SS  (Congo)  it  is  stated  that  there  must  be
    compelling circumstances for a claim to succeed on  Article  8  grounds
    outside the Rules.  She submitted that the judge made an error  of  law
    because this issue was not dealt with.

11. The  Presenting  Officer  submitted  that  in  this  case  it  was  not
    appropriate to consider the claim outside the Rules.   The  application
    was refused on suitability grounds.  It  was  found  that  it  was  not
    conducive to the public good for the Appellant to remain in the  United
    Kingdom.  The Appellant was arrested on suspicion of child cruelty  and
    cautioned and her children were removed from her.   The  children  have
    since  been  granted  Registration  of  Minors  which  gives  them   UK
    citizenship as there is no chance  of  them  being  returned  to  their
    mother.  They will remain in long-term foster care until the age of  18
    and the Appellant is not allowed any unsupervised access to them.   She
    submitted that  the  Appellant  has  failed  to  meet  the  suitability
    threshold.

12. The Presenting Officer submitted that it is clear that the Appellant is
    not actively involved in the upbringing of her children.  There  is  no
    evidence to show that she has any involvement.

13. With regard to the  best  interests  of  the  children  the  Presenting
    Officer submitted that the judge in this case has found  that  this  is
    the trump card at paragraph 73 of the determination.  The judge  states
    that  the  children's  best  interests  are  of  course  the  paramount
    consideration in the Family Court.  The  Presenting  Officer  submitted
    that at paragraph 39(iv) of SS (Congo) it is stated that the fact  that
    the interests of a child are in issue, does not provide  a  trump  card
    for positive action to be taken by the State. In the field  of  Article
    8(1), a child must not necessarily have their application  acceded  to.
    She submitted that the best interests of the  children  are  a  primary
    consideration not the primary  consideration  and  the  judge  has  not
    considered the fact that this Appellant has mistreated her children.

14. The Appellant's evidence is that she could  not  afford  to  visit  the
    children if she was removed to Nigeria but  she  produced  no  evidence
    about this.  There  is  also  no  evidence  about  the  possibility  of
    employment for her in Nigeria.

15. I was referred to Part 5A of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 as amended by  the  Immigration  Act  2014  and  Section  117B
    thereof.  This is referred to by the judge at  paragraphs  76  and  77.
    The Presenting Officer submitted that in this case the children are  in
    care.  They do not require to leave the United Kingdom if the Appellant
    is removed.  She submitted that the judge has not given  enough  weight
    to the public interest in effective immigration control.

16.  The  Presenting  Officer  submitted  that  the  judge  has  given   no
    consideration to the Appellant's private life situation.  The appellant
    is in the United Kingdom illegally and is not financially  independent.
    She is a burden on the state.  The Presenting  Officer  submitted  that
    this has to be considered  and  the  judge  has  not  done  this.   The
    Presenting Officer submitted that there are material errors of  law  in
    the determination relating to the Article 8 aspect of  the  Immigration
    Rules and also Article 8 outside the Rules.

17.  I  was  asked  to  overturn  the  judge's  decision  and  dismiss  the
    Appellant's appeal.

Decision and Reasons

18. This is an error of law hearing.

19. The judge has  made  no  decision  as  to  whether  the  terms  of  the
    Immigration Rules have been satisfied.  This is  a  material  error  of
    law.

20. The judge has then gone on  to  consider  the  claim  under  Article  8
    outside the Rules.  She has made no finding as to whether  there  is  a
    good arguable case for doing so.  This is a material error of law.

21. The judge's findings at paragraphs  76  and  77  of  the  determination
    relating to public interest have not been dealt with in  the  necessary
    way. The Appellant is in  the  United  Kingdom  unlawfully.   Her  only
    period of lawful residence was as a visitor in 2007.

22. The judge appears to consider the fact that there are British  children
    in the United Kingdom is a reason for the appeal  to  be  automatically
    allowed.

23. This Appellant mistreated her children.  She has supervised access with
    them for two hours four times a year.  She has been found not  to  meet
    the suitability requirements for  consideration  of  limited  leave  to
    remain in the UK as a parent under E-LTRPT and/or  on  the  grounds  of
    private life under paragraph 276ADE.  The Respondent has found that the
    terms of paragraph 276ADE and  Appendix  FM  cannot  be  satisfied  for
    reasons given in the refusal letter.  The children in  this  case  have
    been granted Registration of Minors which gives them UK citizenship  as
    there is no chance of them being returned to their mother.   They  will
    be in foster care until they are 18 years old.  The  Appellant  is  not
    allowed any unsupervised access to the children and her  behaviour  has
    been found not to be conducive to the public  good  and  therefore  she
    fails to meet the suitability threshold.

24. The judge has given none of this any weight.

25. There are material errors of law in the judge's determination.

Notice of Decision

As there are material errors of  law  in  the  judge's  determination  I  am
setting aside Judge Head-Rapson's determination promulgated  on  31st  March
2015.

I dismiss the appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules  and  on  human
rights grounds. This is a mother whose children are permanently in care  due
to her mistreatment of them and who has supervised contact only  4  times  a
year. She cannot meet the suitability  threshold.  The  children  are  never
going to be retuned to their mother.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray

