
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/41610/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 13 November 2015                  |On 25 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 IRAM DANIEL
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Absent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal  but
in order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hands,  promulgated  on  8  July  2014
which allowed the Appellant's appeal.

Background

3.    The Appellant was born on 04  February  1982  and  is  a  national  of
Pakistan.

4.    On 11 July  2013  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application for variation of leave to remain in the UK.

The Judge's Decision

5.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal  Judge  Hands  ("the  Judge")  allowed  the  appeal   against   the
Respondent's decision. The Judge relied on a direction  made  by  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Cope in his decision dated 04 June 2014.

6.    Grounds of appeal  were  lodged  and,  on  01  September  2014,  Judge
Hollingworth gave permission to appeal stating

    "In the light of the background to this case it is  arguable  that  the
    matter should have been listed for oral hearing in order to crystallise
    the position of each party.  An  error  of  law  thereby  vitiates  the
    decision."

The Hearing

7.    The Appellant did not attend the appeal nor  was  she  represented  at
the appeal. I am satisfied that due notice of the  appeal  was  served  upon
the Appellant at the address that was given. I am satisfied that  it  is  in
the interests of justice to proceed with  the  hearing  in  the  Appellant's
absence as I am entitled to do by virtue of paragraph  38  of  The  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

8.    Ms Willocks-Briscoe for the respondent told  me  the  judge  had  been
incorrect to find in favour of the appellant, and to approach this  case  on
the basis that the respondent conceded the  appeal.   She  argued  that  the
respondent's decision had never been withdrawn, even though  the  respondent
has not complied with directions. She  emphasised  that  the  appellant  had
claimed asylum in  May  2014  and  that,  since  the  Judge's  decision  was
promulgated,  the  appellant  has  left  UK.  She  said  that  the  decision
displayed bias in favour of the appellant which  amounted  to  a  procedural
misdirection causing unfairness. She urged me to consider (if  I  find  that
there is a material error of  law)  whether  or  not  the  appeal  has  been
abandoned because the appellant has left UK.

Analysis

9.    Neither party in this case request an oral  hearing.  The  case  first
called as a "paper case" placed before the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Cope.
He found that there was inadequate documentary  evidence  to  allow  him  to
justly determine the case, and so issued directions  to  the  respondent  to
produce further documentary evidence.  In his decision dated 4 June 2014  he
set out the history of the appeal, and issued the following direction.

    "6.    Having regard to the determination  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    Cvetkovs (Latvia)  [2011]  UKUT  00212  (IAC)  the  respondent  is  now
    directed to serve on the IAC and on the appellant by 4th  July  2014  a
    copy of the notice of decision to which the notice of  appeal  relates;
    any other document giving reasons for that  decision;  any  unpublished
    documents on which the respondent relies; the application form; and any
    supporting documents  supplied  by  or  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant,
    including particularly the covering letter from Crystal  Advice  Centre
    and its enclosures.

    7.     If the documents are not served by the date specified the appeal
    will be decided on the basis that the respondent no longer opposes  the
    appeal or supports any contention made in the  notice  of  decision  of
    11th July 2013."

10.   It is  a  matter  of  concession  that  the  respondent  ignored  that
direction. In Cvetkovs  (visa  -  no  file  produced  -  directions)  Latvia
[2011] UKUT 00212 (IAC)  the Tribunal said  that  (i)  Where  a  visit  visa
application is refused because the Visa Officer  is  not  satisfied  of  the
appellant's intentions as a result of only limited documents being  produced
and translated; and the respondent breaches Procedure Rules  by  failing  to
send documentation to the Tribunal, directions can be given indicating  that
unless the respondent complies with the rules it may be  that  the  Tribunal
will assume that the appeal is unopposed; and  (ii)   Where  the  respondent
breaches Procedure Rules by failing to send documentation to  the  Tribunal,
and the First-tier  Tribunal  issues  a  reasoned  decision,  based  on  the
material before it, allowing the  appeal,  a  challenge  by  the  respondent
based on sufficiency of reason is unlikely to prosper on an application  for
permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

11.   In this case the Judge gives a reasoned  decision  setting  out  quite
clearly the background to the appeal and making findings in  fact  from  the
limited evidence that was available. The truth (which the  respondent  might
find unpalatable) is that only limited evidence was  available  because  the
respondent  chose  to  ignore  an  unambiguous  direction  which  gave   the
respondent a chance to rectify the deficiencies in the  preparation  of  the
respondent for this appeal. The direction made by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
Cope quite clearly warned the respondent  that  a  failure  to  comply  with
directions would result in the appeal being determined  on  the  basis  that
the respondent no longer opposes the appeal. That is exactly what  happened.
In marking an appeal against the Judge's decision the  respondent  does  not
identify an error in law. Instead the respondent emphasises her own  mistake
in ignoring the direction issued the First-tier Tribunal Judge Cope.

12.   Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow  binding
authority or to distinguish it  with  adequate  reasons,  ignoring  material
considerations by taking into account  immaterial  considerations,  reaching
irrational conclusions on facts or evaluation or giving  legally  inadequate
reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,  constitute  errors  of
law.

13.   In  this  case  the  Judge  produced  a  well-reasoned  decision.  The
decision is brief because  of  the  paucity  of  evidence  produced  by  the
respondent. The Judge did not simply  refer  to  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Cope's direction, instead she manifestly  considered  all  of  the  evidence
placed before her before reaching a  decision  which  was  well  within  the
range of decisions available to the Judge. The decision does  not  displayed
bias, as is argued for the respondent. (The decision  might  have  displayed
bias if the  Judge  had  ignored  the  respondent's  failure  to  adhere  to
directions). In reality, the decision explains to the objective  reader  why
the appellant was successful and why the respondent was unsuccessful.

14.   In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that (i) Although there is a legal duty to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

15.   A fair reading of the Judge's decision  indicates  that  there  is  no
misdirection of law and that the fact-finding process cannot be  criticised.
As I have already indicated, the Judge's conclusion was a  conclusion  which
was reasonably open to her.

16.   I find that the Judge's determination when read as  a  whole  set  out
findings that were  sustainable  and  sufficiently  detailed  and  based  on
cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

17.   No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

18.   The appeal is dismissed.


Signed      Date 20/11/2015

                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

