
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
IA/41292/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 4 September 2017                    |     On 20 October 2017              |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                               MR Wadood Faiq
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Richardson, instructed by Adam Bernard
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  Griffith,  promulgated  on  16   January   2017,
    dismissing his appeal against the decision of the respondent made on  6
    October 2014 to refuse to grant him  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom on human rights grounds.

 2. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  in  March  2005  with  the
    assistance of an  agent.   He  did  not  enter  lawfully  and  made  an
    application for discretionary leave on the basis  of  family  with  his
    wife on 28 January 2010.  That application was refused as was a further
    application pursuant to EU law in March 2012.

 3. Following that, the appellant applied for leave to remain as the spouse
    of a settled person which was refused on 13 March 2013 without right of
    appeal.  Finally, in June 2014 he applied for leave to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom on the basis of his private and family  life  which  was
    refused on 6 October 2014.

 4. The appellant's appeal against that decision came before the First-tier
    Tribunal on 11  September  2015.   In  a  decision  promulgated  on  17
    November 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese allowed the appeal  on
    human rights grounds.  The respondent appealed  against  that  decision
    and, in a decision promulgated on 16 August 2016 Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Canavan allowed the respondent's appeal and remitted  the  decision  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision on the issues.

 5. Having heard the evidence from the appellant and his  wife,  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Griffith concluded that the appellant had not shown that
    there were insurmountable obstacles to family life  continuing  outside
    the United Kingdom, the judge noting:-

      i) that there is no evidence he had been attempting to look into  what
         job opportunities might be available in Pakistan,  the  appellant's
         wife  not  having  undertaken  research  or  taken  any  steps   to
         familiarise herself with her husband's country of origin;

     ii) that the appellant had not been able to  point  to  any  particular
         risk to himself or his wife that could be taken into  account  with
         regards to the security situation [42];

    iii) that the appellant's wife  could  be  helped  to  learn  the  local
         language and generally to adapt to life in Pakistan [43];

     iv)  that  the  appellant's  wife's  medical  conditions  were  not  so
         significant that she was unable to hold down a full-time job  [44],
         the medical evidence in her case being brief and  inadequate  [45],
         the letter from the GP saying she was not fit to work away from the
         home being contradicted [45];

      v) the appellant's wife knew  that  she  was  in  the  United  Kingdom
         illegally and the relationship continued in the  knowledge  of  his
         lack of status [47] the evidence suggesting that neither had  given
         any thought to the consequences to their relationship in the  event
         of an adverse decision;

     vi) the appellant had not demonstrated that the difficulties could  not
         be overcome or that there would be very serious  hardship  for  the
         appellant or his wife thus it had not been shown  that  there  were
         insurmountable obstacles [48].

 6. The judge then went on to consider Article 8 outside the Rules  in  the
    alternative concluding that removal would be proportionate;  and,  that
    little weight could be given both to his private and family  life  [51]
    given that he had never been in the United Kingdom with leave.

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that:-

      i) that the appellant's wife would find it hard to  integrate  into  a
         country where societal attitudes to  women  differed  greatly  from
         those in the United Kingdom and that it would be hard  for  her  to
         find equivalent work in Pakistan [v]; and, that she has  a  history
         of fibromyalgia and depression finding it hard to mobilise  in  the
         mornings, has many close family members in the United Kingdom;

     ii) that the test of insurmountable obstacles was not properly applied;

    iii) that  although  following  Agyarko  v  SSHD  [2015]  EWCA  440  the
         threshold for success outside the Rules was high, the  proper  test
         is not "insurmountable obstacles" but whether it is  reasonable  to
         expect the couple to relocate; that if a test of reasonableness  is
         applied outside the Immigration Rules  it  is  submitted  that  the
         appeal is one that which could succeed on Article 8 grounds.

Submissions

 8. Mr Richardson submitted that this was not a perversity challenge rather
    it was submitted that the judge had applied too  high  a  threshold  in
    making the assessment  both  under  EX.1  and  Article  8  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.  He submitted further that there  would  significant
    hardship for the appellant's spouse given her age, her family  ties  to
    the United Kingdom as she is now a grandmother.  He  submitted  further
    she was unable to function in terms of  working  without  help  of  the
    applicant.

 9. Mr Richardson accepted that the letter from  the  doctor  was  somewhat
    "cryptic" but was sufficient.  It was not suggested that she could  not
    get treatment in Pakistan and thus it would not reach the threshold for
    a protection claim nonetheless it was a matter which needed to be taken
    properly into account given  the  substantial  differences  in  culture
    between the United Kingdom and Pakistan.  It  was  submitted  following
    the evidence set out at D2 and D3 that in reality the appellant's  wife
    would be living in fear, the  evidence  of  visits  by  United  Kingdom
    nationals to Pakistan not being not relevant given that  many  of  them
    would be of Pakistani origin.

10. Mr Richardson submitted further the judge's approach to  the  threshold
    set out in EX1 was effectively  equating  it  to  a  situation  whereby
    Article 3 was engaged.  Mr Richardson  submitted  further,  relying  on
    Agyarko v SSHD [2017] UKSC 11 that there were  exceptional  grounds  on
    which this case could succeed.  It was submitted further that  in  this
    case there was limited public interest given that it was accepted  that
    the appellant's wife earned approximately �20,000 per annum although he
    accepted there was a  possibility  of  refusal  pursuant  to  paragraph
    320(11) of the Immigration Rules.

11. He submitted further the delay in this case needed  to  be  taken  into
    account [see paragraph 52] there being a lack of the Secretary of State
    seeking to enforce after 2010.

12. Mr Whitwell submitted whilst it could not properly be argued  that  the
    judge had applied a too higher test, following the decision in  Agyarko
    and  whilst  living  in  Pakistan  might  well   be   unpalatable   and
    unattractive nonetheless this  did  not  meet  the  relevant  threshold
    either to succeed under EX1 or in Article  8  outside  the  Rules.   He
    submitted that little weight could be taken  to  the  medical  evidence
    given that the letter  was  undated.   He  submitted  in  reality  this
    decision was simply a disagreement with the  findings  reached  by  the
    judge.  He submitted that Chikwamba was not engaged in this case  given
    that there was no indication that Appendix FM-SE had been met nor could
    it be said that the application would succeed.

13. Mr Whitwell submitted that although there had been delay in  this  case
    it was not to the detriment of the appellant and was to a great  extent
    negated, much of time relied upon being when the Secretary of State was
    considering application made by the appellant.

14. In response Mr Richardson submitted  that  the  judge  had  misdirected
    himself in law.

The Law

15. Paragraphs EX1(a) and paragraph (b) of Appendix FM provide as follows.
    EX.1. This paragraph applies if
 1. (a) ...
     (b) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a
    partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled in the UK or
    in the UK with refugee leave or humanitarian protection, and there are
    insurmountable obstacles to family life with that partner continuing
    outside the UK.
    EX.2. For the purposes of paragraph EX.1.(b) "insurmountable obstacles"
    means the very significant difficulties which would be faced by the
    applicant or their partner in continuing their family life together
    outside the UK and which could not be overcome or would entail very
    serious hardship for the applicant or their partner.

16. How the phrase "insurmountable obstacles"  was  to  be  interpreted  is
    directly addressed in Agyarko [see paragraph 39] and what is  meant  by
    insurmountable obstacles was discussed in detail at [42] to  [48].   At
    paragraph 44 Lord Reed held  that  the  definition  of  "insurmountable
    obstacles" which appears in paragraph EX.1 and is defined in  paragraph
    EX2 is consistent with the  meaning  which  can  be  derived  from  the
    Strasbourg case law:-

    "44. Domestically, the expression 'insurmountable obstacles' appears in
          para EX.1(b) of  Appendix  FM  to  the  Rules.   As  explained  in
          paragraph 15 above, that  paragraph  applies  in  cases  where  an
          applicant for leave to remain under the partner route is in the UK
          in breach of immigration laws, and requires that there  should  be
          insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  with   that   partner
          continuing  outside  the  UK.   The   expression   'insurmountable
          obstacles'  is  now  defined  by  para  EX.2  as   meaning   'very
          significant difficulties which would be faced by the applicant  or
          their partner in continuing their family life together outside the
          UK and which could not be overcome or would  entail  very  serious
          hardship for the applicant or  their  partner.'   That  definition
          appears to me to be consistent  with  the  meaning  which  can  be
          derived from the Strasbourg case law.  As  explained  in  para  16
          above, paragraph EX.2 was not introduced  until  later  after  the
          dates of the  decisions  in  the  present  cases.   Prior  to  the
          insertion of that definition, it would nevertheless be  reasonable
          to infer, consistently with the  Secretary  of  State's  statutory
          duty to act compatibly with Convention rights, that the expression
          was intended to bear the same meaning  in  the  Rules  as  in  the
          Strasbourg case law from which it was derived.  I would  therefore
          interpret it as bearing the same meaning as  is  now  set  out  in
          paragraph EX.2."

17. With regard to "exceptional circumstances" Lord Reed held as follows:-

    "54. As explained in paragraph 49 above, the European  court  has  said
          that, in cases  concerned  with  precarious  family  life,  it  is
          'likely' only to be in exceptional circumstances that the  removal
          of the non-national family member will constitute a  violation  of
          article 8.  That reflects the weight attached to  the  contracting
          states' right to control their borders, as an attribute  of  their
          sovereignty, and the limited weight which is generally attached to
          family  life  established  in  the   full   knowledge   that   its
          continuation in the contracting state is unlawful  or  precarious.
          The court has repeatedly acknowledged that 'a state  is  entitled,
          as a matter of well-established international law, and subject  to
          its treaty obligations, to control the entry of non-nationals into
          its territory and their residence there' (Jeunesse, para 100).  As
          the court has made  clear,  the  Convention  is  not  intended  to
          undermine  that  right  by   enabling   non-nationals   to   evade
          immigration control by establishing a family life while present in
          the host state unlawfully or temporarily, and then  presenting  it
          with qa fait-accompli.  On the contrary  'where confronted with  a
          fait accompli the removal of the non-national family member by the
          authorities  would  be  incomparable  with  article  8   only   in
          exceptional circumstances' (Jeunesse, (para 114).

    60.  It remains the position that the ultimate question is how  a  fair
          balance  should  be  struck  between  the  competing  public   and
          individual interests involved, applying  a  proportionality  test.
          The Rules and Instructions in issue in the  present  case  do  not
          depart from that position.  The Secretary of State has not imposed
          a test of exceptionality, in the sense which Lord Bingham  had  in
          mind: that is to say, a requirement that the case  should  exhibit
          some highly unusual feature, over and above the application of the
          test of proportionality. On the contrary, she has defined the word
          'exceptional', as already explained, as meaning 'circumstances  in
          which refusal would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for
          the individual such that the refusal of the application would  not
          be  proportionate'.   So  understood,   the   provision   in   the
          Instructions that leave can be granted  outside  the  Rules  where
          exceptional circumstances apply involves the  application  of  the
          test of proportionality to the  circumstances  of  the  individual
          case, and cannot be regarded as incompatible with article 8.  That
          conclusion  is  fortified  by  the  express   statement   in   the
          instructions  that  'exceptional'  does  not  mean  'unusual'   or
          'unique': see para 19 above".

18. It is evident from the  judge's  decision  at  [39]  that  he  directed
    himself properly in accordance with the Rules and it cannot  be  argued
    this is not, in light of the decision in Agyarko, a misdirection on the
    law.  At paragraph 48 the judge said as follows:-

    48.  I do not doubt that  the  prospect  of  resuming  family  life  in
          Pakistan is not attractive and I accept that for  Mrs  Faiq  there
          would be difficulties caused by her unfamiliarity with the country
          and culture of Pakistan and  her  medical  problems,  but  on  the
          evidence before and for the reasons I have set out above mean I am
          not  satisfied  that  the   appellant   has   demonstrated   those
          difficulties cannot be overcome or that the evidence  demonstrates
          very serious hardship for the appellant or his  wife.   For  these
          reasons I am not  satisfied  the  appellant  can  show  there  are
          insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life   with   his   partner
          continuing outside the UK in Pakistan

19. Further, and in considering Article  8  outside  the  Rules  the  judge
    directed himself at [49] in line with SS Congo and Others  [2015[  EWCA
    Civ 387  and  also  at  53  that  he  could  not  find  any  compelling
    circumstances that tipped the balance in the  proportionality  exercise
    in the appellant's favour.

20. Contrary to Mr Richardson's submissions, I do not accept that there  is
    any sufficient indication that the judge has not properly  adopted  the
    correct test in law as explained in Agyarko.

21. Further, and in any event, I consider that the findings of fact made by
    the judge were open to him.  The medical evidence is  vague  and  while
    saying that the applicant's wife  requires  significant  assistance  to
    help her function at home, and that "she is not fit to work  away  from
    home" this seems inconsistent with the evidence that she does work full-
    time away from the home.  It is also evident from the letter  dated  23
    November 2011 that there is no evidence of depression present the  last
    prescription being in January 2009 and it is simply not  clear  at  all
    what date of the letter which appears at page DO maybe.  In  any  event
    the letters are vague and fail properly to set out in any  detail  what
    help is needed.

22. Whilst I accept that the travel advice provided by  FCO  in  particular
    may relate primarily to UK citizens of Pakistani heritage visiting that
    country, equally there is no evidence to support that submission or  to
    show that those such as the appellant's wife would be  particularly  at
    risk.   There  is  insufficient  medical  evidence  to  show  that  the
    treatment she receives for her condition is unavailable in Pakistan  or
    only at excessive cost.  It was open to the judge to  conclude  on  the
    evidence before him that the applicant's wife may be able to get a  job
    and it is clear that he did take into account the evidence at  [24]  of
    ties to the United Kingdom.

23. Viewing the decision as a whole the judge gave adequate and sustainable
    reasons for concluding that the test set out at EX1 was not met and  it
    cannot be argued that the judge misdirected himself in law  as  to  the
    relevant test.

24. Further, it cannot be argued that  the  judge  misdirected  himself  in
    respect of an Article 8 claim outside the Rules.  He  was  entitled  to
    conclude for the  adequate  and  sustainable  reasons  given  that  the
    balance of proportionality did not fall in the appellant's favour.   It
    was open to him to apply properly as he did Section 117B  of  the  2002
    Act, dealing with the various factors at [51] to [52].

25. It cannot be argued that this case is comparable to that of  Chikwamba.
    The appellant has  a  poor  immigration  history  and  as  Mr  Whitwell
    submitted there is insufficient evidence to show  that  Appendix  FM-SE
    was met.  Further, in any event it is always open to the  Secretary  of
    State to refuse pursuant to paragraph 320(11) of the Immigration Rules.
     Thus, following the decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Gill in  Chen,  I
    do not consider it can be said that the judge erred in his approach  to
    this issue.

26. With respect to the delay, I am not satisfied that  it  can  be  argued
    that any delay in this case falls to  be  counted  in  the  applicant's
    favour given the length of time he has  spent  in  the  United  Kingdom
    without leave and the length of time spent pursuing actions.

27. Accordingly, for these reasons, I find the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did not involve the making of an error of law and I uphold it.



SUMMARY OF DECISION


 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law and I uphold it.


Signed                                  Date 19 October 2017
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul




