
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41059/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 26 January 2015                            |On 27 February 2015           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             mr md. aminul islam
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     (On file - London Law Associates).  No attendance
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State but for the purposes of  this  decision  I  shall  refer  to  the
    parties as they were described before the First Tier Tribunal, that  is
    Mr Aminul  as  the  appellant,  and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
    respondent.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of  Bangladesh  born  on  15  May  1988  and
    appeals against a decision to refuse him leave to remain as  a  Tier  4
    Student Migrant under the points-based  system  (PBS)  under  paragraph
    245ZX(c) with reference to paragraph 116(e) of Appendix A and paragraph
    245ZX(d) of the Immigration Rules.

 3. The appellant made an application on 31 August 2012 for leave to remain
    and that application was refused on 19 September 2013.

 4. The respondent set out in the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  that  the
    appellant  had  claimed  30  points  under  Appendix  A  for  a   valid
    Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies (CAS)  assigned  by  St.  John's
    College, London.  However the Secretary of State was not satisfied that
    he had a valid CAS because the Tier 4 sponsor register was  checked  on
    19 September 2013 and St. John's College Limited was not listed at that
    date.  The appellant's claim was also rejected under Appendix C of  the
    Immigration Rules in respect of funds.

 5. Specifically it was stated that the CAS  the  appellant  had  submitted
    with his application referred to reference  number  E4G1JL3C16POQ6  was
    assigned by St. John's  College.   The  Tier  4  Sponsor  Register  was
    checked on 19 September 2013 and St. John's  College  Limited  was  not
    listed as a Tier 4 Sponsor on that date.

 6. The  reasons  for  refusal  letter  dated  19  September  included  the
    following statement:

         "On 25 July 2013 you were informed of this and allowed 60  days  to
         obtain a new sponsor and CAS, however you have not provided  a  new
         CAS within that period.

         As such, you are not in possession of a valid CAS and so  have  not
         met the requirements of the rules.  Therefore, no points have  been
         awarded for your CAS."

 7. The appellant had submitted an application giving  his  address  as  24
    Mayfield Road, Birmingham B19 1RL.  At all times this was his address.

 8. First-tier Tribunal Judge Walters on 29 October 2014 allowed the appeal
    on the papers stating, at paragraph 10, the following:

         "The Grounds of Appeal state that as at  the  date  of  application
         (31.8.12) St. John's College was a  listed  Tier  4  Sponsor.   The
         appellant continues to submit that if, by the time the decision was
         made (19 September 2013) the Tier 4 Sponsor licence of  St.  John's
         College had been revoked  by  the  respondent  then  the  appellant
         should have been given 60 days to apply to a  new  college  and  to
         provide a new CAS  following  the  case  of  Patel  (Revocation  of
         Sponsor Licence - fairness) India [2011] UKUT 00211."

 9. It should be noted that the First-tier Tribunal  recorded  on  29  July
    2014 that there was a request for a paper hearing made by the appellant
    and a direction was given by another Judge, First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Clarke,  to  the  effect  that  the  respondent  should  serve  on  the
    appellant's representatives and to the Tribunal Service within 21  days
    evidence that St. John's College Limited was not listed on the  Tier  4
    Sponsor Register.  This direction was issued on 5 August  2014.   There
    appeared to be no response to that direction.

10. At paragraph 11 of the determination of Judge Walters it was stated, "I
    took into account what was said in Patel's case has been adopted by the
    respondent as a policy.  She clearly has not followed that policy,  nor
    complied with Directions" (sic).

11. An application for permission to appeal  was  made  which  pointed  out
    paragraphs 10 and 11 as  cited  above  and  stated  that  in  fact  the
    respondent had pointed out that on  20  July  2013  the  appellant  was
    informed of this (St. John's College no longer being on a register) and
    allowed 60 days to obtain a new sponsor and CAS.   The  judge  made  no
    reference to this.

12. Permission to appeal was allowed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Pirotta
    on the basis that the judge had not taken into account all the evidence
    and was misled by the failure of the Secretary of State to comply  with
    the directions though the failure would have been of no effect  as  the
    appellant did not challenge the facts stated by the Secretary of  State
    that the original college had lost their sponsor status by the date  of
    the decision.

13. At the hearing Mr Whitwell submitted that he relied on the grounds  for
    permission to appeal and the short point was that  the  judge  had  not
    taken into account the fact that the respondent had  indeed  given  the
    appellant 60 days to enrol with an alternative sponsor  and  produce  a
    new CAS.  The fact that the  directions  were  not  complied  with  was
    immaterial.

14. My findings are  that  nowhere  in  the  determination  was  there  any
    reference made by Judge Clarke to the fact that the respondent  claimed
    the appellant had been allowed 60 days to obtain a new  sponsor.   This
    was a material fact which was not taken into account.

15. I therefore set aside the determination decision of Judge  Walters  and
    re-make the decision.

16. Enquiries were made of London Law Associates who failed  to  attend  at
    the hearing.  A notice of the hearing  including  the  date,  time  and
    venue was served on London Law Associates on 19 December 2014.   At  no
    point had  the  appellant  advised  the  Tribunal  that  he  no  longer
    instructed  London  Law  Associates  and  no  correspondence  had  been
    received from London Law Associates.  I find  that  the  appellant  was
    properly served with the notice of the  hearing  and  that  the  matter
    should proceed in the absence of representation or the  appellant.   On
    telephone enquiries made by the clerk prior to  the  re-making  of  the
    decision there was no response.

17. In compliance with The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008
    (as amended) two letters were produced, written from the respondent  to
    the appellant at the appellant's address given in the application  form
    and dated 24 June 2013 and 25th July 2013.  These confirmed that on  19
    February 2013 the UK Border  Agency  made  a  decision  to  revoke  the
    licence of St. John's College, Limited and therefore  the  CAS  he  had
    submitted with his outstanding application was no longer valid and  his
    application would fall to be refused.

18. Particularly the letter dated 24th June 2013 stated that:

         "Before the final decision is made and in line with our  Rules  and
         guidance we will suspend consideration of your  application  for  a
         period of 60 days.  (During this 60 day period it is open to you to
         withdraw your application and  submit  a  fresh  application  in  a
         different category or to leave the United Kingdom)."

    This letter pointed out that it was open to the appellant to  obtain  a
    new CAS for a course of study at a fully licensed  Tier  4  educational
    sponsor and then submit an application  to  vary  the  grounds  of  his
    original application.

19. A further letter dated 25 July 2013 was sent to the appellant from  the
    respondent confirming that rather than having to pay  he  could  return
    the enclosed application form.  Once  again  this  stated  that  on  19
    February 2013 the UK Border Agency  had  revoked  the  licence  of  St.
    John's College and that his existing CAS was no longer valid.

20. I find that the appellant had been notified on two occasions  that  the
    CAS from St. John's College was no longer valid.  He had been  given  a
    60 day period within which the appellant failed  to  submit  a  further
    application.

21. In his grounds of appeal the appellant stated that he should have  been
    given 60 days to send in a new CAS which indeed he was.

22. I find from the evidence presented that there was no unfairness exacted
    upon the appellant.  He was given by way of the letter of 24 June  2013
    adequate opportunity to submit a new CAS and he failed to do so.

23. EK (Ivory Coast) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 1517 refers to the "fair balance  to  be  struck  between  the
    public interest in having the PBS regime operated in a simple  way  and
    the interests of the particular individual  who  may  be  detrimentally
    affected by such operation".  The Secretary of State was aware  of  the
    change of position in relation to St. John's  College  and  indeed  had
    brought the facts and effects on the appellant's case to his attention.

24. In sum the appellant cannot  comply  and  could  not  comply  with  the
    Immigration  Rules  at  the  date  of  his  application   and   despite
    correspondence from the respondent, failed to provide a new CAS.  There
    was no unfairness in the approach of the Secretary of State.

25. The appellant requested that this matter be dealt with  on  the  papers
    and submitted no further evidence in support of his application  and  I
    find that even if his Article 8 private life was engaged, the  decision
    to refuse to vary his leave to remain is  not  disproportionate,  Patel
    and ors  v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72, Nasim and  others  (Article  8)  [2014]
    UKUT 00025 (IAC), Section  117B  of  the  Nationality  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.  He entered the United Kingdom in 2009 to  study,  can
    have had no expectation of being able to remain and  always  knew  that
    his leave was temporary.

26. I therefore refuse the appeal under the Immigration Rules and on  human
    rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 26th February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed        Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
