
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber  Appeal Numbers: IA/41375/2014
                                                               IA/41380/2014
                                                               IA/41383/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 October 2015                    |On 19 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE S H STOREY


                                  Between:

                                   1) O s
                                   2) j s
                                   3) p s
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Aborinsade, OA Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. This is an appeal made by the above Appellants against the decision  of
    the First-tier  Tribunal  (FTT)  dated  15  May  2015,  dismissing  the
    Appellants' appeals against the decision of the Secretary of State (the
    Respondent) dated 6 October 2014, in which she refused the  Appellants'
    application for further leave to remain.

 2. The Appellants are all nationals  of  Nigeria.  The  first  and  second
    Appellants arrived in the  UK  with  entry  clearance  as  visitors.  A
    subsequent application for  leave  as  a  visitor  was  refused  on  26
    November 2008. The first and  second  Appellants  have  overstayed  the
    period of their lawful leave. The third Appellant was born in the UK on
    11 October 2010 but has never had leave to enter or remain in the UK.

 3. On 22 August 2012, the family applied for leave to  remain  in  the  UK
    under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules and Articles 3 and 8 of
    the ECHR, and section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration
    Act 2009 (the BCIA 2009). The crux of the third Appellant's application
    was that he  suffers  was  sickle  cell  disease,  a  life  threatening
    condition for which inadequate treatment is available  in  Nigeria.  As
    such, requiring him to return  to  Nigeria  was  inhuman  or  degrading
    treatment contrary to Article 3 as it posed risks to his health and his
    life. In support of the application, the  Appellant  submitted  medical
    evidence, in particular, the documents appearing at pages 20  -  24  of
    the bundle produced before us. This evidence together  with  additional
    documentation was before the Respondent and the FTT.

The FTT's decision

 4. The FTT heard the Appellants' appeals on 20 April 2015 and  promulgated
    the decision and reasons on 18 May 2015.

 5. The judge stated that the Appellants' application for leave  to  remain
    was made outside of the immigration rules. That  may  explain,  why  he
    failed to address  the  Immigration  Rules,  specifically  Appendix  FM
    (Family Life) and Rule 276ADE (Private Life); Articles 3  and  8  ECHR,
    which, along with section 55,  were  all  given  consideration  by  the
    Respondent in her comprehensive 10.5 page decision.  By  contrast,  the
    FTT decision was a page and a half in  length  with  findings  of  fact
    limited to twelve lines.

 6. In the application for permission dated 26  May  2015,  the  Appellants
    submit that the FTT decision is erroneous in law because the judge:

          a) misdirected himself in law;

          b) made inadequate findings of fact;

          c) failed to provide adequate reasons;

          d) failed to take relevant matters into consideration; and

          e) reached unreasonable conclusions.

 7. I will return to these grounds later as far as this is necessary.

Proceedings before the Upper Tribunal

 8. At the hearing before us, Mr Aborisade, for the  Appellants,  submitted
    that the FTT judge had failed to give anxious scrutiny to  the  medical
    evidence which he said suggested that 50% of children with sickle  cell
    disease in Nigeria die before the age of 10  years  owing  to  lack  of
    adequate treatment. He considered that there were significant obstacles
    to reintegration of the family into Nigeria as a result  of  the  third
    Appellant's medical condition, the length of residence in the UK of the
    family and the impact on the children's  education  as  well  as  other
    factors. He maintained that the evidence before  the  FTT  demonstrated
    that exceptional circumstances existed but that the FTT judge failed to
    conduct a balancing exercise and compounded his  error  by  failing  to
    provide adequate reasons for the decision.

 9. Mr Tufan, for the Respondent, submitted that sickle cell anaemia  is  a
    common disease in Nigeria for which treatment is readily available.  He
    said that it was  not  a  life  threatening  condition  and  hence  the
    Appellants' circumstances were not exceptional. He submitted  that  the
    medical evidence was unreliable because the report (documents 22 -  25)
    did not explain the source of the statistics quoted.  Whilst  conceding
    that the FTT judge did not fully consider the evidence before  him,  or
    address the discrepancies  in  the  evidence,  Mr.  Tufan  nevertheless
    maintained that the FTT decision did not disclose a material  error  of
    law.

Was there an error of law?

10. The FTT judge was required to make clear findings of fact  setting  out
    what evidence he accepted; what evidence he rejected; whether there was
    any evidence, on which he was undecided; and what, if any, evidence  he
    regarded as irrelevant.  Furthermore,  where  the  FTT  had  before  it
    medical or other expert evidence, it was required to give  reasons  for
    accepting or rejecting the evidence. None of thee things  was  done  by
    the FTT judge. His one and a half  page  decision  was  devoid  of  any
    consideration of the Immigration Rules, Appendix FM (Family  Life)  and
    Rule 276ADE (Private Life), Articles 3 and 8  of  the  ECHR,  the  duty
    under section 55 of the BCIA 2009 and the medical evidence relating  to
    the third Appellant. Whilst short reasons can  be  perfectly  adequate,
    the brevity of this decision demonstrates a lack  of  anxious  scrutiny
    and a failure to give consideration to relevant factors as required  by
    law.

Decision

11. For all the above reasons, we are unable to accept the  submissions  of
    the Secretary of State's representative that the FTT has made  adequate
    findings of fact and given sufficient  reasons  for  its  decision.  We
    therefore set aside the decision of the FTT for error of law and  remit
    the case for rehearing by a new tribunal. The effect of  this  decision
    is that  a  new  tribunal  will  now  hear  the  appeal.  It  is  their
    responsibility to evaluate the evidence and to reach a decision  on  an
    assessment of that evidence, applying the relevant law.

12. The Appellants should note that the  fact  this  appeal  has  succeeded
    before the UTIAC is not an indication of the likely outcome before  the
    new tribunal.


|Signed:                              |Dated:                               |
|[pic]                                |                                     |
|Sehba H Storey                       |10  November 2015                    |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |                                     |

