
[pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/41965/2013
                                                               IA/42799/2013
                                                               IA/42806/2013
                                                               IA/42810/2013
                                                               IA/42826/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons                 |
|On 26 June 2015                      |On 9 July 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before


                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL KAMARA


                                   Between

                                   MR OSB
                                   MRS LTO
                                 MASTER FAOB
                                  MISS HIAB
                                  MASTER FB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Anifowoshe, counsel instructed by Apex
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    1. This is an appeal against the determination promulgated on 9  October
       2014, of First-tier Tribunal Judge Woolf.

    2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules
       2008 (SI 2008/269) I  make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
       Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings
       or any form of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
       identify the original appellants. This direction applies to,  amongst
       others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this direction  could
       give rise to contempt of court proceedings. I do so as three  of  the
       appellants in this case are minors.

  Background

    3. The first appellant claimed to have last entered the  United  Kingdom
       21 April 1993 in possession of a visit visa valid for 6  months.  The
       second appellant entered the United Kingdom  in  February  2001.  The
       first appellant applied for indefinite leave to remain on  the  basis
       of long residence on 28 November 2005. The remaining appellants,  who
       are the first appellant's partner and minor children,  were  included
       in that application. The Secretary of State did not accept the extent
       of the first appellant's claimed residence and concluded that he  was
       an illegal entrant who  could  only  demonstrate  10  years  unlawful
       residence between 2003  and  25  September  2013,  the  date  of  the
       decision. The respondent considered that the  first  appellant  could
       not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules in relation to his
       family because his wife and children were all Nigerian nationals  who
       could be expected to return to Nigeria together  as  a  family  unit.
       Furthermore, it was not accepted that the first appellant had severed
       all ties with Nigeria. The respondent did not accept that her 8  year
       delay in considering  the  application  in  question  amounted  to  a
       compelling factor. The grounds of appeal  stressed  the  respondent's
       alleged failure to take into consideration the best interests of  the
       minor appellants.

    4. During the course of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal which
       took place on 23  September  2014,  the  respondent's  representative
       relied on Edgehill v SSHD [2014] EWCA 402 and conceded that the Rules
       set out  in  Appendix  FM  were  not  to  form  part  of  the  FTTJ's
       consideration.

    5. Judge Woolf found as follows:

        a. The first appellant had not amassed 14 years  residence  in  the
           United Kingdom.

        b. The oral evidence of the first and second appellant as  well  as
           their witnesses lacked credibility.

        c. The first and  second  appellants  had  not  lost  all  ties  to
           Nigeria.

        d. The minor appellants had no special needs  and  could  adapt  to
           life in Nigeria.

        e. It was not unduly harsh for the children  to  leave  the  United
           Kingdom with their parents.

        f. The respondent unreasonably delayed making a  decision,  however
           the application was without merit from the outset.

  Error of law

    6. The renewed grounds of appeal submit:

        1. The Designated Judge who previously refused  permission  made  a
           material mistake of law and fact in not  appreciating  that  the
           letter from the mosque referred to in the grounds formed part of
           the respondent's  bundle  which  was  before  the  FTTJ  at  the
           hearing.

        2. The FTTJ failed to consider and give due weight  to  the  letter
           from the General Secretary of a mosque dated 6 October 2013.

        3. The FTTJ ought to have considered that  the  respondent's  delay
           had resulted in the appellants' family  lives  being  integrated
           into the United Kingdom. In particular, the fourth appellant was
           now aged 9.

    7. Permission was granted solely in relation to the arguable failure  of
       the FTTJ to consider  the  letter  from  the  mosque  and  consequent
       failure to give adequate reasons  for  her  findings  on  a  material
       matter.

    8. The respondent sent a Rule 24 response to the grant of permission  to
       appeal.  In essence, the respondent opposed the  appellants'  appeal,
       albeit it was accepted that the document from the mosque was in  fact
       contained in the respondent's bundle before the FTTJ. It  was  argued
       that owing to the judgment in Singh v SSHD [2015] EWCA  Civ  74,  the
       post  9  July  2012  Immigration  Rules  applied  and  therefore  the
       appellant would not have been able to benefit from the 14  year  Rule
       even if the letter from the mosque was accepted.

    9. At the hearing before me, Ms Anifowoshe accepted that the issues  had
       been narrowed by UTJ Goldstein who granted leave; in  that  the  only
       issue at large was in relation to the letter  from  the  mosque.  She
       accepted that the new Rules applied and therefore the  appellant  was
       required to show that he had been continuously residing in the United
       Kingdom for 20 years, which she considered he had demonstrated.

   10. For her part, Ms Fijiwala relied on the points made in  the  Rule  24
       response.  In  addition,  she  drew  my  attention  to  an   apparent
       discrepancy in the letter from the mosque. Ms Anifowoshe attempted to
       respond to that criticism in her closing submissions.  I  should  add
       that  Ms  Anifowoshe  referred  to  the  considerable  delay  in  the
       respondent reaching a decision in this case as well as the fact  that
       the fourth appellant is due to turn 10 years old on 28 June 2005. She
       accepted that neither of these issues was  relevant  to  the  grounds
       upon which permission to appeal had been granted.

  As was agreed  by  the  representatives,  owing  to  the  fact  that  the
       respondent's decision was made on 25 October 2013,  that  is  outside
       the 2 month window identified by the Court of Appeal  in  Singh,  the
       new Rules apply and therefore the first appellant is required to show
       that he meets the requirement of 20 years continuous residence in the
       United Kingdom. In any event, it is the first appellant's  case  that
       he arrived in the United Kingdom on 21 April 1993 and had  this  been
       accepted, he would have completed 20 years residence as of  the  date
       of the respondent's decision.


   11. The FTTJ, at paragraph 16 of the determination, noted the appellant's
       claim that "he has been actively involved with his Mosque,  which  he
       joined in 1999." However, at paragraph 41, she remarks that "there is
       no evidence from the Mosque  to  corroborate  the  first  appellant's
       claim that (he) started attending there in 1999." That was incorrect.
       Enclosed with the notice of appeal as well as the respondent's bundle
       of evidence, was a copy of a  letter  from  Assalatur-Rahman  Islamic
       Association UK dated  6  October  2013  and  signed  by  the  General
       Secretary, Akeem Rilwan-Adagun, which stated that both the first  and
       second appellants had been "attending  service  and  praying  in  our
       mosque since 1999."

  Notwithstanding the FTTJ's error in stating that there had been no letter
       from the mosque and also in failing to have regard to the letter from
       the mosque, I find that this did not amount to a  material  error  of
       law for the following reasons.


   12. The said letter from the mosque said, unequivocally,  that  both  the
       first and second appellants had attended services and prayed  at  the
       mosque since 1999. However it is the second appellant's case that she
       did not arrive in the United Kingdom until 2001.  Ms  Anifowoshe  had
       little to say in relation to this clear discrepancy. I note that  the
       mosque letter concerns both the first and second  appellants  equally
       and I do not accept that  the  contents  relate  only  to  the  first
       appellant. It is therefore unlikely that the FTTJ would have attached
       much weight to that item had she considered it.

   13. Furthermore, at paragraph 41 of the determination, the  FTTJ  further
       remarks as follows;

           "... there is absolutely  nothing  in  documentary  form  for  a
           period spanning 10 years between the appellant's claimed date of
           entry and 2003 undermines the credibility of his claim. There is
           not a bill, not a photograph, not a letter or  any  document  in
           support. I regard the  complete  absence  of  other  documentary
           evidence of an unofficial nature, an  official  nature  in  what
           ever identity the appellant claims he was using before he  began
           to use his true one, undermines the credibility of his claims to
           be continuously resident since 1993."

   14. The letter from the mosque is not a contemporaneous  document  dating
       from the 10 year period commencing 1993. It is dated 2013 and had the
       FTTJ considered it, it could not be said that it would  have  made  a
       material difference to her conclusions as to the length of the  first
       appellant's residence.

   15. Even if the FTTJ had accepted the mosque letter as  evidence  of  the
       first appellant's residence since 1999, this  would  have  taken  him
       only  part  of  the  way  to  satisfying  the  20   years   residence
       requirement. A period of residence from 1999 until the  date  of  the
       hearing would amount to only 15  years  residence.  In  addition,  Ms
       Anifowoshe did not argue that any finding that  the  first  appellant
       had been resident in the United Kingdom since 1999, that  is  for  an
       additional  4  years,  would  have  tipped  the   balance,   in   the
       proportionality assessment, in the appellants' favour.

   16. In these circumstances I am satisfied that there are no errors of law
       in the FTTJ's determination such that the decision ought  to  be  set
       aside to be remade.

Conclusions

  The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
  making of an error on a point of law.

  I do not set aside the decision.






  Signed:   Date: 28 June 2015


  Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
