








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41684/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 11 September 2014                         |On: 14 October 2014          |
|Prepared:  6 October 2014                     |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the home department


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             Miss Shanshan Zhang
                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Lewis, counsel (instructed by Etmont Solicitors
LLP)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. For the sake of convenience I shall refer  to  the  appellant  as  the
      secretary of state and the respondent as "the claimant."


   2. The claimant is a national of China, born on 15th  January  1983.  Her
      appeal against the decision of the secretary  of  state  refusing  her
      application made on 17th September 2012 for indefinite leave to remain
      in the UK on the basis of long residence (10  years)  under  paragraph
      276E of the Immigration Rules was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Thew in a determination promulgated on 29th May 2014.


   3. The Judge upheld  the  appellant's  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds
      (Article 8).


   4. The Judge found that although the appellant had no family in  the  UK,
      she had lived here apart from brief holidays abroad and business trips
      to China, lawfully since she arrived on 8th September 2002. There were
      compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised under the  rules.
      She directed herself in accordance with Gulshan (Article 8 - New Rules
      - Correct Approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC).


   5. On 25th July 2014,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Collyer  granted  the
      secretary of state's application for permission to appeal. The grounds
      relied on asserted that the  Judge  did  not  address  how  length  of
      residence,  in  isolation,  equated  to   'arguably   good   grounds'.
      Additionally, she had not addressed  how  length  of  residence  is  a
      compelling circumstance not sufficiently recognised under  the  rules,
      per Gulshan. It was submitted that the length of residence within  the
      UK is sufficiently recognised within  the  Immigration  Rules,  namely
      Rule 276ADE. The contention  was  that  this  constitutes  a  material
      omission in the light of the claimant's concession, paragraph 50, that
      the Immigration Rules, including paragraph 276ADE, could not be met.


   6. In granting permission, Judge Collyer stated that it was arguable that
      the Judge made a material error of law that could have made a material
      difference to the outcome of the appeal. That included the  contention
      that the Judge had not given adequate reasons  as  to  why  length  of
      residence  within  the  UK  amounts  to  arguably  good  grounds   and
      compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised under  the  rules
      justifying a further consideration of Article 8.


   7. Mr Kandola relied  on  the  secretary  of  state's  grounds.  He  also
      submitted that the Judge failed to  consider  whether  in  considering
      compelling circumstances, the claimant could have returned to China in
      order to make an application for  entry.  There  would  have  been  no
      compelling reason preventing that.


   8. In particular, he submitted that Gulshan had not been properly applied
      and that there had been no adequate reason given as to why there  were
      compelling circumstances.


   9. In response, Mr Lewis submitted that it was wrong  ('nonsensical')  to
      argue that the only reason given  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      regarding compelling circumstances was the length  of  time  that  the
      claimant had remained in the UK. He accepted that the Judge did  refer
      to the length of time that she had remained here  (since  2002)  which
      was clearly a relevant consideration.


  10. However, the Judge had also taken into account various other  factors.
      That included the significant delay by the secretary  of  state  which
      had led to one period of absence from the UK being extended beyond the
      period of time that the claimant and her employer company  had  wished
      her to remain outside the UK.


  11. He submitted that  the  reasons  given  by  the  Judge  had  not  been
      challenged. Further, there  had  never  been  any  suggestion  by  the
      secretary of state or by the Home Office Presenting Officer before the
      First-tier Tribunal that a Tier 2 application abroad should have  been
      considered.


  12. Accordingly, contrary to the challenge by the secretary of state,  the
      compelling circumstances and indeed  the  findings  by  the  Judge  in
      relation to Article 8, and  proportionality,  did  not  only  rely  on
      "length of residence".


  13. Mr Lewis also referred to s.117A of the 2014 Act where regard must  be
      had in all cases to the considerations listed  in  s.117B.   Paragraph
      117B sets out the public interest  considerations  applicable  in  all
      cases and to Article 8.


  14. He submitted that the factors identified by parliament as relevant  to
      the determination of Article 8 were  factors  which  indeed  had  been
      considered by the First-tier Tribunal Judge when  she  determined  the
      appeal.


     Assessment


  15. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Thew  has  given  a  careful  and  detailed
      determination setting out her findings. The claimant had not been able
      to succeed under the long provision rules.


  16. She directed herself in accordance with Gulshan, supra. She found that
      the decision was lawful and in pursuance  of  the  legitimate  aim  of
      maintenance of effective immigration control.


  17. She then turned to the issue of proportionality "and whether there are
      compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised under the Rules."
      [53].  She set out the immigration history of the claimant who arrived
      in the UK on 8th September 2002, and who had been here  for  11  years
      and eight months as at the date of the hearing.


  18. She then noted the significant contribution that was being made by the
      claimant to British companies operating in China. Mr Lewis  emphasised
      that this also entailed humanitarian work.


  19. Further, she has set out as part of the proportionality exercise other
      factors including the fact that for almost all  the  time  that  spent
      outside the UK, was on account of her undertaking work  on  behalf  of
      British companies, under their direction and control. In  turn,  those
      companies have recognised the important role  the  claimant  plays  in
      enabling them to meet orders for export.


  20. The Judge also had regard to her academic achievements  including  her
      degree whilst in the UK, her command of English  which  she  developed
      and which enabled her  to  undertake  employment  with  two  companies
      involving the production of goods in China.  She was held in very high
      regard by LGS which dealt extensively  with  the  United  Nations  and
      associated projects.


  21. Her current employer has identified the fact that  she  has  made  and
      continues to make a very significant contribution to the  achievements
      of that company and that it would be difficult to replace her.


  22. A significant component considered by the  Judge  was  the  effect  of
      delay by the secretary of  state,  which  she  properly  found  to  be
      unreasonable in  the  circumstances.  She  found  that  she  had  been
      required to leave the UK because of the expiry of her visa. Whilst she
      remained in China, there was legitimate work for her to do, which  was
      for a considerably longer period  than  either  she  or  her  employer
      wished. Accordingly she was absent from the UK for  257  days  between
      17th November 2012 and 3rd August 2011, as a result of the time  taken
      by the secretary of state to make a decision regarding her work permit
      visa (paragraph 19).  The delay was a factor that  could  properly  be
      considered in relation to the proportionality component in the  appeal
      [60].


  23. The Judge found that the claimant had decided to make her life in  the
      UK through study and employment and the extent of the social contacts.
      She undoubtedly had extensive  social  life  in  the  UK.  She  had  a
      relationship with a Mr Patterson who became very fond of her over  the
      years. Their relationship is one which is important to them both.  Her
      private and social life centres upon the life she has built herself in
      the UK and her ties to China have lessened over the years [61].


  24. The Judge also took into account the  public  interest  including  the
      need to maintain fair and effective  immigration  controls.  She  also
      took into account the reasons why the claimant was unsuccessful in her
      application; the extent and contribution to the business interests  of
      her employees as shown in the evidence; the high regard they have  for
      the claimant as well as the other factors  already  referred  to.  The
      Judge  found  that  these  have  a   significant   impact   upon   the
      proportionality exercise.


  25. At paragraph 65, the Judge stated that this  is  an  unusual  case  in
      which she found that all of the factors set  out  at  paragraph  52-64
      cumulatively  amount  to  compelling  circumstances  not  sufficiently
      recognised under the Immigration  Rules.  Accordingly,  she  concluded
      that the decision constituted a disproportionate interference with the
      claimant's Article 8 rights.


  26. I accordingly find that the secretary of state's  submissions  in  the
      grounds relied on and in particular the assertion that the  Judge  did
      not address how the length of  residence,  in  isolation,  equated  to
      arguably good grounds, is not sustainable.


  27. It was clearly not the only reason given by the Judge. Whilst that was
      a relevant consideration, she also referred to all the  other  factors
      which I have summarised, including the delay in excess of  six  months
      occasioned by the secretary of  state   resulting  in  the  claimant's
      remaining outside the UK.


  28. I find that the First-tier Judge  has  properly  directed  herself  in
      respect of the relevant law when considering Article 8, including  the
      reference to relevant authorities such as  EV(Kosovo)  v  SSHD  [2008]
      UKHL 41 and the decision of the Court of Appeal in  UE  (Nigeria)  and
      Others v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 975.


  29. I accordingly find that the Judge has  given  proper  and  sustainable
      reasons, taken cumulatively, for the conclusions reached.


     Decision


        The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not  involve  the
making of any        material error of law. The decision shall  accordingly
stand.







                               Signed                     Date 6/10/2014


                               C R Mailer
                               Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




