
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/41761/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 November 2015                  |On 21 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                               USMAN ALI WARIS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Sowerby (counsel) instructed by Farani Javid
                    Taylors, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Grant  promulgated  on  25  May  2015,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal.

Background

3.    The Appellant was born on  08  January  1986  and  is  a  national  of
Pakistan.

4.    The appellant entered the UK  as  a  student  in  December  2006.  The
respondent granted leave to remain as a student until 11 August  2012,  when
the appellant was granted leave to remain until 11 August 2014 as a  Tier  1
(Post study work) migrant.  On 3 October 2014  the  respondent  refused  the
appellant's application  for  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  as  a  Tier  1
(Entrepreneur) migrant.

The Judge's Decision

5.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal Judge E B Grant ("the Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision.

6.    Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 7 August 2015 Judge Simpson  gave
permission to appeal stating

    "It is clear from the RfRL that the issue was whether A was  active  in
    the occupation described  by  the  job  title  provided  i.e.  Business
    Development Manager (3545) and it was open to the Judge to find that  A
    was not working in that capacity. However, given the judge's finding at
    [6] that A does provide accountancy services, it  is  arguable  that  A
    meets that requirement as he would still have an occupation which was a
    NQF level 4 or above. The Judge's comments at [7] are confusing but  in
    any event, I am satisfied that NQF level 6 is  a  higher  qualification
    than NQF level 4! Whilst A did not meet the  requirements  of  para.41-
    SD(e)(v) as he had not submitted a Companies House Current  Appointment
    report, it is arguable that the Judge ought to have considered  whether
    Paragraph 245AA could apply, given that that was the  only  outstanding
    issue and addressing that issue might well lead to a grant."

The hearing

7.    (a)   Mr Sowerby, for the appellant moved the grounds  of  appeal.  He
    told me that there are three bases for  the  respondent's  reasons  for
    refusal. The first is a failure of the appellant to submit a  Companies
    House current appointment report. The second  is  that  the  respondent
    believes that the  services  provided  by  the  inconsistent  with  the
    services of a business development manager (SOC Code 3545).  The  third
    is that the  respondent  argues  that  the  contract  produced  by  the
    appellant did not specify the duration.  Mr  Sowerby  took  me  to  the
    productions in the appellant's bundle. At page 184 there is a copy  the
    appellant's business card which designs the appellant  as  a  financial
    and management consultant. He referred to the business plan at page  45
    of the  bundle  which  sets  out  the  activities  of  the  appellant's
    business. He told me that there was inadequate documentary evidence  to
    establish that the appellant provides  services  consistent  with  code
    3545.

    (b)    He  argued  that  the  Judge  had  failed  to  take  account  of
    documentary evidence produced and referred to the  contracts  produced,
    referring specifically to the clause setting out the duration  of  each
    contract. He argued that the Judge should have been  satisfied  on  the
    documentary evidence produced, but that in any event the  Judge  failed
    to make findings in fact relating to the evidence  placed  before  her.
    Instead at [5] and [6] the Judge rests on bald assertions.

    (c)    Mr Sowerby  concedes  that  the  appellant  did  not  produce  a
    Companies House current appointment report, but argued that there was a
    wealth of  evidence  to  indicate  that  the  appellant  is  a  company
    director, so the provisions of paragraph 245AA were engaged. He  argued
    that it would have been a simple matter for an immigration  officer  to
    either ask the appellant for  a  Companies  House  current  appointment
    report, or to make an online enquiry at the Companies House website. He
    argued that the decision contains a number of material  errors  in  law
    and urged me to allow the appeal and set the decision aside.

8.    For the respondent, Ms  Holmes  argued  that  the  decision  does  not
contain any material errors of law, and that the Judge's  consideration  was
restricted to the standard occupation code selected by the appellant; it  is
not for the Judge to shoehorn the  appellant  into  the  category  that  the
appellant did not choose himself. She told me that there was  in  any  event
inadequate evidence to establish that the  appellant  fell  into  any  other
category. Ms Holmes conceded that the contract  produced  by  the  appellant
did have duration specified, but argued that there was  nothing  wrong  with
the refusal in relation to the category codes so that there is more to  this
case than an argument about evidential flexibility  in  terms  of  paragraph
245AA. She told me that the decision does not  contain  material  errors  of
law and should be allowed to stand

Analysis

9.    In R (on the application of Nwaiwu) [2014] EWHC 3694   the  Claimant's
entrepreneur application was refused when he failed to provide  a  specified
document, stating  that  funds  held  in  the  First  Bank  of  Nigeria,  an
institution not regulated by the Financial Services Authority ("FSA"),  were
transferable to the UK. The Claimant submitted on Judicial Review  that  the
question of whether the funds were transferable  was  a  minor  detail,  and
thus the SSHD ought to have taken steps to correct the omission pursuant  to
paragraph 245AA of the Immigration  Rules  and  her  evidential  flexibility
policy. It was held that the  responsibility  was  at  all  times  upon  the
Claimant to ensure that he provided the  relevant  information  pursuant  to
the requirements of the Immigration Rules upon  which  his  application  was
based. He could not reasonably expect the Secretary of State  to  accept  an
application, which was lacking in a material respect (paras 34 and 39).  The
failure to confirm that the funds in question were transferable  to  the  UK
was not  a  minor  omission.  Pursuant  to  the  true  construction  of  the
Immigration Rules, and the proper application of the evidential  flexibility
process, the Secretary of State was not obliged to make  good  the  omission
in the Claimant's  application.  It  had  not  been  shown  that  there  was
injustice or unfairness to the Claimant at any stage.

10.   It is not disputed that the appellant made  an  application  referring
to  the  codes  of  practice  for  skilled  workers  and  alighting  on  the
definition of his job description as SOC 3545.  The  Judge  correctly  notes
that SOC 3545 is recognised by the respondent as an  occupation  skilled  to
NQF level 6. At first instance, counsel argued that the  appellant  provides
accountancy services which fits within code 2421 ([7] of the  decision),  an
occupation skilled to NQF level 6. In  the  appellant's  witness  statement,
the appellant insists that he  provides  services  falling  within  the  job
description set out SOC code 3545.

11.   It is argued that the difference in the job descriptions  of  the  two
occupations is academic because if the  appellant  occupation  falls  within
the definition of either  of  the  SOC  codes  then  he  is  working  in  an
occupation skilled to NQF level 6 or above and so fulfils  the  requirements
of the immigration rules (Appendix A table 4).  The  fundamental  flaw  with
that argument is that the respondent's decision is based on the  information
provided  by  the  appellant  to  support  his  application.  The  appellant
submitted his application on the basis that his occupation fell within  code
3545. It is for the respondent to consider the application  as  it  is  made
and make a  decision  on  the  basis  of  the  evidence  that  supports  the
application.

12.   It is not for the respondent  to  unilaterally  amend  an  applicant's
application. It is not for the respondent to receive a bundle  of  documents
forming an application and then try to guess what the  application  is  for.
If the  appellant  had  identified  code  to  2421  in  the  course  of  his
application, then the respondent's decision might have been  different;  but
he had not. The respondent was asked to  consider  an  application  made  by
reference to code 3545. The respondent did that.

13.   At [7] the Judge correctly  identifies  code  3545  as  an  occupation
skilled to NQF level 6. The Judge then goes on to say "I find  as  a  matter
of  fact  the  appellant  has  not  demonstrated  that  he  could  meet  the
requirements of the  occupation  code  he  placed  on  his  application  SOC
3545....." That is a finding of  fact  which  was  manifestly  open  to  the
Judge; it is clearly a finding  of  fact  with  a  firm  foundation  in  the
evidence presented to the Judge. It  is  a  clear  and  unambiguous  finding
which does not contain an error of law, material or otherwise.

14.   The appellant's argument  that  the  respondent  should  have  applied
paragraph 245 AA of the immigration  rules  cannot  succeed  because  it  is
entirely dependent on the only flaw in his application being the absence  of
a current appointment report from Companies House.  The  appellant  concedes
that he did not produce a current appointment report. It is argued that  the
respondent should have carried out her  own  investigations  to  obtain  the
relevant report, because it is argued that it is obvious that the  appellant
was a director of a limited company.

15.   In many ways this appeal is an  attempt  to  re-litigate  the  matters
which were before the Judge at first instance. The  grounds  of  appeal  and
submissions  from  counsel  take  issue  with  the  logic  employed  by  the
respondent in the decision  appealed  against,  and  seek  to  use  the  re-
litigation of those arguments as  an  argument  that  the  Judges'  decision
contains a material error of law.

16.   The Judge has adopted  an  unusual  style  in  writing  her  decision,
importing the appellant's witness statement into the decision and  importing
parts of the respondent's decision into the Judge's decision, but the  Judge
clearly sets out findings between [5] & [8] which were  open  to  the  Judge
and which lead the Judge to the conclusion  that  the  appellant  could  not
benefit of paragraph 245AA of the immigration rules.  The  Judge's  findings
may be brief, but they lead the Judge to  an  unassailable  conclusion  that
the  appellant's  application  did  not  fulfil  the  requirements  of   the
immigration rules.

17.   It is not an arguable error of law for a  Judge  to  give  too  little
weight or too much weight to a factor, unless irrationality is alleged.  Nor
is it an error of law for a Judge to fail to deal with every  factual  issue
under  argument.  Disagreement  with  a  Judge's  factual  conclusions,  his
appraisal of the evidence or assessment of credibility,  or  his  evaluation
of risk does not give rise to an error of law. Rationality is  a  very  high
threshold and a conclusion is not irrational just because  some  alternative
explanation has been rejected or can be said to be possible.

18.   In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that (i) Although there is a legal duty to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the Judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

19.   A fair reading of the Judge's decision  indicates  that  there  is  no
misdirection of law and that the fact-finding process cannot be  criticised.
As I have already indicated, the Judge's conclusions are  conclusions  which
were reasonably open to her to reach.

20.   I find that the Judge's determination when read as  a  whole  set  out
findings that were  sustainable  and  sufficiently  detailed  and  based  on
cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

21.   No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

22.   The appeal is dismissed.


Signed      Date: 3 December 2015

                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
