
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41335/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 5th May 2015                              |On 22nd May 2015              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD


                                   Between

                           mr Wahid Otman M Miftah
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain - Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison - Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by Wahid Otman M Miftah, a citizen of Libya born 21st
    September 1985.  He appeals against  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Holt  issued  on  January  2015  dismissing  his  appeal
    against the decision of the Respondent made  on  2nd  October  2014  to
    refuse to grant a residence card as a spouse of an  EEA  citizen.   The
    Secretary  of  State  refused  the  application  because  she  was  not
    satisfied that the Sponsor was exercising treaty  rights  or  that  the
    parties were in a genuine and  subsisting  relationship,  the  marriage
    being one of convenience.  Permission to appeal was granted  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Baker on 11th March 2015.  He said:

         "3.  It is arguable that the Judge's treatment of  the  content  of
             the  interview  record  and  the  witness  statement  of   the
             Appellant,  particularly  paragraph  4  which  set   out   the
             Appellant's responses to the  reasons  for  refusal  based  on
             their respective answers given at their respective  interviews
             about how they met and their knowledge of  each  other  (i)  -
             (xvii) erred.  It is arguable that there is a  material  error
             of law in not addressing  the  specific  points  made  in  the
             Appellant's witness statement seeking to rebut the  challenges
             to their relationship based on the alleged lack  of  knowledge
             displayed in their respective interviews.  Namely that in  not
             addressing the specific explanations given by the Appellant in
             respect of each point taken against them the Judge  materially
             erred as set out in paragraphs 5 to 10 of the grounds.

         4.   It is also arguable that the  Judge's  assessment  as  to  the
             reasons why the Appellant  and  representative  had  told  the
             Court  Interpreter  that  interpretation  in  Arabic  was  not
             necessary and he proceeded to speak in English throughout  the
             hearing  was  a  procedural  error  arguably   amounting,   as
             submitted, to a procedural impropriety amounting to a material
             error of law."

 2. In the grounds seeking permission there is a  lengthy  submission  that
    the Judge failed to consider the response made by the Appellant to  the
    list of inconsistencies relied on by the Respondent.  These answers are
    indeed set out at length in the grounds.  It is  submitted  that  there
    was sufficient information in the interview  to  demonstrate  that  the
    relationship was genuine and detail is given.  This was highly material
    evidence.  The Judge did refer to the interview but simply set out  the
    objections that had been contained within the refusal  letter  and  did
    not consider the detailed explanations that the Appellant  provided  in
    his witness statement.

 3. With regard to the issue of the language spoken and the interpreter, it
    is submitted that only a Romanian interpreter was  requested.   It  was
    the Appellant's intention to give evidence in  English  and  the  Judge
    materially erred in failing to consider this.

 4. The final submission is that the Judge materially erred in  considering
    the issue of the wife's employment.  The evidence of the Appellant  was
    that he goes to pick her up from work and she said that she is  looking
    for full-time work because she earns so little.  The Judge commented at
    paragraph 16 that the payslips show a very modest income  yet  she  did
    not consider the evidence that  was  given  orally  in  court  in  this
    regard.

 5. I would say at this point that it was further stated that at  paragraph
    13 Judge Holt said that she  did  not  find  credible  the  Appellant's
    explanation when questioned about difficulties of communication between
    him  and  his  wife  that  when  they  struggled  to  communicate  they
    communicated in Turkish.  It was submitted that she erred in dismissing
    the claimed relationship on this point only, without considering  other
    evidence, particularly the interview record  that  the  Respondent  had
    served on the morning of the hearing.

 6. In response to the grant of permission the Respondent simply said  that
    the Judge directed herself appropriately and the findings were open  to
    her on the facts.

 7. Firstly with regard to the language, what Judge Holt says at  paragraph
    13 is that she asked questions of the Appellant to try to ascertain how
    they could communicate in Turkish given that his  spouse  was  Romanian
    and he was Libyan.  The explanation given was that the Sponsor's father
    was Turkish and therefore she had learned some Turkish.  The  Appellant
    then said that Turkish and Arabic  are  very  similar  languages.   The
    Judge expressed her surprise at that assertion and noted that when  the
    issue was explored yet  further  what  became  apparent  was  that  the
    Appellant said that Turkish and Arabic  had  certain  words  in  common
    which were essentially naming words i.e. nouns, and  that  the  parties
    were able sometimes to identify certain  things  because  the  noun  in
    Turkish was the same or very similar to that in Arabic.  The Judge made
    what I consider to be a reasonable finding that having the  ability  to
    identify certain nouns in  common  and  being  able  to  speak  Turkish
    together as a shared language are two  wholly  different  things.   She
    found that the Appellant  had  grossly  exaggerated  their  ability  to
    communicate in this way.

 8. The Judge did not  specifically  mention  the  responses  made  by  the
    Appellant to the list of inconsistencies relied on by  the  Respondent.
    She did however say that she had considered all the evidence  that  was
    in front of  her  and  the  response  of  the  Appellant   was  in  the
    Appellant's bundle as part of a statement.

 9. The submission of Mr Hussain was that there was clear evidence that the
    marriage is genuine and that the couple are very happy  together.   His
    submission was that if the Judge had properly considered the  responses
    to the alleged inconsistencies in the evidence  and  to  their  claimed
    lack of knowledge of each other the appeal would have been allowed.

10. The difficulty I have with the submissions of  the  Appellant  in  this
    case is that Judge Holt found that there was no  satisfactory  evidence
    to support the contention that the Sponsor is exercising treaty  rights
    in the UK.  She had a few wage slips but she was not  satisfied  as  to
    their authenticity because they were not supported by any evidence from
    any other source.  There were no tax or national  insurance  documents.
    As was confirmed to me at the hearing there  was  no  letter  from  the
    employer.  Further Judge Holt notes at paragraph 17 when commenting  on
    the fact that there was a glaring discrepancy in the evidence about how
    she got the job (she had  said  that  her  husband  had  organised  and
    obtained it for her and her husband in evidence had emphatically denied
    that) the Appellant  said that he had been confused over this. He  said
     he thought the Presenting Officer had been asking him  about  his  own
    employment with Miami Pizza.  Judge Holt noted that this issue was  put
    to the  Sponsor  four  times  and  she  was  quite  satisfied  that  he
    understood the question and gave the answer that his wife had found the
    job herself.  She went on to say that his  explanation  made  no  sense
    whatsoever  because  he  is  not  supposed  to  be  working  so  it  is
    incomprehensible how he thought the question could possibly  relate  to
    him.  Again reasonably, she took the view that his answer might suggest
    that he had been  working  which  would  have  the  effect  of  further
    undermining his credibility and reliability.

11. I also consider that  some  of  the  inconsistencies  relied  upon  are
    serious ones.  There was an inconsistency as to where the  couple  met.
    The Appellant had said that they met at a social event  at  a  friend's
    house in 2012.  The Sponsor said they met in a coffee  shop  in  London
    Road in Liverpool.  The Appellant said that they met  at  Costa  Coffee
    every morning and his spouse that they would meet every  two  or  three
    days.  I think these are serious inconsistencies.  I accept and  indeed
    the Judge took into account that they knew certain  things  about  each
    other but that does not mean that the discrepancies  do  not  exist  or
    that they are not material.

12. Another serious and frankly  inexplicable  inconsistency  is  that  the
    Appellant said that the Sponsor had been employed by  Miami  Pizza  for
    four years and the Sponsor said that she had only been there for  eight
    months.  According to the interview the couple met in 2012 and  married
    on 15th December 2013.  The interview took place on 2nd September 2014.
     The couple were married by then.  I cannot  understand  how  he  could
    have thought that she had been working with Miami Pizza for four years.
     She was only there for eight months which would mean that she did  not
    start her job until after the wedding and the couple had been  together
    for at least six months prior to the wedding.  His explanation  in  his
    statement was that he had genuinely assumed that she had  been  working
    there for four years but this discrepancy is  frankly  inexplicable  if
    they were together.

13. I have considered the submissions made by Mr  Hussain,  taking  account
    particularly of the fact that it is clear  from  the  Appellant's  bank
    statement that he pays the landlord and the bills but  there  are  cash
    sums being paid into his account, the  source  of  which  are  unknown.
    Judge Holt said she took account of all the evidence  that  was  before
    her and I see no reason to doubt this.

14. It may well be an arguable error not to have mentioned specifically the
    Appellant's  responses  to  the  inconsistencies  relied  on   by   the
    Respondent but I do not accept that it is  and  having  considered  the
    findings made and the reasons given it is certainly not material.   The
    appeal could not have succeeded in any event because  on  the  evidence
    that was before the Tribunal about the  Sponsor's  job  the  Judge  was
    entitled to make the findings she did and the  appeal  could  not  have
    succeeded in the absence of satisfactory evidence that the Sponsor was,
    at the date of the hearing, exercising treaty rights in the UK.







Notice of Decision

I therefore find that the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  does  not
contain a material error of law and that decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                              Date: 18th May 2015

N A Baird
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
