
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/41419/2013
     IA/41420/2013
     IA/41421/2012
     IA/41422/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 27 August 2014                             |On 4 September 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                              fahim sahabooleea
                         beebee shakila sahabooleea
                             jameel sahabooleea
                          abdool kaleem sahabooleea
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr J Martin, instructed by Raj Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants are nationals of Mauritius.  The  first  two  appellants
    are husband and wife and are  the  parents  of  the  third  and  fourth
    appellants.  They have been in the United Kingdom  since  2003.   Their
    leave expired in November 2005.  An application prior to that  made  by
    the first appellant to extend leave to remain as a student was refused.
     Thereafter they were  in  the  United  Kingdom  illegally  until  they
    applied for discretionary  leave  to  remain  in  October  2010,  which
    application was refused.  There was a further application  and  refusal
    followed by an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal subsequent to which an
    appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  was  allowed.   Thereafter  there  were
    further representations made to the respondent for discretionary  leave
    to remain and unsuccessful applications for judicial review.

2.   The first appellant said he had a cooking and catering  business.   The
    third appellant, Jameel is in a relationship with Zahraa Bhuttoo  which
    has lasted for some three years.  Mrs Sahabooleea  has  been  diagnosed
    with Fabri disease which is a rare  disease  for  which  she  has  been
    receiving treatment.  Jameel gave evidence to say that  he  and  Zahraa
    Bhuttoo planned to marry once she  had  finished  university.   At  the
    moment they saw each other a couple of times a month and kept in  touch
    in the usual way otherwise.  Abdul had completed his A levels  and  had
    applied to college but was refused admission because he  had  no  valid
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom and thereafter had to assist  his
    father in the catering business.

3.   The judge accepted a great deal of the evidence of the appellants.   He
    had reservations about language in that although he accepted  that  the
    second appellant had a good command of English he found it difficult to
    believe that she spoke nothing  but  English  in  a  family  where  her
    husband and  sons  were  brought  up  speaking  Creole  for  all  their
    formative years and in her husband's case for a substantial part of his
    adult life.  As regard Jameel's relationship  with  his  girlfriend  he
    noted that Zahraa Bhuttoo had not made a witness statement and they did
    not spend a great deal of time together and he  doubted  whether  their
    future together was as  assured  as  Jameel  indicated.   He  had  some
    reservations about the extent to which they had cut themselves off from
    their families in Mauritius.  He did not accept the second  appellant's
    evidence as to the treatment for Fabri disease in  Mauritius  including
    not accepting that chemotherapy was not available there.

4.   The essential issue was that of Article  8  private  life.   The  judge
    noted the relevant legal tests in this regard and considered the matter
    on the basis  of  whether  the  removal  of  the  appellants  would  be
    proportionate.  He took into account such authorities as  MM,  MF,  and
    Izuazu.  With regard to the issue of delay he noted that the delay  had
    been longer than might reasonably have been expected but said  that  it
    had to be seen in the context of the appellants' willingness to  remain
    without leave in the United  Kingdom  rather  than  return  home.   The
    appellants, he said, had chosen to remain in the United Kingdom knowing
    that they had for part of the time no basis for remaining and for  part
    of the time no more than a hope for being able  to  remain.   They  had
    built up their family life in  the  United  Kingdom  to  a  significant
    extent during the period when they had not had  leave  to  remain.   He
    took account of all the evidence before him, noting that they had built
    up substantial private lives in the United Kingdom and that there  were
    particular  factors  such  as  the  second  appellant's  illness,   the
    development of the family business, Jameel's development of his working
    life and his relationship with his girlfriend and so on.  On the  other
    hand, as he noted there were the requirements  of  immigration  control
    and the economic welfare of the country.  He said that the family  were
    not a drain on the resources of the United  Kingdom,  although  he  had
    noted earlier that it was the case that they were not paying tax  since
    they were not allowed to work.  He had not been told whether or not the
    second appellant's medical treatment had been paid for  privately.   He
    said that the maintenance of immigration control was something to which
    the Secretary of State gave considerable weight and  he  was  bound  to
    accept the importance which she accorded  to  that  consideration.   He
    concluded that the appellant's  case  was  heavily  outweighed  by  the
    considerations put forward by the Secretary  of  State  and  that  they
    could not succeed either individually or collectively.

5.   The appellants sought and were granted  permission  to  appeal  against
    this decision on the basis that it was  arguable  that  the  judge  had
    erred in law in his assessment of proportionality, in  particular  with
    regard to the medical evidence concerning the second appellant and  the
    issue of delay.  It was argued that insufficient weight had been  given
    to the relationship between Jameel and Ms Bhuttoo, and it  was  unclear
    what weight had been attached to the various arguments.

6.   In his submissions Mr Martin adopted and developed the points  set  out
    in his grounds.  He argued,  with  regard  to  the  second  appellant's
    illness, that although the evidence was  not  as  comprehensive  as  it
    might have been, it showed that she suffered from a rare  illness,  and
    it was clear from the doctor's letter that she was undergoing tests and
    had been for years while the diagnosis was made and that further  tests
    were needed.  He did not challenge what the judge said  about  evidence
    of treatment in Mauritius, but it was clear that  there  had  to  be  a
    proper diagnosis and that had not yet been completed and the judge  was
    in error in that regard.  Also  the  second  appellant  said  that  the
    doctors wished to study her for the purposes of research and that was a
    relevant factor in bearing in mind the interests of the United Kingdom.



7.   As regards delay, although it was the case that they  could  have  left
    at any time, that was true of anyone who is the victim  of  delay,  and
    the judge had not applied the guidance set out in EB (Kosovo).  He  had
    not given weight to the appellants' increased connection to society and
    the fact that the delay diminished somewhat the force of the  Secretary
    of State's arguments.  He had  not  given  proper  weight  to  Jameel's
    relationship with his girlfriend and it was  unclear  what  weight  had
    been given to the evidence.

8.   In her submissions Ms Isherwood argued that the determination was well-
    reasoned.  The family could have left at a time when they had no  leave
    and chose not to.  They had set up a business and did not pay  tax  and
    she assumed that the medical treatment had not been paid for.  They had
    minimised their  connection  to  Mauritius.   It  could  be  seen  from
    paragraph 25 that the second appellant had seen a doctor  in  Mauritius
    in connection with her illness  and  clearly  had  had  some  treatment
    there.  All the matters which formed the basis of the  claim  could  be
    addressed by returning to Mauritius and applying for  entry  clearance.
    The judge had given appropriate consideration to the  issue  of  delay.
    The positive factors had  been  noted  and  set  against  the  negative
    factors.  The grounds under  challenge  amounted  to  disagreement  and
    there was no material error of law in the determination.

9.   By way of reply Mr Martin argued that the issues  of  tax  and  medical
    treatment had not really featured in the judge's decision and could not
    be read into it.  There had been no diagnosis of the second appellant's
    illness until she came to the United Kingdom and it was relevant to her
    that the diagnosis was made correctly and was important for her private
    life.  The judge had missed the point.  As regards delay the  important
    point was the length of time they had been in the  United  Kingdom  and
    the development of stronger roots during that time and  the  diminution
    in the respondent's argument as to the impermanence of their stay as  a
    consequence.  The judge's approach would remove the efficacy of the  EB
    (Kosovo) guidance.

10.  I reserved my determination.

11.  I have set out above in some detail the judge's findings.

12.  As regards the issue of the second appellant's  illness,  I  note  from
    paragraph 9 of her statement that the results were awaited of a meeting
    with a panel of doctors on 6 May 2014.  She also gave evidence that the
    doctors said that they would like her  to  take  part  in  a  study  of
    Fabri's disease.  The judge set out her evidence at paragraphs 23 to 25
    of the determination.  He did not accept her claim that there  were  no
    chemotherapy facilities available in Mauritius.  He accepted  that  she
    had benefited from sophisticated diagnostic  processes  in  the  United
    Kingdom and noted that  such  facilities  might  not  be  available  in
    Mauritius but there was no evidence that the diagnostic  process  would
    be continuing but even if it were that aspect of the appeal fell a long
    way short of Article 3 and as the evidence stood there was little which
    it contributed to the Article 8 claim.  He bore in mind what  had  been
    said by the Court of Human Rights in Bensaid [2001]  ECHR  82  in  this
    regard.  Clearly therefore he bore in mind that  treatment  which  does
    not reach the severity of Article 3 treatment  may  nonetheless  breach
    Article 8 in the private  life  aspect  where  there  are  sufficiently
    adverse effects on physical and moral integrity.

13.  It seems to me that the judge did address adequately the issue  of  the
    second appellant's health and the evidence in  that  regard.   He  bore
    this in mind in the context of Article 8 private life including  noting
    that there was  no  evidence  that  the  diagnostic  process  would  be
    continuing.  The challenge in this regard is a matter  of  disagreement
    only.

14.  As regards the issue of delay, the judge noted that the delay had  been
    longer than might reasonably be expected but considered that  this  had
    to be seen in the context of  the  appellants'  willingness  to  remain
    without leave in the United Kingdom rather than return home.   He  said
    that the delay that had played a part in this case  strengthened  their
    claim to remain in the United Kingdom as had  been  indicated  by  Lord
    Bingham in  EB  (Kosovo)  [2008]  UKHL  41,  having  earlier  noted  at
    paragraph 38 Mr Martin's submissions  quoting  from  EB  (Kosovo)  with
    regard to the three relevant  factors  which  are  summarised  in  that
    paragraph of the determination.

15.  Again I consider the judge has not been shown  to  have  erred  in  his
    assessment of delay.  He took account of the guidance in  EB  (Kosovo).
    It was open to him to comment as he did on the fact that the appellants
    had had a choice and could have returned to Mauritius and  had  elected
    not to do so.  He did not substitute his reasoning in that  regard  for
    the EB (Kosovo) guidance, but, on my reading of the determination, took
    all these matters into account in concluding as he did.

16.  Thereafter he went on to summarise the relevant factors  that  favoured
    the  appellants  and  those  that  went  against  them   in   assessing
    proportionality.  I cannot see any relevant material factors that  were
    omitted from the positive  points  set  out  at  paragraph  72  of  the
    determination.  In noting the adverse factors he was entitled to attach
    the weight he did to the maintenance of  immigration  control,  and  to
    conclude as he did on the proportionality of removal.  I  consider  his
    determination in this regard as elsewhere to  be  clearly  and  soundly
    reasoned.  The challenge in my view  amounts  to  one  of  disagreement
    only, ably though it has been argued by Mr Martin.  I find no error  of
    law in the judge's decision and that decision dismissing the appeal  is
    maintained.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
