
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41914/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 February 2015                           |On 3 March 2015               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                         Md Lutfur Rahaman CHOWDHURY
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim of Counsel instructed by A1 Law Chambers
Respondent:   Mr S Walker of the Specialist Appeals Team

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 10 November 1983.   He
    entered after the grant  of  entry  clearance  as  a  student  from  25
    December  2007.   Further  leave  as  a  student  was  granted  on  two
    subsequent occasions expiring on 6  July  2013.   On  3  July  2013  he
    applied for further leave in the same capacity as a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student Migrant.

The Respondent's Decision

 2. By a decision of 17 September 2013 the Respondent refused the Appellant
    further leave as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant  under  the  Points
    Based System by way of reference to paragraphs 245ZX(a) and 322 of  the
    Immigration Rules (the Rules) because his leave had been subject to the
    provisions of Section 50 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration
    Act 2009 (the 2009 Act)  which  prevented  him  from  studying  at  any
    educational institution other than a named institution.  The Respondent
    also made a decision to remove him under Section 47 of the Immigration,
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 3. On 10 October 2013 the Appellant lodged notice of appeal under  Section
    82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended  (the
    2002 Act).  The grounds are either formulaic or assert the  Appellant's
    application was made during the subsistence of his previous  leave  and
    that he had  successfully  completed  previous  courses  and  had  been
    awarded the requisite points under the Rules for the grant  of  further
    leave.

The First-tier Tribunal Determination

 4. By a determination promulgated on 19 August 2014 Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Herlihy dismissed the Appellant's appeal.  She found that
    he had switched colleges, moving from  Grafton  College  where  he  had
    commenced studies leading to a BTEC Level 7 to a course at ISBS leading
    to an  Advanced  Diploma  in  Strategic  Management.   She  found  that
    switching to ISBS had meant the Appellant had failed to comply with the
    conditions attached to his grant of leaving limiting his place of study
    to Grafton College.

 5. She went on to dismiss the appeal by  way  of  reference  to  paragraph
    245ZY(c)(iv) of the Rules.  This was a provision that came into  effect
    subsequent to the grant of the previous leave to the  Appellant  on  13
    April 2011.

 6. On 29 September 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Lever refused the
    Appellant permission to appeal.

 7. The Appellant renewed the application to the Upper Tribunal and  on  12
    January 2014 Upper Tribunal Judge Warr granted permission to appeal  on
    the basis that the Respondent had relied on general grounds of  refusal
    and it was arguable the burden of proof was on the Respondent  to  make
    good the allegations about the alleged breach of condition.  The  Judge
    had stated the burden of proof was on the Appellant and the grounds for
    appeal were all arguable.



The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 8. Both parties agreed that  the  sole  issue  was  the  imposition  of  a
    condition under Section 50 of the 2009 Act.  It was accepted  that  the
    power imposed by Section 50 of  the  2009  Act  was  permissive.   This
    states:-

         A condition under Section 3(1)(c)(ia) of that Act may be added as a
         condition to leave given before the passing of this Act (as well as
         to leave given on or after its passing).

 9. Before the grant on 19 May 2011 to the Appellant of a residence  permit
    there was a  restriction  in  force  which  made  the  grant  of  entry
    clearance  subject  to  restriction  to  studies  identified   by   the
    Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies Checking Service records  as  an
    applicant's Sponsor.  The provisions in the  Rules  extending  this  to
    study permitted  by  the  grant  of  further  leave  came  into  effect
    subsequent to the grant of the last residence permit to the Appellant.

10. Mr Walker accepted that the burden of proof was on  the  Respondent  to
    show that a condition in this particular case had been imposed  on  the
    Appellant.  The Respondent produced no evidence that such a restriction
    had been imposed.

Findings and Consideration

11. I found that the determination of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  a
    material error of law in that the burden of proof that a restriction of
    the Appellant to studies at a named institution was on the  Respondent.
    The general restriction imposed by  paragraph  245ZY(c)(iv)  came  into
    effect after the grant of the Appellant's last leave.  It was therefore
    on the Respondent to prove that such  a  specific  restriction  on  the
    Appellant had been imposed.  Consequently,  the  determination  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal contained a material error  of  law  such  that  it
    should be set aside.

12. With the agreement of the parties I proceeded to a consideration of the
    substantive appeal.  Neither party had any further submissions to make.
    For the reasons already given, I find the decision  of  the  Respondent
    was not in accordance with the law and the Appellant has shown that  he
    satisfies the relevant  requirements  of  the  Rules.   The  appeal  is
    allowed.

Anonymity

13. There was no request for an anonymity order and having  considered  the
    appeal I find none is warranted.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material error
    of law and is set aside.  The following decision is substituted:-
    The appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules.


Signed/Official  Crest                                            Date   02.
iii. 2015



Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE RESPONDENT: FEE AWARD

The appeal has been allowed and so I have considered  whether  a  fee  award
should be made.  The basis on which the appeal  has  been  allowed  was  one
that was not raised in the original grounds of appeal  or  subsequently  for
the Appellant who simply challenged the issue of the burden  of  proof.   In
all the circumstances I do not consider  it  appropriate  to  make  any  fee
award.

Signed/Official Crest                                                   Date
02. iii. 2015



Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



