
IAC-fH-nl-V2
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41216/2010


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 February 2015                          |On 27 February 2015           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                khizar hayat
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   I issued directions on 23 July 2013 in this case, a copy  of  which  is
    appended to this determination.  As can be seen, I proposed to  provide
    a short determination  clarifying  that  Mr  Hayat's  appeal  had  been
    dismissed as originally held by the Immigration Judge.

2.   Subsequent to those directions  there  were  several  hearings  in  the
    course of which it became clear  that  the  appellant  wished  to  seek
    permission to appeal to the Supreme Court against the Court of Appeal's
    decision in his case and the matter was adjourned to  take  account  of
    that.

3.   On 20 February the appellant appeared in  person.   He  said  that  the
    appeal to the Supreme Court had been withdrawn and he sought directions
    for the disposal of the appeal to be made.

4.   I propose to dispose of this matter as I set out in the  directions  of
    23 July 2013.  At paragraph 52 in the judgment of the Court  of  Appeal
    it was made clear that there was no error in  the  Immigration  Judge's
    approach and that the Upper  Tribunal  had  erred  in  holding  to  the
    contrary.   Accordingly  the  decision  of  the  Immigration  Judge  is
    maintained and as a consequence the appellant's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 25.02.2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

