
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41603/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 19 October 2015                   |on 17 December 2015                  |
|Considered further on papers on      |                                     |
|14 December 2015                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MOLNAPA PUNBOON
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


                                  DECISION

    1. In a decision sent to the parties on 2  November  2015  I  found  the
       determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Majid  allowing   the
       respondent's (hereafter "the claimant's) appeal to  be  erroneous  in
       law because it  had  wrongly  treated  the  oral  evidence  from  the
       claimant  and  her  husband  as  an  adequate  substitute   for   the
       independent documentary evidence which the  Secretary  of  State  had
       previously  informed  the  claimant  she  required  in  order  to  be
       satisfied her ex-husband was exercising Treaty rights at the time  of
       the divorce (28 March 2013). Her  claim  was  that  at  the  date  of
       divorce her ex-husband was self-employed. The claimant's  appeal  had
       been brought against a decision of the Secretary of  State  dated  23
       September 2013 refusing to grant her permanent residence.

    2. As regards re-making of the decision, I  directed  in  that  decision
       that the  claimant be given 21 days in which to produce to the  Upper
       Tribunal further evidence relating to the claimed self-employment  of
       her husband from the point of view of HMRC.  I stated that  if  there
       was no response I would not convene another hearing but would proceed
       to re-make it on the basis of the evidence on the file. It is now  14
       December and the claimant has not replied to my  directions  nor  has
       she sent anything to explain why  she  was  unable  to  produce  this
       evidence in time. Accordingly, I turn to consider the evidence as  it
       stands. As I am now re-making the decision, I can have regard to  the
       documents produced to me at the 19 October hearing by  Mr  Walker  in
       the form of records from HMRC provided to the Home  Office.   I  must
       also, of course, have regard to the evidence in the existing file, in
       particular a number of invoices  produced  by  the  claimant  at  the
       hearing in advance of the First tier Tribunal  seeking  to  establish
       that her husband was pursuing  self-employment  during  the  relevant
       period, these being produced in support of the claim made by  him  in
       his handwritten statement and in his evidence before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge.

    3. On the basis of the body of evidence now before me it cannot be  said
       that  the  claimant  has  established  that  up  to  March  2013  the
       claimant's husband was  self-employed  or  was  otherwise  exercising
       Treaty rights; at most it showed that he had previously been employed
       for some periods between 2008-2013 but not continuously.   Indeed  it
       cannot be established that he has ever been  self-employed.  In  this
       regard I reiterate points from my earlier decision.

    4. First of all the claimant was left in no doubt  as  to  the  type  of
       documents that were required for the (ex) husband to be  accepted  as
       exercising Treaty rights at the date of divorce.  When  acknowledging
       her application the Secretary of State had identified the  particular
       types of  documentation  required.  Secondly,  the  claimant  had  no
       difficulty in producing the correct types  of  evidence  for  periods
       leading up to 2008 and to some extent for the period between 2008 and
       March 2013.  Yet there was nothing relating to the date  of  divorce.
       Thirdly, this was not a case where the claimant was unable to  obtain
       the cooperation of  the  ex-spouse  in  assisting  with  evidence  in
       support of her the appeal; indeed, the ex-husband attended  and  gave
       evidence.  The onus of proof was on the claimant and  it  had  to  be
       discharged by evidence in appropriate form.

    5. Further, as a result of an adjournment  in  December  2014  the  Home
       Office had obtained and has now produced  evidence  from  HMRC  which
       stated that there was no evidence to  show  any  employment  or  PAYE
       employment records for the years 2008/2009 to  2013/2014.  Since  the
       claimant could only succeed  if  able  to  show,  by  aggregation  or
       otherwise, that her husband had accrued five years  during  which  he
       was exercising Treaty rights continuously prior to the divorce,  this
       reinforces the reasons for concluding that the appeal by the claimant
       against refusal of a permanent residence card cannot succeed.



Notice of Decision

As was stated in my decision  sent  on  2  November  2015,  the  First  tier
Tribunal judge erred in law and his decision is set aside.

The decision I re-make is to dismiss the claimant's appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   [pic]    Date 14 December 2015

Dr H H Storey, Judge of the Upper Tribunal

