

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: Ia/41274/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at  Field House                              |Determination           |
|                                                   |Promulgated             |
|On 18th June 2014                                  |On 23 June 2014         |
|                                                   |                        |

                                   Before

                     Deputy upper tribunal Judge Frances


                                  Between:

                             MUHAMAD AFZAL AFZAL
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:           Mr M Majeed, Denning Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr S Waitwell, Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.    The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 8th December  1981.  He
      appeals against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Finch
      dismissing his appeal against the decision to refuse a residence  card
      as confirmation of a right of residence under  the  Immigration  (EEA)
      Regulations 2006.



2.    Permission to appeal was granted on 14th April  2014  on  the  grounds
      that it was arguable that there had been procedural unfairness,  as  a
      letter from the  Sponsor's  employer  sent  to  the  Tribunal  by  the
      Appellant and received on 28th February 2014 was not placed before the
      Judge before she determined the appeal on 7th March 2013.

3.          At the hearing, it was agreed by  the  parties  that  there  had
      been a procedural irregularity and the decision should be remade. Rule
      43 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  states  that
      the Upper Tribunal may set aside a decision if it is in the  interests
      of justice to do so and there has been some procedural irregularity in
      the proceedings. I find that there has been a procedural  irregularity
      in the proceedings and in the interests of justice  I  set  aside  the
      decision dated 7th March 2014.

4.    Mr Waitwell submitted that the matter should be remitted to the First-
      tier Tribunal to hear further evidence and make  findings  on  whether
      the Sponsor was a qualified person. The Sponsor had not  attended  the
      hearing before the First-tier Tribunal and her  employment  had  since
      changed. There was no issue in relation  to  whether  the  Appellant's
      continuing presence was not conducive to the  public  good  since  the
      Respondent accepted that the  Appellant  did  not  have  any  previous
      convictions.

5.    Mr Majeed agreed that the matter should be  remitted  for  substantive
      hearing and, after taking instructions, requested that the  matter  be
      heard by the same Judge.

6.    Given the  Judge's  findings  at  paragraph  13,  I  have  decided  in
      accordance with paragraph 7.2  of  the  Practice  Statements  of  25th
      September 2012 that the decision dated 7th March 2014  should  be  set
      aside and the appeal remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


                                 DIRECTIONS

(i)   The Tribunal is directed pursuant to section 12(3) of  the  Tribunals,
      Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 to reconsider the appeal at a  hearing
      before First-tier Tribunal Judge Finch.

(ii)  The parties to serve all further documentary material  on  which  they
      intend to rely not later than 7 days before the date of hearing.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
18th June 2014
