
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/41027/2014
                                                               IA/41031/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 December 2015                  |On 29 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                               MUHAMMAD WASEEM
                               shuja ul hassan
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Biggs, Hanson Young Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   These are two linked appeals in respect of a decision reached by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Roots and promulgated on 21  May  2015.   They  are
    brought pursuant to a grant of permission given by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Brunnen on 5 August 2015.

2.   The two  appellants  claimed  that  they  were  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)
    Migrants.  That claim had been rejected by the Secretary of  State.  It
    again rejected by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

3.   There were two elements of the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge which were unsatisfactory and for neither  of  which  should  the
    judge himself be responsible. The first was that the appellants elected
    not to given any oral evidence and in  those  circumstances  the  judge
    merely had the documents  to  rely  on.   The  second  was  that  those
    representing the Secretary of State and the appellants  encouraged  the
    judge to have particular regard to a statutory provision which,  as  it
    now transpires, was arguably misread by both representatives and by the
    judge himself.

4.   Amongst the various requirements that need to be addressed  by  someone
    seeking immigration status as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) is a  section  at
    paragraph 41-SD(e)(iii) and (i).  That provision reads as follows:

         "(e) If the applicant is applying under  the  provisions  in  D  in
             table 4 he must also provide:

             [...]

             (iii)  one  or  more  of  the  following  specified  documents
             covering (either together or individually) a continuous period
             commencing before 11 July 2014 up to  no  earlier  than  three
             months before the date of his application:

             (1)  advertising or marketing material, including printouts of
                  on line advertising; that has been  published  locally  or
                  nationally showing the applicant's name (and the  name  of
                  the business if applicable)  together  with  the  business
                  activity or,  where  his  business  is  trading  on  line,
                  confirmation of his ownership or  the  domain  name  of  a
                  business's website"

5.   Considerable time was  taken  up  in  argument  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and in the judge's findings as to  evidence  of  ownership  of
    domain name.  There was a dispute between the  parties  as  to  whether
    probative documentation had been submitted by  the  appellants  at  the
    time of the application.  The judge found in this instance that no such
    documentation had been submitted albeit in relation to another category
    of documentary evidence, the judge took a different  view.   The  judge
    was troubled by the lack of any oral evidence but  came  inevitably  to
    the conclusion at paragraph 34:

         "I do not find that the material proved to  have  been  before  the
         respondent with this application met the requirements of  paragraph
         41-SD(e)(iii)."

6.   The reason for the grant of permission, and as is very fairly  conceded
    by Mr Tufan,  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  before  me  today
    (although I record not when this matter was dealt with  in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal) is that the particular provision has not  been  properly
    read.  The matters addressed in (1) are alternatives and the word  "or"
    that appears part-way through that sub-paragraph is clearly used in its
    disjunctive sense. It therefore follows that confirmation of  ownership
    of a domain name is only required where a business is trading on  line.
    Here the business in question is an accountancy practice  and  although
    it advertises on line, it does not trade on line in the ordinary course
    of its business.

7.   In those  circumstances  it  was  unnecessary  for  the  appellants  to
    provide confirmation of ownership  of  the  domain  name.  The  lengthy
    enquiry embarked upon by the First-tier Tribunal Judge, with the active
    encouragement  of  both  representatives  then  appearing  was   wholly
    unnecessary.   I am  told  that  in  a  subsequent  rewriting  of  this
    particular provision the fact that this second  clause  is  disjunctive
    has been made abundantly plain by a modest editorial change.

8.   It therefore follows that through no fault of his own  the  judge  fell
    into error.  It is an error of law which is clearly material because it
    was on this sole ground that the appeal failed.  In relation to all the
    other matters that were pursued by the appellant the  judge  determined
    them in their favour and thus the interpretation of this provision  and
    its application in these particular factual circumstances  was  crucial
    to the disposal of the appeal below.

9.   It must therefore follow that that decision is set aside.

10.  With the concurrence of the representatives of both the appellants  and
    the Secretary of State, it falls to me to remake that decision  on  the
    material available today.  This  is  a  straightforward  task  for  the
    reasons I have already indicated.  It  is  the  appellants'  case,  and
    wholly properly it is not resisted by the Secretary of State,  that  as
    the first alternative in relation to advertising and marketing material
    is adequately discharged and as  a  matter  of  statutory  construction
    ownership of the domain name  does  not  need  to  be  proved  in  this
    instance,

11.  In the circumstances, all the requirements for  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)
    status are satisfied and the appellants are entitled to such status.

Notice of Decision

Appeal allowed and decision of First-tier Tribunal set  aside  and,  on  re-
determination, both appellants are entitled to leave to  remain  as  Tier  1
(Entrepreneur) Migrants.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Mark Hill     Date 27 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
