








Upper Tribunal
(Immigration And Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Numbers: IA/ 39405/2014
                                                               IA/41542/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Taylor House            |                        Decision and      |
|on 14 October 2015                |Reasons Promulgated                       |
|                                  |On 2 November 2015                        |
|                                  |                                          |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mr Joey Oria Laca
                             Mrs Shirley Badillo
                       (no anonymity directions made)

                                                                 Respondents
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms C Bexson, counsel (instructed by Law Lane
Solicitors)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. For the sake of convenience I shall refer to  the  appellant  as  "the
      secretary of state" and to the respondents as "the claimants".


   2. The claimants are nationals of the Philippines and are  partners.  The
      second claimant is dependent on the first. Their appeals  against  the
      decision of the secretary of state dated 26 September 2014  to  refuse
      to issue them a derivative residence card under the Immigration  (EEA)
      Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 Regulations") as the primary carers  of  a
      British citizen resident  in  the  UK  were  allowed  under  the  2006
      Regulations  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,   in   a   decision
      promulgated on 14 May 2015.


   3. He found that the first claimant's mother works for about 37  hours  a
      week and therefore cannot be said to be in need of care in  line  with
      the definition of the  European  Regulations.  Although  she  has  had
      '....some incidents whereby she has fallen over in  the  bathroom  and
      needed assistance, this has been on an  emergency  basis  rather  than
      upon a permanent basis' [14].


   4. He went on to find that "...In view of the fact  that  there  did  not
      seem to be the existence  of  another  caregiver,  relative  or  legal
      guardian,  and  that  it  is  not  reasonable  to  expect  the  [first
      claimant's] father to go into the care system when he has his own  son
      who can look after him, I find that  the  first  claimant  acts  as  a
      primary carer for his father" [14].


   5. He found that if the claimants were to be removed  from  the  UK,  the
      father will  be  deprived  of  effectively  exercising  his  right  of
      residence as there will be nobody to look after  him  other  than  his
      wife who is working [15]. However due to her own medical problems  the
      Judge found that she would not be able to act as a primary  carer  for
      her husband. She will also not be able to give the same care  that  is
      being given by the first claimant as she is working 37 hours  a  week.
      He accepted that the second claimant is equally giving  assistance  to
      the father when she is not working [15].


   6.  Accordingly,  he  found  that  "......on  the  basis  given  to   the
      appellant's father that the first appellant and the  second  appellant
      amount to primary carers under the EEA Regulations. The  role  of  the
      second appellant is that of sharing the responsibility with the  first
      appellant"15].


   7. On 14  July  2015,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Simpson  granted  the
      secretary of state permission to appeal. He stated that  although  the
      Judge found that the claimant's mother would not be able to act  as  a
      primary carer for her husband, it is not clear  why  he  reached  that
      conclusion and given that  this  is  a  particularly  stringent  test,
      cogent reasons are required.


   8. Moreover, he stated that it is not clear  why  the  claimant's  father
      requires a primary carer, given that he does not  suffer  from  severe
      mental or physical disability. It is not sufficient for the  claimants
      to show that it might be convenient for them to care for their  father
      and given that the claimant's mother is working a 37  hour  week,  she
      cannot be regarded as requiring care herself.


   9. On behalf of the secretary of state  Mr  Kandola  submitted  that  the
      Judge erred in failing to make any finding in  respect  of  Regulation
      15A(4A)(c) which provides that persons will satisfy  the  criteria  in
      this paragraph if the relevant British  citizen  would  be  unable  to
      reside in the UK or in another EEA state if the person  were  required
      to leave.


  10. He submitted that there had been no  suggestion  from  the  claimant's
      mother's statement indicating any intention by her or her  husband  to
      return to the Philippines if the claimants were to leave. In fact, the
      first claimant himself stated that  it  would  be  difficult  for  his
      parents if he had to leave, again showing that they  would  remain  in
      the UK.


  11. Mr Kandola referred to  paragraph  7  of  the  second  claimant's  (Ms
      Badillo's) witness statement dated 20 April  2015.  There  she  simply
      stated that "....I believe they require our care in the  UK  and  they
      will have to leave the UK if Joey leaves this country." However, apart
      from her "belief" in that respect, there was not even an assertion  by
      the parents themselves that they will have to leave the  UK  in  those
      circumstances.


  12. He submitted that the Judge has  not  engaged  with  this.  The  Judge
      stated at [15] that if the claimants were removed, the father would be
      deprived of effectively exercising his rights of  residence  as  there
      will be nobody to look after him other than his wife, who is  working.
      Mr Kandola submitted that it was "perverse" to find that  one  of  his
      parents would not be able to give the care  required.  There  were  no
      specific grounds relating to any physical or mental disability.


  13. Mr. Kandola submitted that it is  not  clear,  apart  from  the  first
      claimant reminding his father to take his medication,  what  care  the
      claimants provide for him. The mother does not have a  primary  carer.
      The father suffers from backache and panic attacks for which  he  self
      medicates. He dresses himself and takes care of his  cleanliness.  The
      father does not go for a walk by himself. Sometimes both  the  parents
      go out together and he also joins them. His mother looks after herself
      and dresses herself [6]. He also submitted that there is no mention of
      his suffering from any  severe  mental  or  physical  disability.  His
      father can take medication himself but the first claimant stated  that
      he would have to remind him [4].


  14. The Judge also noted at [6] that the claimant has not  undertaken  any
      research into social services help. Mr. Kandola  submitted  that  this
      case is distinguishable from children's cases where a greater level of
      care would be required and where they would inevitably have  to  leave
      the UK. It is not clear that the father needs the level of  care  that
      he has asserted.


  15. The first claimant's mother is a supervisor in a restaurant in a hotel
      for breakfast, a job she has been doing since she came here. She works
      37 hours a week. She gets the train on her own and walks to her  place
      of work from the station. She is out of the house between  6.30am  and
      5.30pm. Sometimes she works at weekends.


  16. The Judge had regard to the second claimant's evidence that  her  work
      as a health assistant with the NHS expires on 22 June 2015. She stated
      that her in laws would not be able to cope emotionally if she and  her
      husband had to leave them. They are the only relatives of her sponsors
      [7]. They are aged 70 and 69 respectively. Nobody can  give  them  the
      emotional support except both of them [7].


  17. Mr Kandola thus contended that it was  irrational  to  find  that  the
      claimant's parents would be forced to leave the UK. In any  event,  no
      such finding has been made. Even if the Judge had  considered  whether
      they would have to leave, he was bound to have found that  they  would
      not have to.


  18. On behalf of the claimants, Ms Bexson forcefully  submitted  that  the
      decision should be upheld. The Judge did have regard  to  the  medical
      evidence. Accordingly the secretary of state is simply in disagreement
      with the findings and the decision properly reached. It is clear  that
      both the mother and father had medical issues. In those  circumstances
      the Judge was entitled to find that the claimants were primary carers.


  19. The Judge had addressed whether or not the claimant's father would  be
      'deprived' of remaining in the UK. His finding at [15] that the father
      would be deprived of effectively exercising his right of residence  as
      there would be nobody to look after him other than  his  wife  who  is
      working, is sustainable. There would accordingly  be  no-one  to  look
      after the father other than his wife.


  20. Ms Bexson referred to the medical evidence at p. 57, relating  to  the
      father. The doctor's report dated 10 October  2013  is  addressed  "to
      whom it may concern". It states that Mr Laca is  registered  with  the
      Shrewsbury Road Surgery. He suffers from chronic  panic  disorder,  is
      under the care of a clinical psychologist and is undergoing  cognitive
      behavioural therapy. He also receives medication  for  that.  He  gets
      panic attacks on going out. The children are his main carers, who help
      him out with "every day chores."


  21. There is a further GP report at p. 62 dated 8 July 2014 in  which  the
      same information is given. The 'problems' identified are:  28  October
      2011, chronic anxiety; 23  November  2011,  mixed  hyperlipidemia;  27
      January 2012, chronic anxiety; and 1 July 2014,  fungal  infection  of
      skin. Medications including hydrocortisone and emollient  creams  were
      prescribed.


  22. In the prescription dated 9 June 2014,  at  p.61,  Fluoxetine  tablets
      were prescribed, one to be taken daily as well as  Atorvastatin,  10mg
      tablets, one of which is to be taken each day.


  23. Ms Bexson submitted that the first claimant's witness statements  were
      before the Judge. He referred in them to the GP letter  dated  8  July
      2014 with respect to his father, who gets severe  panic  attacks.  She
      pointed out, as already noted, that the GP stated  that  his  children
      are his main carers, who help him out on everyday chores.


  24. The first claimant stated at paragraph 16 of his statement that he and
      his partner look  after  them  "...by  doing  grocery,  all  household
      responsibilities including cooking, washing, cleaning etc. and  taking
      them for medical appointments and small trips and so on". If they  are
      removed from the UK,  his  parents'  well  being  and  care  would  be
      compromised. They would have to leave the UK because his  father  will
      need a carer who speaks Tagalog[1]. It will be difficult  for  him  to
      afford medication and treatment - para 18.


  25. She noted that the father adopted the  facts  set  out  in  his  son's
      witness statement at pages 10 and 11 of the claimants' bundle.


  26. Ms Bexson submitted that the emotional  support  given  could  not  be
      replaced by social services.  There  are  'cultural  implications'  as
      well.


  27. She acknowledged that there have been no social  service  assessments.
      The father has suffered from his disability from 2012. She referred to
      the GP summary for 2011, 2012 and 2014 at  page  62.  There  does  not
      appear to be any up to date report however.


  28. She submitted that the Judge took all  this  into  account,  including
      evidence of the medication taken. She noted that  the  first  claimant
      stated at paragraph 16 of his statement that he and his partner attend
      to  their  day  to  day  needs  including  taking  them  for   medical
      appointments. The Judge has assessed this evidence properly. It is not
      a mere question of convenience. The fragile nature of the  family  and
      the needs of the claimant's father had been set out. The Judge has set
      out the medical problems relating to the claimant's mother as well  as
      the letters from the GP at [13]


  29. There had been a lengthy hearing and there  were  detailed  statements
      from the parents including  statements  found  at  section  J  of  the
      secretary of state's bundle.


  30. In reply, Mr Kandola submitted that the crucial question which had not
      been answered or dealt with was whether the parents would be unable to
      reside here and would be required to leave the UK. The Judge  has  not
      engaged with that question. No report had been commissioned  from  the
      NHS or Social Services. No  evidence  was  given  why  the  claimant's
      mother could not take care of the father.


  31. He submitted that this is a case of preference and convenience  rather
      than there being no other person or agency to help the father, who has
      limited needs. The level of help required is not significantly high.


      Assessment


  32. I accept Ms Bexson's submission that  the  Judge  has  considered  the
      available evidence including the  medical  evidence  relating  to  the
      first claimant's father.  That  evidence  does  not  go  beyond  2014,
      however.  There  was  no  updating  evidence  produced  regarding  his
      father's condition in April 2015, the date of the hearing.


  33. The medical evidence produced asserts that the claimants  assist  with
      the daily chores and are the main carers for both parents. However, it
      is evident that they are not primary carers for the  first  claimant's
      mother: she has been working for 37 hours  a  week  and  therefore  it
      cannot be claimed that she is  in  need  of  care  in  line  with  the
      definition in the European Regulations. The Judge found that any  care
      that she required had been on an emergency basis [14].


  34. The Judge nevertheless went on to find that in view of the  fact  that
      there does not seem to be the existence of another caregiver, relative
      or legal guardian, it is not reasonable to expect  the  father  to  go
      into the care system when he has his own son who can look  after  him;
      he found that the first claimant acts  as  a  primary  carer  for  his
      father.


  35. It was not however clear what care the father was receiving  from  his
      son. The claimant reminded his  father  to  take  his  medication.  He
      suffers from backaches and panic attacks for which he self  medicates.
      He is required to take two tablets a day. He is however able to  dress
      himself and look after his own hygiene. He sometimes asks his  son  to
      help him dress [10].


  36. He has suffered from chronic panic disorder and is under the  care  of
      psychologists and is having cognitive behavioural therapy. There is no
      suggestion that the claimant's father is unable  to  move  about.  The
      Judge also found that the first claimant  is  not  in  employment  and
      assists his father in making sure that he uses his medication as  well
      as helping him with groceries and cooking.


  37. The Judge found that at [15] if the claimants were to be  removed  the
      father would be  deprived  of  effectively  exercising  his  right  of
      residence as there would be nobody to look after him  other  than  his
      wife who is working. His wife would not be able to give the same  care
      given by the first claimant as she works 37 hours a  week.  That  care
      consists of the chores carried out by the claimants, who  were  living
      together with the parents.


  38. There was however no finding that the parents would leave the Union if
      the claimants left.  Nor was there a finding that the first claimant's
      parents would be unable to reside in the  UK  if  the  claimants  were
      required to leave. The first claimant himself stated no more than that
      it would be difficult for his parents if he had to leave.


  39. The Judge accordingly did not consider why they  would  be  unable  to
      reside in the UK if the claimants were required to  leave.  The  first
      claimant's mother stated that if the claimants were to return  to  the
      Philippines, she would be unable to work. However, that is a matter of
      choice of lifestyle. She would prefer to continue working.


  40. Nor did the claimants produce any  evidence  or  contend  that  social
      services,  the  local  authority  or  the  health  services  had  been
      contacted in order to ascertain whether a  level  of  care  consistent
      with the father's needs could be provided. As  British  citizens,  the
      first claimant's parents would be entitled to  appropriate  care  from
      the local authorities' social services department, or from the NHS  to
      which he would also be entitled.  That  would  include  assisting  his
      attendance at ongoing cognitive therapy sessions, if required.


  41. For these reasons I find that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
      involved the making  of  a  material  error  on  a  point  of  law.  I
      accordingly set it aside and re-make it.


  42. I have set out the evidence  underlying  the  claims  under  the  2006
      Regulations.


  43. Paragraph 15A(1) provides that if a non-exempt  person  satisfies  the
      criteria in the relevant paragraphs, he is entitled  to  a  derivative
      right to reside in the UK.  Paragraph  15A(4A)(c)  provides  that  the
      person satisfies the  criteria  in  this  paragraph  if  the  relevant
      British citizen would be unable to reside in the UK or in another  EEA
      state if the person were required to leave.


  44. I find that the claimants have not demonstrated that  the  parents  of
      the first claimant would be unable to continue to reside in the UK  or
      another EEA state if they were required to leave.


  45. There is no evidence or suggestion that they would be forced to  leave
      the Union if the claimants were  not  granted  leave  to  remain.  The
      requirement under the Regulations is not met  by  an  assumption  that
      they will leave and does not involve a  consideration  of  whether  it
      would be reasonable for the carer to leave the UK: Ayinde and  Thinjom
      (Carers - Reg 15A - Zambrano) [2015] UKUT 00560 (IAC) at [62]. Indeed,
      the first claimant's mother would prefer to continue  her  employment.
      His father would wish to continue receiving medical and  psychological
      help in the UK.


  46. The fact that the family may consider it preferable to remain together
      and continue with their current routine or that  they  might  find  it
      more convenient financially, is not relevant - MA and SM (Zambrano: EU
      children outside EU) Iran [2013] UKUT 380.


  47. The claimant's mother stated that it would be hard for her if her  son
      and daughter in law had to go back to the Philippines as  there  would
      be nobody to look after them if her son goes away.  However,  she  has
      been in the UK for some 40 years. She stated that she  did  not  think
      that family and friends could help out. However, she acknowledges that
      she has not contacted social services as it is better for her  son  to
      look after her. She can rely on him as she knows him and the tradition
      and culture [9].


  48. The Judge however found at [14] that the claimant's mother is  working
      for about 37 hours a week and that it cannot therefore be claimed that
      she is in need of care  in  line  with  the  definition  of  the  2006
      Regulations. The claimants have not challenged that finding.


  49. As to the first claimant's father, I do not accept that  there  is  no
      other appropriate caregiver, available from social services, the local
      authority or NHS, including  from  the  first  claimant's  mother,  to
      provide him with the necessary care and assistance.


  50. In the circumstances I find that the first claimant's parents have not
      shown that they would be unable to reside in the UK or in another  EEA
      state were the claimants required to leave.


      Notice of Decision


      Having found that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the
      making of an error  on  a  point  of  law,  I  substitute  a  decision
      dismissing the claimants' appeals.


      No anonymity direction is made.


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


      Dated:  27 October 2015

-----------------------
[1]  During the course of the submissions, I was informed by Ms Bexson that
the claimant's father receives counselling and during the session with the
psychologist has the benefit of an interpreter who speaks Tagalog .

