
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/41233/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham, Sheldon Court              |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 25th July 2014                               |On 11th August 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                          mr muhammad Ishfan Iqbal
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Imran Hussain (LR)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge A J Parker, promulgated on 23rd April 2014 following a hearing at
    Stoke-on-Trent on 8th April 2014.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  Muhammad  Ishfan  Iqbal.    The   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, who  was  born  on  7th
    December 1973.  He appealed against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State dated 18th September  2013,  refusing  to  vary  his
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant.

 3. The reasons for refusal were  that  the  Appellant  had  made  a  false
    statement with respect to  submission  of  a  postgraduate  diploma  in
    business management from the  Cambridge  College  of  Learning  in  his
    previous application as a participant  of  the  International  Graduate
    Scheme,  and  that  institution  had   never   offered   a   legitimate
    postgraduate qualification.  As such his application fell to be refused
    under paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration Rules.   Moreover,  since  a
    false  representation  had  been  made  in  this  respect  his   future
    applications would also  be  refused  under  paragraph  322(2)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

The Appellant's Claim

 4. The Appellant's claim is that he has undertaken the  specified  course.
    He has completed eight modules in a lecture form for fifteen to  twenty
    people and he wrote two assignments.  He studied for  the  postgraduate
    diploma in business management from 2007 to May 2008.  The course  that
    he sat had indeed been run (see paragraph 10).

The Judge's Findings

 5. The judge considered the evidence before him.   He  observed  that  the
    Appellant had  undertaken  his  course  at  the  Cambridge  College  of
    Learning.  The case of NA  (Cambridge  College  of  Learning)  Pakistan
    [2009] UKAIT 00031 had  established  that  this  college  never  ran  a
    postgraduate diploma in business management or a  postgraduate  diploma
    in an IT course (see paragraph 13).

 6. The judge also had regard to the  case  of  TR  (CCOL  cases)  Pakistan
    [2011] UKUT 33.  Having gone through the authorities,  the  judge  held
    that, "NA... is indicative of there being no such thing as a  genuinely
    issued CCOL postgraduate certificate in those subjects" (paragraph 13).
     The judge also wondered why the Appellant had maintained that  he  had
    only done two assignments and he had  produced  no  evidence  of  study
    (paragraph 15).  The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state that the judge  erred  in  failing  to
    apply the correct burden of proof and in failing to explain why he  did
    not accept the Appellant's evidence that he had undertaken the  course.
    If dishonesty had to be proved, the allegation of which  was  made  six
    years after the event, then there had to be a proper basis in  evidence
    for it and it could not simply be assumed on the part of the Appellant.

 8. On 23rd May 2014, permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me, Mr Imran Hussain, appeared on behalf  of  the
    Appellant.  He had prepared a well-constructed  skeleton  argument  for
    the assistance of the court which I read.  He then submitted  that  the
    proper approach in this case was not to look at paragraph 322(1A) which
    was only relevant to a deception made in the current  application,  but
    the application here referred to a  historic  allegation  of  deception
    which occurred more than six years ago, so  the  proper  provision  was
    Section 322(2).   The  Appellant  had  simply  failed  to  provide  the
    documentation.  There was no deception.  He had obtained his degree  in
    2012.

10. Mr Smart, on behalf of the Respondent, submitted  that  the  judge  had
    given proper consideration to the degree certificates issuing from  the
    Cambridge College of Learning at paragraph 13 of the determination.  He
    had taken all the matters into account comprehensively.  The case of NA
    (Pakistan) [2009] UKAIT 00031 was also considered.   The  determination
    was entirely sustainable.

11. In reply Mr Hussain submitted  that  six  years  had  passed  from  the
    alleged deception by the Appellant and this period of  time  should  be
    construed in favour of the Appellant.  The judge had wrongly  construed
    it against the Appellant.

No Error of Law

12. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside this decision and remake it.  I
    come to this conclusion notwithstanding Mr Imran  Hussain's  very  able
    and competent submissions before me.

13. The fact is that  the  judge  took  into  account  the  authorities  in
    relation to NA (Pakistan).  He then went  on  to  consider  the  entire
    issue of proving deception having  specific  regard  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal authority here.  He explained that, "It would  be  important  to
    follow the guidance given by the Court of Appeal in AA (Nigeria) [2009]
    EWCA  Civ  773  that  knowing  deception  is  needed  to   show   false
    representations..." (paragraph 13).

14. The judge then had regard to the weakness of the evidence on  the  part
    of the Appellant even at the  time  when  his  studies  were  completed
    asking why the Appellant  had  only  undertaken  two  assignments  (see
    paragraph  15).   Thirdly,  the  judge  considered  the  position   now
    observing that although six years had passed, "he would be  well  aware
    from the TR case of the difficulties of postgraduate  diplomas  and  he
    should have been able to obtain evidence from  students  and  lecturers
    and other forms to back up what he has said.  He has provided  none..."
    (paragraph 19).  This was a perfectly legitimate conclusion on the part
    of the judge.

15. Finally, the judge had just as proper a regard to  the  application  of
    Article 8 jurisprudence,  setting  up  the  relevant  case  law  before
    deciding that the Appellant could not succeed under this aspect of  the
    jurisprudence either (see paragraphs 20 to 22).



Decision

16. There is no true error of law in the original  judge's  decision.   The
    determination shall stand.

17. No anonymity order is made.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 9th August 2014

