
[pic]


Upper Tribunal


(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number: IA416462014


|At  Field House                       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|                                      |                                |
| on 6th June  2016                    |on 20th June 2016               |
|                                      |                                |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                            MR.MORGEN CHIRONGOMA
                                      (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                          Appellant

                                     And


               THE  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                          Respondent



No application was made for an anonymity order  and  there  is  no  apparent
need.
Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms.G.Peterson, instructed by CK Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr P.Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction


     1. Although it is the respondent who is appealing I will continue to
        refer the parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal for the
        sake of convenience.


     2. The appellant is a national of Zimbabwe. He came to the United
        Kingdom as a student in January 2000 at the age of 23. He obtained
        various renewals until 31 August 2009. A further in time
        application was refused on 13 October 2009.He unsuccessfully
        appealed and became appeal rights exhausted on 16 February 2010.

     3. On 28 September 2012 he submitted an application for indefinite
        leave to remain on the basis he had resided in the United Kingdom
        for 10 years lawfully. This was considered under rule 276B along
        with a consideration of his private life under rule 276ADE.

     4. His application was refused in a decision of 12th June 2013,
        subsequently withdrawn. The refusal was maintained in a September
        2014 decision.

     5. The respondent accepted that he had 10 years continuous lawful
        residence. However, he did not satisfy 276B (v) which requires that
        an applicant be not in the United Kingdom in breach of immigration
        laws beyond the 28-day disregard. His application was submitted two
        years and seven months after he became appeal rights exhausted. By
        the time of decision had been an overstayer for almost 4 years.

     6. Regarding paragraph 276ADE he had not lived in the United Kingdom
        20 years and he could reintegrate into life in Zimbabwe.

 The First tier Tribunal.

     7. His appeal was heard by Judge of the First-Tier Remington on 17
        September 2015. The appeal was allowed under both the immigration
        rules and on freestanding human rights grounds. At paragraph 34 the
        judge felt it would be extremely difficult for the appellant to
        reintegrate into Zimbabwe. He had lived in the United Kingdom
        nearly 16 years and had no remaining ties in Zimbabwe. His father
        died in 2002, his mother had sold the family home and they were not
        in contact. His friends had left the country. The judge referred to
        the political situation in Zimbabwe, stating the appellant had
        candidly raised the question of his political affiliation and did
        not know who to trust.

     8. In seeking permission to appeal the respondent submitted that the
        judge's reasoning for concluding he would face difficulties
        reintegrating was inadequate. It was not clear what his political
        affiliation was but even assuming he was as an MDC supporter, there
        was the possibility of relocation.

     9. It was also submitted that the judge erred in referring to delay on
        the part of the respondent and citing EB (Kosova) for allowing the
        appeal under article 8. It was submitted that the question of delay
        was not a feature as the appellant had never made a valid in time
        application in respect of paragraph 276B. It was accepted that had
        he done so he may well have been successful but the reality was he
        had not. It was submitted that the judge in allowing the appeal
        under article 8 was effectively using it as a dispensing power.

    10. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was not clear from
        the decision why the judge found he could not return to live in
        Zimbabwe. He had lived there for more than half his life and it was
        not clear what his political affiliations were. Arguably the judge
        erred in citing EB (Kosovo) in relation to the article 8 assessment
        if the appellant had never made an in time application on the basis
        of 10 years lawful residence.

The Upper Tribunal.


    11. Mr Duffy submitted the judge took the wrong approach when
        considering paragraph 276 ADE (vi) and obstacles to the appellant's
        return to Zimbabwe by treating it as if it were an asylum issue. If
        the appellant was an MDC supporter he submitted he could live in
        another part of the country. Furthermore, he had been out of the
        country for over 10 years.


    12. Regarding paragraph 276B, whilst the appellant had been in the
        United Kingdom lawfully for 10 years he did not apply during that
        time. He submitted the rationale in EB (Kosovo) was that: (i) the
        longer a person is in the country the greater opportunity to
        establish article 8 rights: (ii) with the passage of time
        relationships can be formed and the sense of precariousness reduced
        (iii) delay may demonstrate systemic issues .He submitted these
        factors did not justify the outcome.


    13.  Ms.G.Peterson's argument was that paragraph 276 B as originally
        drafted meant that once 10 years continuous lawful residence had
        been built up there was no limit on the length of time afterwards
        when the person can apply to benefit. In this regard she referred
        to the respondent's Guidance valid from 28 August 2012. It states:

             Once an applicant has built up a period of 10 years continuous
             lawful residence, there is no limit on the length of time
             afterwards that they can apply. This means they could leave
             the UK, re-enter and apply for settlement based on a 10-year
             period of continuous lawful residence they built up in the
             past.


    14. She argued that on the chronology there had been earlier
        applications made by the appellant and the ten-year rule as it then
        existed had not been applied. Whilst Judge Remington in dealing
        with the immigration rules had to apply the law as it existed  at
        the time of the decision under appeal the delay and failure to deal
        with  earlier applications adequately where factors going to the
        article 8 assessment.


    15. This point was canvassed before First-Tier Judge Remington before
        whom Ms.G.Peterson appeared. The respondent was not represented.
        The chronology was set out. On 20 August 2009 there was an
        application for further leave to remain as a student. This was
        refused on 13 October 2009 on maintenance ground. The tribunal on
        13 January 2010 affirmed the refusal. On 9 February 2010 the
        appellant applied to the Administrative Court for reconsideration.
        That court requested a copy of the original application from the
        appellant and on the 26 February 2010 the appellant wrote to the
        respondent for a copy of his application. He was subsequently
        interviewed on 27 April 2010. On 29 November 2011 he made
        application for leave to remain outside the rules. This appears to
        have been refused on 18 June 2012. On 21 June 2012 the appellant's
        representatives wrote to the respondent pointing out the ten-year
        guidance set out above.


    16. It was argued that the ten-year rule as then in force should have
        been identified in relation to the original application of 2009 and
        subsequent appeal in 2010. Similarly, it was not considered when
        the application outside the rules was made in November 2011 and was
        not referred to in the refusal decision relating to the
        application.

    17. First-tier Judge Remington stated:

             21. What makes this case exceptional is the failure to
             recognise that he was entitled to leave at the relevant time
             and despite the appellant's continual efforts to argue his
             case the failure to recognise that he had attempted to have
             this matter considered, the failure to deal with the long
             residence claim and the delay in response to the long
             residence claim.

    18. At paragraph 19 First-tier Judge Remington pointed out that the
        applicable immigration rules in relation to the decision of 24
        September 2014 were those in force at the time of decision. Under
        those rules a claim under paragraph 276B would fail because of the
        appellant's overstaying. At paragraph 35 the judge acknowledge that
        article 8 is not a general dispensing power. It is apparent the
        judge was significantly influenced by the fact that the appellant
        would most likely have succeeded under the ten-year route had this
        been dealt with in relation to his earlier applications.


Consideration


    19. The decision sets out the chronology and it is apparent on close
        reading that the judge was not simply applying article 8 because
        the appellant would most likely have succeeded under the rules at
        the time but for a failure to apply. Rather, the judge is
        indicating that there were earlier applications predating the
        change in the rules and from these it should have been apparent to
        the respondent he met the rule on long residence.

    20. The judge at paragraph 39 refers to the appellant having
        established a strong private life in United Kingdom. In the
        following paragraphs the judge clearly sets out the section 117
        factors relevant to the assessment.

    21. It may be that because there was no presenting officer in the First-
        tier tribunal that the delay point was not fully appreciated when
        leave to appeal was sought. Having been referred to the 2012
        guidance Mr Duffy did not demur on the point.

    22. It is my conclusion that when the arguments before Judge Remington
        are properly analysed the judge was entitled to consider article 8
        and the conclusion in the appellant's favour is sustainable.

    23.  I do find there was a material error of law in allowing the appeal
        under 276 ADE.The factors set out in paragraph 34 are not adequate
        to justify the conclusion that he could not reintegrate. The
        recorded findings in this regard are inadequate. It is clear that
        the focus was upon his historical rights under paragraph 276 B; the
        respondent's actions or inaction and the engagement of article 8.

Decision.

      There is a material error of law in the decision of Judge Remington in
      relation to how paragraph 276 ADE was dealt with. I remake the
      decision allowing Mr Chirongoma's appeal on human rights grounds only
      and not under the immigration rules.


   Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly

