
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41961/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |                  Decision & Reasons  |
|                                       |Promulgated                           |
|On 10th December 2015                  |                  On 4th February 2016|
|                                       |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                         MRS Gunaletchmy PALANIAPPAN
                          (ANONYMITY NOT RETAINED)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Coleman of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 18th November 1977 is a citizen of Malaysia.  The
    Appellant had entered the United Kingdom on a valid  spouse  visa  such
    visa valid until 5th August 2014.  On 27th March 2014 she  had  applied
    for leave to remain but that application was dismissed on 11th  October
    2014 on the  basis  that  she  had  allegedly  used  deception  in  the
    provision of an educational testing service certificate  on  the  basis
    that ETS confirmed the  validity  of  the  test  result  could  not  be
    authenticated.  The Appellant appealed that decision and her appeal was
    heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Parker sitting at  Taylor  House  on
    26th March 2015.  He dismissed the appeal.  Application for  permission
    to appeal was made and although refused at first instance  was  allowed
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds.  It was said that litigation relating to
    ETS had unfolded since the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    March 2015 in particular the judgment in Gazi [2015] UKUT 327  and  the
    Court of Appeal case of Mehmood and Ali [2015] EWCA Civ  744.   It  was
    stated therefore that it was  certainly  arguable  as  to  whether  the
    evidence relied upon by the Respondent was sufficient to discharge  the
    burden of proof in relation to this particular Appellant's case.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellant

 2. Mr Coleman relied upon the Grounds of Appeal in this case and submitted
    that there was an insufficiency of evidence upon which the judge  could
    properly have found that  the  Respondent  discharged  the  appropriate
    burden of proof.

Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent

 3. It was submitted by Miss Isherwood that the Grounds of Appeal  amounted
    to nothing more than a disagreement with the findings and that the case
    of Gazi was a judicial review case only and it  was  a  matter  of  the
    Tribunal to make findings on fact and evidence.

 4. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision to consider the
    documents and evidence submitted.  I now provide that decision with  my
    reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 5. The case before the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  involved  an  assertion
    made by the Respondent that the Appellant had deployed deception in the
    taking of an English language test (TOIEC) administered by ETS, one  of
    the few suppliers used by the Respondent as an out-sourced provider  of
    such tests worldwide.  As a consequence the Respondent had  refused  to
    vary leave to remain and also to issue  directions  for  removal  under
    Section 47 of the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2006.   The  evidence
    produced by the Respondent in support of that assertion was

      a) Witness statement Matthew Harold.

      b) Witness statement Rebecca Collings.

      c) Witness statement Peter Millington.

      d) ETS look-up file single line extract relating to Appellant.

 6. The Appellant had given evidence, on the face of it  without  the  need
    for an interpreter.  The judge had noted that she said  she  had  taken
    the test, had taken a further test that was not in dispute, in November
    2015 and had passed that test.  Her husband had also provided  evidence
    confirming she had not cheated.

 7.  The  judge  had  noted  that  he  agreed  with  Appellant's  Counsel's
    submissions that the burden of proof was on the  Respondent  (paragraph
    12).  He further stated that the burden on  the  Respondent  was  on  a
    balance of probability (paragraph 12 and 17).  The judge having set out
    the submissions and extracts from the  witness  statements  of  Rebecca
    Collings and Peter Millington  reached  his  conclusions  in  a  single
    paragraph (17) where he stated

         "I have  to  be  satisfied  on  the  balance  of  probability  that
         deception has been used.  Mr Singer said  that  it  could  be  data
         entry error.  I reject this argument.  If a data  entry  error  had
         been made you would not expect two independent verifiers to come to
         the same conclusion.  I have to decide a case  on  the  balance  of
         probabilities.   The  fact  that  we  have  no  evidence  from  the
         verifiers or any other employer of the ETS is not a bar for  me  to
         conclude that deception had been used in this case.  The  Appellant
         has not provided any evidence to persuade me otherwise.   The  fact
         that she has subsequently passed the test  is  not  relevant.   The
         fact that she achieved a pass  could  mean  she  has  improved  her
         English in between the two tests.  It could be that she has made an
         error of judgment.  Without further evidence from the  Appellant  I
         would believe that the Respondent has discharged the duty upon  him
         and proven that deception has been used."

 8. There are three concerns that this case  raises,  perhaps  identifiable
    within that paragraph.  They are concerns that relate not just to  this
    case but this group of cases relating to ETS  language  testing.   They
    are concerns discernible within the judgment of Gazi.

 9. The case of Gazi was  a  judicial  review  decision  and  in  terms  of
    decision was focused on the questions as  to  whether  the  Appellant's
    improper purpose ground of challenge was established (decided not), and
    whether an out of country appeal  provided  an  adequate  remedy  to  a
    Respondent's refusal.  However Gazi helpfully highlighted  features  of
    relevance to this class of case and  the  evidence  available  and  the
    applicability to the decision of the First-tier Tribunal before me.

10. Firstly at paragraph 44 of Gazi  the  Upper  Tribunal  noted  that  the
    question of law for the First-tier Tribunal in this type  of  case  was
    whether the concept engaged the Doody principles in particular  whether
    the affected person  was  afforded  an  opportunity  to  make  informed
    representations in advance of the impugned decision  Doody  [1994]  1AC
    531.  It referred to the need for the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  decide
    whether the recent decision in Miah [2014] UKUT 515 applied.

11. In terms of procedural fairness the ETS cases, of which  this  is  one,
    can perhaps usefully be looked at in terms of two other groups of cases
    that have troubled the Tribunal.  It will be recalled that there were a
    large number of cases involving Sprakab  language  analysis  that  came
    before  the   Tribunal   where   procedural/evidential   fairness   was
    challenged.  Often the challenge was that the Sprakab language  testers
    anonymised themselves, the quality/length of  conversation  upon  which
    decisions were based were poor or short and the inability to  challenge
    undisclosed source material.  The Upper Tribunal dealt with those cases
    in a lead case that had  the  effect  of  significantly  reducing  such
    challenges.  That case concluded there was nothing inherently wrong  in
    language  analysts  anonymising  themselves,  not  least  because  they
    provided a "pen  picture"  giving  their  language  qualifications  and
    experience, nationality and countries where they had lived and absorbed
    languages.   The  case  further  determined  that  procedural  fairness
    indicated that the tapes and transcripts  of  such  tests/conversations
    should be disclosed to allow that evidence to be seen by  an  Appellant
    and subject to their own expert scrutiny if  so  desired.   Essentially
    the Upper Tribunal in that case  was  setting  out  basic  guidance  on
    procedural fairness expected in adversarial proceedings in a  court  or
    Tribunal.

12. In like manner the case of Miah concerned the class of cases where  the
    Respondent asserted  a  "sham  marriage"  based  wholly  or  partly  on
    interviews conducted by  the  Respondent  with  an  Appellant  and  his
    spouse.  The Upper Tribunal noted that  procedural  fairness  indicated
    disclosure of the interview records and any summary or  note  given  by
    the interviewer to the decision maker.

13. It is noteworthy that both those classes of cases  involved  assertions
    being made by the Respondent that an Appellant had acted dishonestly or
    had used deception and where therefore, the burden of proof shifted  to
    the Respondent.  The traditions of procedural fairness  and  disclosure
    in  proceedings  in  this  country  should  perhaps  have  alerted  the
    Respondent to act in a manner compatible with those principles  but  if
    in doubt those cases set out that which is expected in such  cases  and
    no doubt significantly  reduced  the  levels  of  concern  and  appeals
    brought on such grounds within those classes of cases.

14. They are in my view useful  parallels  for  this  class  of  ETS  case,
    particularly given the Sprakab  cases  involved  the  same  element  of
    language testing.  In my view those  cases  underscore  the  nature  of
    procedural fairness and disclosure and that should  have  been  in  the
    mind of a judge hearing an  appeal  in  another  class  of  case  which
    involves the Respondent  asserting  that  an  Appellant  has  practised
    deception and the burden therefore falling upon the Respondent to prove
    such matters.  The case of Gazi  noted  the  need  for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to decide the applicability of Miah  in  terms  of  procedural
    fairness and one could add to that  the  Upper  Tribunal  case  in  the
    Sprakab language cases as referred to above.

15. In this case there had been no disclosure of  the  evidential  material
    upon which the Respondent based assertions.  The case of Gazi looked at
    the "generic evidence" available in the case before the Upper  Tribunal
    that evidence being precisely the same evidence available to the  judge
    in the case before me.

16. In Gazi the Upper Tribunal assessed the Respondent's  generic  evidence
    at  paragraphs  6  to  15.   Contained  within  those  paragraphs   are
    observations that demonstrate the concerns relating to  that  evidence.
    In particular I note at paragraph 14 the Upper Tribunal stated

         "One observes inevitably that this  description  of  what  actually
         occurred is lean in detail and further as noted above Mr Millington
         can lay claim to no relevant credentials or expertise in the  field
         of voice recognition.  The same observations apply to  his  ensuing
         averments that non-verified matches were confidently identified  by
         Mr Millington and his colleagues.  There is a  discernible  element
         of          bombast           in           those           claims."



17.  The  Upper  Tribunal  also  noted  the  dichotomy  of  "invalid"   and
    "irregularity"  in  his  averments.   The  Upper  Tribunal  quoted   Mr
    Millington's statement that

         "Where a match has not been identified and verified an individual's
         test  result  may  still  be  invalidated  on  the  basis  of  test
         administration irregularity including the fact that their test  was
         taken at a UK testing centre where numerous other results have been
         invalidated on the basis of a match.  In those cases the individual
         would normally be invited to take a free re-test ... no evidence of
         this distinction even if in redacted form is provided.  Finally  it
         is clear from the concluding averments in Mr  Millington's  witness
         statement that the Home Office  invariably  accepts  the  deception
         assessment provided by ETS without more."

18. At paragraphs 16 to 20 the Upper Tribunal then looked at the criticisms
    of the ETS system made by an expert Dr Harrison.

19. I appreciate that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not have  the  case
    of Gazi before him and the reminder that that case perhaps provides  in
    respect of procedural unfairness as noted above.  However it  could  be
    said that the issue of procedural fairness is of longstanding as  noted
    in Goudey [1994] and considered specifically by the Upper  Tribunal  in
    two similar types of circumstances in both the Sprakab  cases  and  the
    sham marriage cases referred to in Miah.   In  my  view  therefore  the
    issue of procedural unfairness in this case should  have  been  in  the
    judge's mind, albeit Gazi would no doubt have prompted  that  had  that
    case been available.

20. Secondly however, even on the extremely limited  evidence  produced  by
    the Respondent, Gazi highlights an inherent difficulty within the  case
    before me.   The  witness  statement  of  Mr  Millington  as  noted  at
    paragraph 15 of Gazi suggests that an "invalid" result  may  flow  from
    factors other than deception i.e. test administration irregularity such
    as taking a test at a centre  where  there  have  been  numerous  other
    invalidated results.  As well as potentially  being  a  self-fulfilling
    prophecy that suggests a person may have his  test  invalidated  for  a
    number of factors including the suspicion that many others at that same
    centre have been suspected or found  to  have  used  deception  without
    necessarily the term invalid demonstrating that the specific individual
    had used deception.  Therefore in terms of discharging  the  evidential
    burden of proof the generic evidence in the case before the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge would seem to have fallen far short  of  that  which  is
    required even leaving aside the criticism and potential  weaknesses  of
    the ETS system as later identified by Dr Harrison in the Gazi case.  It
    is noteworthy that in this case the judge had a computer print-out that
    simply said "invalid" and nothing more and therefore on the face of  it
    presented a situation that may not have disclosed deception but  simply
    a "test administration irregularity."

21. Finally whilst the judge  noted  the  burden  of  proof  was  upon  the
    Respondent, paragraph 17 of the decision noted that whilst  he  had  no
    evidence from the verifiers or ETS that was not a bar to him concluding
    deception had been used noting that the Appellant had not provided  any
    evidence to persuade him otherwise.  The Appellant had in fact produced
    evidence and whilst the judge was entitled to take a view on the  later
    language test that she passed it was not the case that no evidence  had
    been produced.  Further, whilst it may not have  been  in  the  judge's
    mind, the terminology of paragraph 17 suggests the judge may have  been
    requiring evidence from the Appellant rather than  focussing  upon  the
    need for the Respondent to prove deception  and  thereby  inadvertently
    shifting or diluting the burden of proof.

22. In summary I find a material error of law in this case.  Firstly I find
    that there was a procedural unfairness in the scope and manner in which
    evidence was produced by the Respondent and a lack of disclosure to the
    Appellant and that procedural unfairness was left  unrectified  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.   Secondly  I  find  that  on  the  evidence
    available it was an error of law to have concluded that  that  evidence
    demonstrated that the Respondent had discharged the burden and standard
    of proof required and that finally there may have inadvertently been  a
    dilution or shift as to where the burden and standard of proof  lay  in
    the mind of the judge.

Decision

23. I find that an error of law was made by the judge in this  case  and  I
    find that the decision needs to be re-made.

Anonymity not retained.

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  fee  award
of any fee which has been paid or may be payable





Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever



