
[pic]
IAC-PE-AW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/41915/2014
                                                               IA/41919/2014
                                                               IA/41921/2014
                                                               IA/41924/2014
                                                               IA/41927/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th November 2015                |On 29th December 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD


                                   Between

                      Miss lumjeta k (first appellant)
                       Mr diamant n (second appellant)
                            lk (third appellant)
                            rk (fourth appellant)
                            zk (fifth appellant)
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Reynolds, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe - Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants, the first two of which are the  parents  of  the  other
    three, are citizens of Kosovo.  They appeal against  the  determination
    of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lawrence  issued  on  29th  April  2015
    dismissing their appeals against the decision of the Respondent made on
    3rd October 2014 to refuse leave to remain and to remove them from  the
    United Kingdom..  The Secretary of State  dealt  with  the  application
    under Appendix FM and Paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration  Rules.   The
    Judge heard evidence only from the first Appellant, Miss K although the
    others apparently were in the court building. .

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Shimmin
    on 7th July 2015.  He said:

         "2.  It is arguable that the Judge has failed  to  give  sufficient
             attention and weight to the private life of two of  the  child
             Appellants who were both born in the UK and were 9 and 8 years
             old at the time of the appeal.  Both have been in  the  United
             Kingdom in excess of seven years.

         3.   It is arguable that the Judge has erred in  giving  weight  to
             the fact that the children have established their private life
             whilst in the UK unlawfully.

         4.   The ground in respect of  the  Judge's  consideration  of  the
             expert evidence of Mr Robert Simpson is less compelling but  I
             do not reject it."

 3. The appeal proceeded on human rights grounds outwith the Rules.

 4. The immigration history of the family can be summarised as follows.

 5. The first and second Appellants had attempted to enter the  UK  without
    leave but were refused entry and removed on 14th  April  2006.   It  is
    assumed that they re-entered the UK illegally shortly after that, given
    the date of birth of their eldest child on 29th August 2006.   On  15th
    October 2013 after the eldest child had been in the UK for seven  years
    the first Appellant sought to  regularise  her  immigration  status  by
    making an application outside the Rules.   She  named  the  other  four
    Appellants as her dependants.

 6. It is submitted in the grounds seeking permission that  Judge  Lawrence
    made the following errors in law:

      i) He failed in his statutory duty to have regard to the provisions of
         Section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  in
         particular Section 117B(6).  The two older children were  9  and  8
         years  old  at  the  time  of  the  appeal.   These  children  were
         qualifying children for the purposes  of  Section  117B(6)  because
         they had lived in the United Kingdom for  a  continuous  period  of
         seven years or more.  The issue was raised before the Judge  as  to
         whether it would be reasonable for the children, having  integrated
         into the UK, to return with their parents  to  Kosovo.   The  Judge
         failed  to  address  this  test.   Instead  he   relied   upon   EV
         (Philippines) and Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874.  He also erred
         in finding that the children had  established  their  private  life
         whilst in the UK unlawfully was a  determining  factor  in  finding
         that fact.  He  cited  ZH  (Tanzania)  v  SSHD  [2011]  UKSC  4  as
         authority for the fact that the  children  should  not  have  their
         immigration  status  held  against  them.    Their   parents   were
         responsible for this, not them.

     ii) He made a clear mistake regarding a material fact in assessing  the
         evidence of Mr Robert Simpson a forensic social worker.  Mr Simpson
         had said that the children "identify more  or  less  strongly  with
         their ethnic group".  He did not say in his report that  the  first
         Appellant's  children  strongly  identified  with   their   Kosovan
         ethnicity.  The Judge misinterpreted what Mr Simpson had said.  The
         children are thriving in the cultural environment of  the  UK.   He
         did not take this into account.  Additionally the Judge  failed  to
         take into account a number of other conclusions made by Mr  Simpson
         regarding the impact on the Appellant children.  The  Judge  indeed
         made findings contradictory to these conclusions one of  which  was
         the expressed concern of the children as to how they would be  able
         to communicate at school if no English was spoken because  that  is
         the only language they speak.  It was stated that they do not speak
         Kosovan Albanian.

 7. Judge Lawrence gave a great deal of consideration  to  this  case.   He
    considered the private life of the Appellants.  He considered the  best
    interests of the children.  It may well be that he  misunderstood  what
    Mr Simpson said about the extent of their identifying with their ethnic
    group.  With regard to the issue of what languages they speak the Judge
    noted that the oral evidence  of  the  first  Appellant  was  that  the
    children do understand their native tongue and that  that  language  is
    spoken  at  home  by  the  adults.   He  found  it  therefore   to   be
    inconceivable that the children are  not  familiar  with  their  mother
    tongue.  He said it was inconceivable that once they entered the UK the
    family only spoke English amongst themselves.  The first Appellant gave
    evidence in Albanian.  He pointed out that Mr Simpson had come  to  the
    view that the children are not able to understand their  mother  tongue
    on what he was told or observed at the interview.  The Judge relied  on
    the decision Azimi-Moayed and  Others  (decisions  affecting  children;
    onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197 in which the Tribunal set out certain
    guidelines and said that  as  a  starting  point  it  is  in  the  best
    interests of children to be with both their parents and if both parents
    are being removed  from  the  UK  then  this  suggests  that  dependent
    children who form part of their household should also be removed unless
    there are reasons to the contrary.  It was also said in that case  that
    apart from the terms of published policies and  Rules,  the  period  of
    seven years from age 4 is likely to be more significant to a child than
    the first seven years of life. It was said, "Very  young  children  are
    focused on their parents rather than their peers  and  are  adaptable".
    This followed another finding that:

         "Lengthy residence in a country other than the State of Origin  can
         lead to development of social, cultural and educational  ties  that
         would be inappropriate to disrupt, in  the  absence  of  compelling
         reasons to the contrary.  What amounts to lengthy residence is  not
         clear cut but past and present policies have identified seven years
         as the relevant period."

 8. The Judge considered this and found that attending English education at
    the level they were at and being exposed to culture provided  by  their
    parents at home would not prevent them accompanying  their  parents  to
    Kosovo or that it would be a detrimental wrench to remove them from the
    UK.  They are children and are not used to education other than English
    education but they are exposed to their own mother tongue  at  home,  a
    fact which Mr Simpson appears not to have been aware of.

 9. He then thoroughly went through the decision in EV  (Philippines).   He
    reached  the  conclusion  that  there  was  nothing  compassionate   or
    exceptional which would render return of the family disproportionate to
    the legitimate aim of maintaining proper immigration control.

10. I heard oral submissions from Mr Reynolds and Ms Willocks-Briscoe.   Mr
    Reynolds pointed out that the children were all  born  here.   He  went
    through the four errors of law.  He relied on the  decision  of  Forman
    (ss 117A-C considerations) [2015] UKUT 00412 in which the Tribunal said
    that the list of considerations contained in Section 117B and 117C  are
    not exhaustive and a Court or Tribunal is entitled to take into account
    additional considerations provided that they are relevant in the  sense
    that they properly bear on the  public  interest  question.   In  cases
    where the provisions of Section 117B-C of  the  2002  Act  arise,   the
    decision of the Tribunal must demonstrate that  they  have  been  given
    full effect.  The Judge failed to do this.  He did not apply a test  of
    reasonableness.  He did  not  consider  whether  there  are  compelling
    reasons.

11. Ms Willocks-Briscoe relied on her Rule  24  response  in  which  it  is
    submitted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge   directed   himself
    appropriately,  having carried out a careful analysis of the  situation
    of the Appellants and particularly the children.   He  had  paid  close
    attention to the report  of  the  independent  social  worker  and  his
    conclusions.  It is submitted that the conclusions of  the  Judge  fall
    squarely within the circumstances outlined in Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74 in
    which the Supreme Court said that in that case the  children  were  not
    British citizens and had no right to future education and healthcare in
    this country.  They were part  of  a  close  knit  family  with  highly
    educated parents and were of an age when their  emotional  needs  could
    only be fully met within the immediate family unit.   Such  integration
    as had occurred into UK society would have been  predominantly  in  the
    context of that family unit.  Ms Willocks-Briscoe  submitted  that  the
    evidence has to be considered in the round.  The children have not been
    here for seven years from the age of 4 or 5.   Seven  years  is  not  a
    determinative period.  It may well be that the Judge failed to look  at
    paragraph 117B.  In all the circumstances this is not a material error.

12. I have given careful consideration to all the submissions made in  this
    case.  The Judge failed to consider paragraph 117B.  It is difficult to
    see why the Appellants' representatives relied on  Forman  because  the
    hearing in this case took place on 28th May 2015  and  the  Appellants'
    appeal was heard on 1st April so Forman was not  in  existence.   There
    had of course in February been the decision in Dube (ss 117A-D)  [2015]
    UKUT 90 in which the Upper Tribunal  made  it  clear  that  Judges  are
    required statutorily to take into account the considerations set out in
    those Sections.  What paragraph 117B(6) says:

         "In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where -

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a qualifying child, and

         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom."

13. I accept that the two  older  children  in  this  case  are  qualifying
    children.  I accept that the Judge failed to deal with Section 117B.  I
    do however agree with Ms Willocks-Briscoe that in this case it  is  not
    material.  The Judge gave a great deal of careful consideration to  all
    the evidence before him and to the facts of this case.  Firstly  it  is
    clear that the forensic social worker Mr  Simpson  was  misled  by  the
    first Appellant.  Clearly the children can speak Kosovan Albanian.  The
    lack of the language of their parents'  country  of  origin  is  not  a
    factor to be taken into account.  The  Judge  gave  sound  reasons  for
    finding that it would be reasonable  for  the  children  to  return  to
    Kosovo citing appropriate case law. It is abundantly  clear  that  this
    family entered the UK illegally and waited seven years  before  putting
    an application in.  They were obviously aware of the law and waited for
    seven years to make the application in the knowledge that it  would  be
    more likely to be successful.  This weighs heavily in an assessment  of
    the public interest.  I accept that it is not the fault of the children
    that their parents came here in the way that  they  did  and  took  the
    action that they did but the family live together.  They are a unit  as
    described in Zoumbas.  The parents were  brought  up  in  Kosovo.   The
    children have presumably been exposed to their parents' culture and the
    decision that the Judge made that it would not be unreasonable for them
    to return to Kosovo with their parents was one that was open to him  on
    the evidence before him for the more than adequate reasons given.

Notice of Decision

I find that there is no material error of law in the  determination  of  the
First-tier Tribunal and I uphold that decision.


Signed   Date: 14th December 2015

N A Baird
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
