
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41661/2013
                                                               IA/42129/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 September 2014                 |On 11 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                            MRS GHULAM ZEENAB (1)
                      MR SYED MUHAMMED SIBTAIN SHAH (2)
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Karnick of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                        AMENDED DECISION AND REASONS
                     FOR FINDING A MATERIAL ERROR OF LAW

Introduction

1.   The  present  appeal  is  by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department, who was the respondent before the First-tier Tribunal ("the
    FTT").  I will refer to the  Secretary  of  State  henceforth  as  "the
    respondent."  The appellants are a husband  and  wife,  both  Pakistani
    citizens. I will refer to them collectively by their description in the
    FTT as  "the  appellants"  or  individually  as  "the  wife"  and  "the
    husband."

2.   The respondent sought permission to  appeal  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Ransley (the Immigration Judge)  who  in  her
    determination allowed the appellants' appeal against  the  respondent's
    decision dated 20 September 2013 to  refuse  to  grant  the  appellants
    indefinite leave to remain (ILR).

3.   Following the promulgation of  that  decision  on  28  July  2014,  the
    respondent obtained permission to appeal on the basis  of  the  grounds
    which were drafted on 6 August 2014.  Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Reid considered that the grounds disclosed an arguable error of law  in
    that the appellants were illegal overstayers  who  were  attempting  to
    circumvent  the  Immigration  Rules.  They  had  invoked  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) as well as Section 55 ("Section  55")
    of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 ("the  2009  Act")
    to avoid removal when in fact there were  no  compelling  circumstances
    outside the Immigration Rules which enabled the judge to consider their
    applications  on  that  basis.   It  was  at  least  arguable  that   a
    proportionality assessment placed too much weight on the best interests
    of the appellant's grandchildren rather than on the public interest  of
    enforcing immigration control in the economic interests of the UK.

Background

4.   The appellants are  citizens  of  Pakistan  born,  respectively,  on  1
    January  1952  and  5  August  1942.   Their  immigration  history   is
    essentially as follows:

       . They arrived on six month visit visas on 2 March 1998.

       . On 23 July 1998 they applied for indefinite leave to remain as  the
         dependants of their son living in  the  United  Kingdom,  but  that
         application was refused on 8 November 1999.

       . They subsequently appealed that and subsequent decisions.

       . They first raised Article 8 of the ECHR on 5 August 2003 when  they
         applied  for  leave  to  remain  outside  the  Immigration   Rules.
         However, that application was also unsuccessful.

       . There followed numerous applications on human rights grounds,  none
         of which were successful. These included an application in 2012  on
         the grounds that Ghulam was  suffering  from  "severe  mental  ill-
         health" and therefore her article 3 right to freedom  from  inhuman
         and degrading treatment  would  be  interfered  with  if  she  were
         removed.

       . Finally, in their latest application, they sought ILR because  they
         claimed  their  rights  under  article  8  of  the  ECHR  would  be
         unlawfully interfered with. This was refused by the  respondent  on
         20 September 2013

5.   The FTT dismissed the  appellants'  appeals  against  the  respondent's
    refusal but Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lewis found that FTTJ  Law  had
    materially erred in the First-tier Tribunal and remitted the matter  to
    the First-tier Tribunal to be heard by a judge  other  than  FTTJ  Law.
    The remitted appeal came before the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  11  July
    2014.

6.   It seems at that hearing that Mr Karnick, counsel for  the  appellants,
    conceded  that  the  requirements  for  leave  to  remain   under   the
    Immigration Rules were not met because the appellants did not meet  the
    financial  criteria  under  the  Immigration  Rules.  It  seems   their
    principal reasons for remaining here was so that they could continue to
    obtain free treatment on the NHS and because they  wished  to  maintain
    direct physical contact with  their  grandchildren.  Neither  of  those
    reasons was covered by the Rules,  at  least  without  satisfaction  of
    other conditions. The Immigration Judge considered that the  appellants
    had formed such ties with  their  family  in  the  UK  (their  son  and
    grandchildren) that it would be a  disproportionate  interference  with
    their human rights  to  remove  them.   Furthermore,  he  accepted  the
    submission of their Counsel that their medical conditions and their age
    rendered their removal disproportionate within  the  terms  of  Article
    8(2) of the ECHR.

Grounds of Appeal

7.   The grounds of appeal appear comprehensive.  They state that  it  is  a
    material misdirection of law to ignore the  need  to  show  "compelling
    circumstances" which are not sufficiently recognised by the Immigration
    Rules before a freestanding application under Article  8  may  succeed.
    The respondent relies on the case of R (On the Application of) Nagre  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2013]  EWHC  720  (Admin).
    The appellant's length of residence in the UK,  where  of  the  correct
    character,  would  be  recognised  by  the  Immigration  Rules  and  in
    particular by Rule 276ADE.  The fact that the appellants did  not  meet
    those requirements was a reflection of the fact that they had not  been
    in  the  UK  for  a  sufficient  length  of  time.    They   maintained
    considerable ties with Pakistan, where they could  return.  They  would
    reintegrate into life there.  They came as  family  visitors  only  but
    have  always  intended  to  remain  in  the  UK  by  exploiting   every
    opportunity to bring claims and appeals when  those  claims  have  been
    refused.  The dependency on their family was disputed and their medical
    conditions were not compelling circumstances.  Grants of leave  outside
    the Immigration Rules were confined to those cases that the  respondent
    considered to be "exceptional."  They have been in the  UK  since  1998
    but their removal was not thought to be unduly harsh.  The  Immigration
    Judge failed to make any proportionality assessment whereby the  effect
    of removal of the appellants  was  weighed  against  the  wider  public
    interest of enforcing immigration control.  Although the  interests  of
    the grandchildren were primary considerations, they were not  the  only
    consideration   nor   did   their   interests   outweigh   all    other
    considerations.   The  appellants  have   continued   to   ignore   the
    Immigration Rules and taken advantage of  the  NHS  when  they  had  no
    entitlement to treatment, as the Immigration Judge herself found.  This
    had entailed considerable cost to the tax payer which was an  important
    factor in the respondent's decision to  enforce  effective  immigration
    control.  Given their immigration history and the wider public interest
    they should not be allowed to remain under Article 8.

    The Hearing

8.   The hearing lasted approximately 45  minutes.   Both  parties  attended
    represented respectively by Mr Karnick of Counsel for the appellant and
    Mr Diwnycz, a Home Office Presenting Officer, for the respondent.

9.   For the respondent, Mr Diwnycz simply relied on the grounds of appeal.

10.  For the appellants, Mr Karnick said that paragraph  276ADE  was  not  a
    complete code.  Neither the case of Gulshan [2013] UKUT 640  nor  Nagre
    (reference  above)  limited  the  requirement  for  a   proportionality
    assessment, indeed this was essential.  The Immigration  Judge  clearly
    had these cases in mind and did not "go marching straight into  Article
    8."  I was referred to paragraph 10  of  the  determination  where  the
    Immigration  Judge  gave  detailed  consideration  to  the  immigration
    history and all the circumstances of the case.  Nevertheless, she found
    the case to be "exceptional."  The Immigration  Judge  also  considered
    the appellants' health.  The appellants had presented a reasonably good
    case  although,  it  was  accepted,   they   had   made   unmeritorious
    applications in the past.  The possibility  that  the  appellants  were
    "illegal overstayers" was also considered by the Immigration Judge  but
    he did not consider it was a factor  of  such  weight  that  it  should
    outweigh other considerations.  Looking at all the evidence it was  not
    accepted that the Immigration Judge had  erred  in  law.   The  balance
    shifted in favour of  the  appellants  on  acceptance  of  the  medical
    evidence by the FTT.

11.  In reply Mr Diwnycz relied on the case of Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ  31.
     In that case the appellant had  a  family  life  which  was  primarily
    focussed outside the UK.  Therefore, the only effect of  removal  would
    be to prevent the appellant creating a family life here which  had  not
    previously existed.  It was held that on the facts of that  case  there
    was not a family life within the meaning of Article 8 in  the  UK.   It
    was pointed out that the strength of family  life  in  this  case  only
    related  to  the  relationship  between  the   appellants   and   their
    grandchildren.   They  could  continue  to  have  contact  with   those
    grandchildren if removed.  It was submitted that this was not a  factor
    that ought properly to outweigh  all  other  considerations  so  as  to
    prevent the removal of the appellants. To  require  the  respondent  to
    facilitate their family life with their  grandchildren  was  excessive.
    Other considerations such as the public interest  had  not  been  given
    adequate weight by the Immigration Judge.

12.  I allowed Mr Karnick a further submission  to  the  effect  that  there
    would be an adverse impact on the grandchildren of the removal  of  the
    appellants from the UK.  He  submitted  that  there  were  clear  fact-
    findings made and the decision should be allowed to stand.

Discussion

13.  The starting point for consideration of  the  respondent's  grounds  of
    appeal is the Immigration Judge's fact-findings.  She found that  there
    had been material changes in  their  circumstances  since  2006,  as  a
    significant  bond  had  developed  between  the  appellants  and  their
    grandchildren and she  was  clearly  impressed  with  a  psychologist's
    assessment carried out in June 2014 to the effect that there would be a
    potentially deleterious effect on the grandchildren if  the  appellants
    were removed. Considerable weight must  be  given  to  the  Immigration
    Judge's findings which were made after hearing oral evidence.

14.  However, it has been submitted  before  me,  and  Mr  Karnick  did  not
    dissent from this, that there must be "compelling circumstances"  which
    justify departure from the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

15.  The  Immigration  Judge  plainly  failed  to  consider  adequately  the
    following factors:

    (1)  The fact that the appellants had no right to be in  the  UK  since
         1998, such that little weight could be given to  the  private  life
         relied upon, having regard to section 117B(4) of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002;

    (2)  The fact that under Article 8(2) of the ECHR provides that:

             "There shall be no interference by a public authority with the
             exercise of this right (the right to respect for  private  and
             family life) except such as is in accordance with the law  and
             is necessary in a democratic society in the interests  of  ...
             the economic wellbeing of the country."

         The appellants represented a substantial burden to  UK  tax  payers
         arising from the fact that they had  no  income  or  employment  of
         their own and were largely, if not entirely, dependent on expensive
         treatment by the NHS to which they were not  entitled.  These  were
         factors to which some weight ought to have  been  attached  in  the
         circumstances, having regard to section 117B (3) of the 2002 Act;

    (3)  The Immigration Judge failed to give adequate consideration to the
         possibility that the appellants may have a family  support  network
         in Pakistan, consisting of the appellant's three brothers, and that
         medical treatment would be available there;

    (4)  The Immigration Judge's conclusion that the respondent's  decision
         would be contrary to the requirements of Section 55 of the 2009 Act
         failed to pay adequate regard to the fact  that  only  two  of  the
         grandchildren were below the age of  18,  they  could  continue  to
         maintain contact with their grandparents if the latter returned  to
         Pakistan and that the family unit between the  children  and  their
         parents would remain intact.

16.  I start with the first of these points.  The  appellants  had  made  at
    least six applications to remain in  the  UK  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules on human rights grounds.  These included claims under  Article  3
    of the ECHR.  None of those applications  contained  any  merit.   They
    were all unsuccessful.  They had all resulted in appeals  and  some  of
    them subsequent appeals at, no  doubt,  substantial  cost  to  the  tax
    payer.  On at least  one  occasion  (in  2006)  their  application  was
    subject to detailed consideration by an Immigration Judge  (Immigration
    Judge Birkby) but roundly rejected.  More  recently  before  Judge  Law
    sitting at Manchester in January 2014 the argument  was  run  that  the
    effect of removal of the appellants was to compel the family to  go  to
    Pakistan which would "kill" the appellants' grandchildren.  Immigration
    Judge Law noted that the appellants' physical health  had  deteriorated
    in the substantial time (now sixteen years) that they had been  in  the
    UK.  The argument on that particular occasion was  that  they  provided
    support for their grandchildren but as the Immigration Judge indicated,
    it was not credible that they could maintain the children during  their
    periods  of  ill-health.   As  he  put  it,  "they  had  made  numerous
    applications of every variety possible to remain in the UK, all of them
    having been discharged."  The argument was run in front of him that the
    appellants were at a suicide risk but that appeared to  be  unsupported
    by the evidence.  He described their immigration history as  "shocking"
    and he found that there was no substance to their human  rights  claim.
    They were in contempt of the Immigration Rules and not merely failed to
    satisfy them and they had cynically exploited the Secretary of  State's
    failure to expel them.

17.  Although Immigration Judge Law's language was  "strong"  the  Secretary
    of State is entitled to have regard to wider public interest  including
    the perception of the UK as "a soft target" if  it  does  not  properly
    enforce immigration controls.  The respondent has strenuously  resisted
    any recognition of the appellants' status in  the  UK.   Due  to  their
    persistent failure to return to Pakistan they have now been  here  long
    enough to be suffering from some of the ill-health that tends to affect
    people in later life.  However, I  find  that  their  poor  immigration
    history was a significant factor to take into account when carrying out
    the relevant proportionality exercise required under Article 8(2).   In
    my judgment the Immigration Judge failed to attach sufficient weight to
    this factor.

18.  Secondly, the extent of the husband's ill-health  was  exaggerated  for
    the purposes of the hearing.  He did have numerous reports from general
    practitioners and others in relation to the substantial treatment  they
    had been receiving from the NHS.  Epilepsy is relatively common and  is
    largely controlled with anti-convulsant medication, as  it  appears  to
    have been in this case. The wife is said to have suffered  dementia  by
    the date of the hearing before the FTT  but  that  was  also  a  common
    condition, particularly in later  life.   It  was  not  suggested  that
    either appellant was unable to travel, being only 62 in the case of the
    wife and 72 in the case of the husband.  Furthermore, the  evidence  of
    Dr Latif, whose report has not been supplied  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    seemed to stray beyond medical expertise in terms of the family support
    network  available  in  Pakistan.   The  sponsor,  when  he  gave  oral
    evidence, denied that the second appellant's three  brothers  would  be
    available to support the  appellants  if  they  returned  to  Pakistan.
    However, the sponsor had plainly not told the  truth  to  the  Tribunal
    when he gave evidence  that  he  had  been  paying  for  their  medical
    treatment and a degree of scepticism in terms of  his  credibility  can
    therefore be applied to this evidence.

19.  Additionally, the extent to  which  medical  treatment  may  have  been
    available in Pakistan was not adequately considered by the  Immigration
    Judge.  In  fact,  the  respondent  had  set  out  in  some  detail  at
    paragraphs 23 and following in her refusal letter the extent  to  which
    treatment was in fact available there.  It is not the function  of  the
    ECHR to facilitate entry to the UK to enable foreign nationals  to  use
    the NHS when they have healthcare in their own countries for which they
    would have to pay.  The Immigration Judge gave inadequate consideration
    to the possibility that the appellants, other  family  members  or  the
    sponsor, could pay for them to receive medical treatment in Pakistan.

20.  The finding that the respondent's decision was contrary to  Section  55
    of the 2009 Act appears to be  a  finding  not  properly  open  to  the
    Immigration Judge on the evidence.  Only two of the sponsor's  children
    were below the age of 16, and one of those was already 15 years of age.
     It is the case that the  welfare  of  a  child  is  to  be  a  primary
    consideration in making an immigration decision but  this  is  to  form
    part of the balancing exercise required under article 8 (2).   However,
    the relationship was that of grandparents  and  grandchildren  and  the
    latter's removal from the UK would not have the effect of  breaking  up
    the family unit here.  In any event, this had  been  a  factor  at  the
    hearing in 2006 which was rejected by Immigration Judge Birkby.  It may
    be desirable for grandparents to be close by but  it  is  by  no  means
    established that the effect of removal on  the  emotional  relationship
    between grandchildren and  grandparents  was  such  as  to  render  the
    respondent's decision unlawful.

Conclusion

21.  The grounds of appeal, which state that no  good  grounds  existed  for
    allowing the appellants to remain in the  UK  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules, are made out.  The judge did  materially  misdirect  herself  in
    finding that there were "compelling circumstances"  not  recognised  by
    the Immigration Rules having regard to the particular history  of  this
    matter.  The appellants'  poor  immigration  history,  and  substantial
    reliance on the NHS  were  factors  of  sufficient  weight  to  lead  a
    properly directed tribunal to  a  different  conclusion  than  the  one
    reached, particularly having regard to  the  statutory  presumption  in
    section 117B(1), and the 'little  weight'  provisions  in  relation  to
    private life  in  section  117B(4).   Additionally,  the  message  that
    "spinning out" the appeal process for as long  as  possible  ultimately
    results in being allowed to remain in  the  UK  is  a  powerful  factor
    weighing on the public interest and one the respondent was entitled  to
    consider very important.  This was not  the  type  of  case  where  the
    primary  consideration  of  the  children's  interests   required   the
    respondent to allow grandparents to remain in the UK  in  circumstances
    where they had no right to be  here  and  did  not  qualify  under  the
    Immigration Rules. There is no reason why they should not  be  able  to
    maintain contact with their grandchild from Pakistan.

Decision

22.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and should be set-aside.  The  Upper  Tribunal  will  re-make  that
    decision.

23.  The appellants' appeal against  the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse
    further leave to remain in the UK is dismissed.

24.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

