
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/41310/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision and Reasons           |
|On 3rd November 2014                          |Promulgated On 9th December    |
|                                              |2014                           |
|                                              |                               |
|                                              |                               |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                        Mrs Alice Adunola Arogundade
                        (Anonymity Direction Not Made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Okunu, instructed by Samuel Louis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 7th  July  1973  and  she
    applied for a residence card as confirmation of a right  to  reside  in
    the UK on the basis of her marriage or durable relationship with an EEA
    national.

 2. The respondent refused the appellant's application  on  23rd  September
    2013 with reference  to  Regulation  7  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations (EEA  Regulations).   The  detailed  refusal
    letter  stated  that  the  appellant  had  not  provided  evidence   to
    demonstrate she had registered a customary marriage in accordance  with
    Nigerian Law.  Accordingly it was not legally recognised  as  valid  in
    Nigeria and thus could not be accepted as valid in the UK.

 3. The respondent noted that the appellant  had  also  failed  to  provide
    satisfactory evidence that she was is in a durable relationship with an
    EEA national in accordance with Regulation 8.

 4. First-tier Tribunal Judge Cameron determined the matter  on  22nd  July
    2014 and issued a determination  on  5th  August  2014  dismissing  the
    appeal.  He dismissed the appeal with reference  to  Regulation  7  and
    Regulation 8 of The Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006.  He did not accept that the appellant had demonstrated  that  she
    was in a durable relationship  because  of  the  inconsistency  in  the
    answers given during cross examination between the  appellant  and  her
    said  partner.   An  application  for  permission  to  appeal  by   the
    respondent was granted by First Tier Tribunal Judge McDade on the basis
    that the judge misapplied the correct standard  of  proof.  The  matter
    came before me.

 5. At the hearing however Mr Okunu recorded  that  he  had  requested  the
    Record of Proceedings.  He also  at  the  hearing  before  me  made  an
    application to amend the grounds of  appeal.   He  submitted  that  the
    judge had erred in the approach to Regulation 7 of the EEA  Regulations
    and had misapplied Kareem (Proxy marriages EU law) Nigeria [2014]  UKUT
    24 and thus the decision was flawed. A document issued by  a  competent
    authority had been issued.

 6. However, Kareem, as confirmed in TA and Others (Kareem explained) Ghana
    [2014] UKUT 00316 (IAC) identifies that the issue of whether there is a
    marital  relationship,  for  the  purposes  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2006, must always be examined in accordance with  the  laws
    of the Member State from which the Union citizen  obtains  nationality.
    As the judge  identified  in  paragraph  52  'the  difficulty  for  the
    appellant is that the appellant has not provided any evidence that  the
    marriage is valid in accordance with the law of the  member  stated  of
    the union citizen'.  The application by the appellant's  representative
    was a substantial departure from the grounds and I note that the  judge
    correctly directed himself.  I found that  there  was  no  prospect  of
    success in this application and refused Mr Okunu his application.

 7. The appeal was therefore dismissed on the basis of the validity of  the
    marriage and as Kareem confirms it is for the  appellant  to  show  the
    validity of the marriage.  However, the judge also turned his  mind  to
    the issue of the relationship  and  whether  the  appellant  was  in  a
    durable relationship.  The burden of  proof  is  on  the  appellant  to
    establish that the appellant is in a durable relationship. The  grounds
    alleged that the judge was perverse  and  irrational  in  his  approach
    because out of  140  questions  the  appellant  and  sponsor  had  only
    contradicted each other on 6.  This is a high threshold to  demonstrate
    and I have carefully assessed the record of proceedings.

 8. The judge addressed this issue in paragraph 56 of the determination and
    I have considered the record of proceedings.  The judge explained  that
    'it is relevant to take into account  the  particular  questions  which
    were answered inconsistently'. Thus the judge weighted  the  importance
    of the nature of the questions  rather  than  the  quantity.  First  at
    paragraph 57 the judge noted that the appellant  could  not  spell  her
    husband's name.  The  judge  heard  re-examination  on  and  took  into
    account the point that the appellant could not read English and was not
    educated and that the couple were learning the  language  together  but
    found that as they had been married for over  5  years  she  should  at
    least be able to spell his name.  She could not.

 9. The judge also noted the fact that the appellant stated she  had  lived
    in the current accommodation for 2 years whereas the husband stated  it
    was two months which accorded with the tenancy  agreement.   The  judge
    took into account that giving evidence in court could be difficult [60]
    but he did not accept that the appellant  could  be  so  wrong  in  her
    response as to where she lived.  Both also gave an incorrect answer  as
    to the rent.  Clearly the judge found these to be fundamental questions
    and gave his reasoning and this does not disclose perversity.

10. The judge also made a finding that  the  appellant's  father  was  dead
    whereas the husband stated that she was in contact with her father on a
    regular basis and he would occasionally  speak  to  him  when  she  was
    speaking to the father.

11. The judge highlighted serious departures from consistent evidence of  a
    fundamental nature and I do not accept that the  judge's  reasoning  in
    this matter was perverse or irrational.  He gave adequate  reasons  for
    his findings.

12. I find that there is no error of law in the determination of the  First
    Tier  Tribunal  judge  for  the  reasons  explained   above   and   the
    determination shall stand.


Signed                                  Date 3rd November 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
