
[pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41535/2014
                                                               IA/41543/2014
                                                             & IA/41549/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 5th October 2015                  |On 27th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And
                                     A O
                                     M A
                                    & I A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Claimants


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Aghayere of Melrose Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, hereinafter the SSHD, is seeking  permission  to  appeal
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Mitchell.   For  the
    purposes of this decision I have identified the appellants in the First-
    tier Tribunal as the claimants.

 2. The claimants are mother and  two  minor  children.  These  proceedings
    concern the status and interests of children. In order to  protect  the
    child and those interests I make an anonymity direction.

 3. This is an appeal by the SSHD against the determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Mitchell promulgated on 14th May 2015, whereby the judge
    allowed the claimants' appeals against the decisions  of  the  SSHD  to
    remove each of the claimants from the  United  Kingdom  having  refused
    them leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

 4. In essence the claimants were seeking to remain in the  United  Kingdom
    on the basis of the length of time that they had  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom including the fact that the two minors claimants had been  born
    in the UK; on the basis of their integration into United Kingdom  life;
    and on the basis of the private life that they  had  developed  in  the
    United Kingdom. The claimants were seeking to rely on  The  Immigration
    Rules or alternative on the basis of Article 8 family and private  life
    rights acquired whilst they were in the United Kingdom.

 5. The judge had  allowed  the  appeals.  In  respect  of  the  two  minor
    claimants  under  the   Immigration   Rules,   specifically   paragraph
    276ADE(iv). In respect of the  first  claimant  of  the  basis  of  her
    Article 8 of the ECHR family life with the two minor claimants.

 6. By decision made on the 13th of July 2015 leave to appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal was granted. Thus the matter appears before me to determine in
    the first instance whether or not there is  an  error  of  law  in  the
    original determination.

 7. The grounds of appeal submit that: --

      a) the judge has materially misdirected himself in law by allowing the
         appeal on the grounds that it would be  unreasonable  for  the  two
         minor claimants to leave the United Kingdom

      b) the judge  has  materially  erred  by  finding  that  it  would  be
         unreasonable for the  two  minor  claimants  to  leave  the  United
         Kingdom because of their continuing education.

      c) the judge has material erred in allowing the appeals on  the  basis
         of ongoing education in the United Kingdom.

Factual Background

 8. The first claimant is a citizen of Nigeria and she claims to have  come
    to the United Kingdom on 30 September 2004. She claims that she  was  a
    visitor and that her leave expired in 2004 or early in 2005. There  was
    no evidence that she had ever had a visit visa, there were  no  records
    and the claimant has not produced any documentary evidence  in  support
    of her claim such as her passport. There is no evidence of the identity
    of the person she came to visit.

 9. In her evidence she stated that she did not return to  Nigeria  because
    of compassionate circumstances.  No  details  were  given  as  to  what
    exactly those circumstances  were.  The  judge  noted  that  the  first
    claimant's mother has visited her in the United Kingdom  on  more  than
    one  occasion  and  her  stepdad  is  alleged  to  have  supported  her
    financially to enable her  to  undertake  educational  courses  in  the
    United Kingdom. Thus whatever  the  compassionate  circumstances  were,
    they cannot have related to her relationship with her  mother  and  her
    stepfather at the time and with whom she appears to  have  been  living
    prior to leaving Nigeria.

10. With regard to her finances as noted by Judge Mitchell again  there  is
    no evidence, other than the claimant's oral evidence,  as  to  how  the
    educational  courses  have  actually  been  paid  for.  The  claimant's
    evidence was to the effect of that her family were supporting  her.  By
    the time of the hearing the first claimant was alleging  that  she  had
    fallen out with her mother, who was still alive living in Nigeria.

11. It is to be noted that whilst the first claimant came into  the  United
    Kingdom in September 2004 she was having her first child in the  United
    Kingdom on 19 December 2005. The birth certificate for the eldest child
    indicates that her father was in the UK working as  a  care  worker  or
    support worker [pages 125 & 126 appellant's bundle].  Sometime  shortly
    after entry the first claimant must have commenced a relationship  with
    the father of her children and that relationship certainly lasted until
    2008 and the birth of the second child. No evidence was given as to the
    whereabouts of the father of the children or  his  immigration  status.
    The first claimant does say  that  the  father  has  extremely  limited
    contact with the children and does not play any part in their  life  at
    all. The first claimant therefore has sole responsibility for them.  It
    is unclear whether the father makes any financial contribution  to  the
    support of the two minors.

12. Having entered the United Kingdom  the  first  claimant  shortly  after
    entry commenced  relationship  with  the  gentleman  from  Nigeria  and
    remained in that relationship for a number of years. From the documents
    that have been produced it appears that the appellant gave birth to the
    two minor claimants during the course of the relationship  at  national
    health hospitals.

13. I note that within paragraph 27 to 31 there are references to the first
    claimant undertaking courses in the United Kingdom. Whilst at paragraph
    24 there is reference to the fact that the first claimant alleged  that
    she was educated privately in Nigeria,  it  is  to  be  noted  that  in
    paragraph 28 she was undertaking a course in adult numeracy. The two do
    not seem to sit together easily. There is no evidence as  to  who  paid
    for any of these courses, although the appellant has claimed  that  her
    stepfather did. There is no evidence of money transfers.  There  is  no
    documentary evidence as  to  how  the  first  claimant  was  supporting
    herself throughout the whole of the period she has been in the UK.

14. As noted by the judge in paragraphs 35 and 36 there is no evidence that
    she has contributed to the United Kingdom by  paying  tax  or  national
    insurance. The first claimant was noted to  have  worked  illegally  on
    market stalls, selling items on the internet  and  working  voluntarily
    for the Salvation Army, although the judge suggests that the latter was
    a benefit to her as she was able to take clothes that had been  donated
    and sell the clothes herself. There is reference to the fact  that  the
    first claimant has been buying and selling on eBay. Again there  is  no
    evidence to support such.

15. It was noted that the first claimant suggested that she  would  not  be
    able to trade in Nigeria and that she was extremely  disparaging  about
    the Nigerian economy. The judge by comparison refers to the  fact  that
    the Nigerian economy is  the  largest  in  Africa  and  appears  to  be
    booming. At various stages the judge having noted the evidence from the
    first claimant draws  attention  to  other  evidence  and  facts  which
    clearly contradict it.

16. The first claimant also claimed that Nigeria was not safe  because  she
    was a Christian. The judge noted that she came from Lagos, which is  in
    the south of the country and it was mainly in the North that there were
    problems for Christians. It was noted that she had a  mother  that  was
    living in Nigeria along with a sister. The  judge  was  satisfied  that
    there was no credible evidence that the family could not safely  return
    to Lagos.

17. The judge at paragraph 35 finds that the first claimant cannot meet the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.  The  judge  at  various  stages
    refers to the first claimant embellishing her evidence  and  refers  to
    parts of her evidence before discounting such.

18. The first claimant had used medical services and  educational  services
    including educational  services  for  herself,  the  second  and  third
    claimant without making  any  contribution  to  society.  She  has  not
    produced any evidence of income and has not disclosed how  she  manages
    to support herself. There  is  no  evidence  from  the  father  of  the
    children and no evidence that he provides any support to his family. It
    is clear that the judge was less than impressed by the  first  claimant
    and did not find her evidence credible in material respects.   Had  the
    matter been solely concerned with the first claimant then it is  likely
    that the judge would not have allowed the appeal.  However  it  was  in
    that context, that is that the first claimant 'should' be removed  from
    the United Kingdom, that the judge had considered the position  of  the
    children.

19. In that regard, although not drawn to the  judge's  attention,  I  draw
    attention  to  the  Immigration  Directorate  Instructions  'is  Family
    Migration: Appendix FM Section  1.0b  Family  Life  (as  a  partner  or
    parent) and Private Life: 10 Year Routes' gives the following guidance:

         '11.2.4 Would it be unreasonable to expect  a  non-British  Citizen
         child to leave the UK?

         The requirement that a non-British Citizen Child has lived  in  the
         UK for a continuous period of  at  least  seven  years  immediately
         preceding the date of the application, recognises  that  over  time
         children start to put down roots and integrate into the life in the
         UK to the extent that  being  required  to  leave  the  UK  may  be
         unreasonable. The longer the child has resided in the UK, the  more
         the balance will begin to swing in terms of it  being  unreasonable
         to expect the child to leave the UK, and  strong  reasons  will  be
         required in order to refuse the case with continuous  UK  residence
         of more than seven years.'

20. It has to be  acknowledged  that  different  considerations  may  apply
    depending upon circumstances. Where for example the parents  are  being
    removed  because  of  serious  criminal   behaviour,   the   issue   of
    reasonableness has to be considered  in  that  context.  By  comparison
    where a parent is a British citizen or where the parent has a right  to
    remain such has to be taken account of in assessing the  reasonableness
    exercise.

21. I also draw attention to the case of EV  (Philippines)  v  SSHD  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 874 in which LJ Clarke sets out  criteria  for  assessing  the
    best interests of the child:-

         "A decision as to what is in the best interests  of  children  will
         depend on a number of factors such as (a) their age; (b) the length
         of time that they have been here; (c) how long they  have  been  in
         education; (c) what stage their education has reached; (d) to  what
         extent they have become distanced from the country to which  it  is
         proposed that they return; (e) how renewable their connection  with
         it may be; (f) to what extent they will have linguistic, medical or
         other difficulties in adapting to life in that country; and (g) the
         extent to which the  course  proposed  will  interfere  with  their
         family  life  or  their  rights  (if  they  have  any)  as  British
         citizens."

22. LJ Lewison in EV (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874 at  paragraph
    58

         "In my judgment, therefore, the assessment of the best interests of
         the children must be made on the basis that the facts are  as  they
         are in the real world. If one parent has no right  to  remain,  but
         the other parent does, that is the  background  against  which  the
         assessment is conducted. If neither parent has the right to remain,
         then that  is  the  background  against  which  the  assessment  is
         conducted. Thus the ultimate question will be: is it reasonable  to
         expect the child to follow the parent with no right  to  remain  to
         the country of origin?"

23. In looking at the Decision it is correct to say that the judge  appears
    to have started with looking at the position  of  the  first  claimant.
    However that has to be considered in context if the mother had a  right
    to remain in the United Kingdom then the position of the children would
    be that much stronger. If the parent has no right to be in  the  United
    Kingdom than the position of the children has to be considered in  that
    context that is if the parents are to be  removed  what  other  factors
    within the best interests of the children and in the  private  life  of
    the children would render it unreasonable to remove the child.

24. In so doing the judge considered the circumstances  that  the  children
    would face on being returned to Nigeria a country of which they have no
    experience. The judge at paragraph 41 identifies  that  these  are  two
    minor children who have lived in the United Kingdom the whole of  their
    lives. The judge is well aware of the age of the  children  having  set
    the dates of birth out in  paragraph  1  of  the  decision.  The  judge
    clearly examines whether the children have any significant knowledge or
    contact with Nigeria. He notes that English is a common language within
    Nigeria. The judge considers whether or not there  would  be  available
    support for the family in  Nigeria  and  clearly  questions  the  first
    claimant's assertion that she has fallen out with her mother. It is  at
    that stage that the judge again made reference to  the  fact  that  the
    first claimant has a tendency to exaggerate and embellish her  account.
    The judge then considers  the  possibility  of  there  being  available
    support from the first claimant working and then again  refers  to  the
    fact  that  he  gives  little  account  for   the   first   appellant's
    observations about  the  lack  of  opportunities  in  Nigeria  and  the
    unavailability of work.

25. The judge takes account  of  the  conduct  of  the  first  claimant  in
    overstaying and clearly flouting immigration laws. He acknowledges that
    the children, whilst being innocent of responsibility  for  such  being
    totally dependent upon their mother, they are likely to  reap  benefits
    from such by reason of the length of time that they have  been  in  the
    UK. The judge also considers the circumstances of  the  family  in  the
    United Kingdom. The judge assesses whether or not there is evidence  of
    work or ability to support themselves in the United Kingdom.

26. The judge goes on to assess the fact that the  children  have  friends;
    have settled lifestyle and appear to be thriving  in  their  respective
    schools. He acknowledges that whilst there may  not  receive  the  same
    level of education in Nigeria, education will be available in the  home
    country.

27. As a final matter the judge emphasises that the longer that a child has
    been in the United Kingdom the more it  becomes  unreasonable  for  the
    child be removed. The judge notes that both children have  crossed  the
    threshold of seven years  and  that  that  was  the  threshold  set  by
    Parliament.

28. It has also to be noted that within paragraph 38 the  judge  has  taken
    account of Section 117B  of  the  2002  Act.  That  assessment  clearly
    impacts on the first claimant because as noted  by  the  judge  Section
    117B (6) makes the point  that  public  interest  does  not  require  a
    person's removal where they have a genuine and subsisting  relationship
    with the qualifying child and it would not be reasonable to expect  the
    child to leave the United Kingdom.

29. Whilst in coming to a conclusion in this matter the  judge  has  within
    paragraph 44 referred to the fact that the best interests of both these
    minor claimants will be to remain in this country and  not  to  disrupt
    the education he continues by linking that to their private  life.  The
    judge clearly says taking into account all the factors  set  out  above
    the cumulative effect is that the consequence of those factors  renders
    removal of the two young claimants unreasonable.

30. They reference in paragraph  45  to  the  case  of  Zoumbas  is  merely
    emphasising those factors which have to be considered in assessing  the
    best interests of the children. Whilst it is in the context of  Article
    8 it is still relevant to show what factors should be taken account  of
    in assessing the best interests of children.

31.  Having  determined  that  the  minor  claimants  succeed   under   the
    Immigration Rules in part on the basis that it would be unreasonable to
    expect them to leave the United Kingdom  the  judge  has  then  clearly
    considered the position of first claimant. There is  clearly  a  family
    life between the appellant and the children and that family  life  will
    be interfered with if  the  first  claimant  is  removed.  Clearly  the
    decision is in accordance with the law and ostensibly for the  purposes
    of maintaining immigration control. As a final factor the judge has  to
    consider whether or not the decision is proportionately  justified.  In
    making that assessment the judge has  to  consider  the  provisions  of
    Section 117B (vi). The judge having considered all of the evidence  was
    entitled to come to the conclusion that  the  decision  to  remove  the
    first claimant in light of the fact that it was unreasonable to  remove
    the two minor claimants was in the  circumstances  not  proportionately
    justified. Accordingly the judge was entitled to allow  the  appeal  in
    respect of the first claimant on the basis of Article 8 of the ECHR.

32. I am satisfied that the judge has considered  all  of  the  appropriate
    criteria in coming to his decision. This is not a  situation  in  which
    the judge has merely allowed the matter on the basis of the educational
    position of the two minor claimants. I am satisfied that the judge  has
    taken account of their age, the  fact  that  they  have  spent  such  a
    significant period of time in the United Kingdom, nine years in respect
    of one child and more than seven years in respect of  the  other;  that
    they have never been to Nigeria; and have spent all of their  lives  in
    the United Kingdom. In those circumstances the decision is one that was
    open to the judge on the facts and it is certainly one which the  judge
    justified on the basis of the evidence presented.

33. There is a no material error of law in the determination.  I uphold the
    decision to allow the appeals.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure
