
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/41822/2014
     IA/41826/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 June 2015                                |On 23 June 2015               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     (1) Miss Shrika Emmpally (a minor)
                          (2) Mr Sreedhar Emmpally
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                       Respondents/Claimants


Representation:

For the Secretary of State:     Ms Alice Holmes, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondents/Claimants:  Mr V Makol, solicitor, Maalik & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision
    of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge   Pears   sitting   at   Richmond
    Magistrates' Court on 23 February 2015) allowing the claimants'  appeal
    under the Rules, and in the alternative under Article 8  ECHR,  against
    the decision by the Secretary of State to refuse to grant them leave to
    remain as the dependants of a Tier 4 Student Migrant.  The  student  in
    question is the mother of the first  claimant,  and  the  wife  of  the
    second claimant.  The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  anonymity
    direction, and I do not consider  that  the  claimants  require  to  be
    accorded anonymity for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

The Reasons for Granting Permission

 2. On 21 April  2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Juliet  Grant-Hutchison
    granted the Secretary of State permission to appeal for  the  following
    reasons:

         It is arguable that the judge has misdirected  himself  in  law  by
         failing to properly apply the correct Immigration Rule  because  he
         was unable to find paragraph 319C(i) which was referred to  in  the
         refusal and substituted 319C(b)(i) instead.  As such the assessment
         under Article 8 of ECHR is arguably flawed.

The Background

 3. The claimants are all nationals of India.  The first claimant was  born
    in India on 23 June 2008,  and  was  thus  aged  six  at  the  date  of
    application.  The  first  claimant  is  the  daughter  of  Mrs  Kalyani
    Emmpally.

 4. Both claimants first entered the UK on 1 November 2010 with valid entry
    clearance as Tier 4 Student Migrant  dependants  from  7  October  2010
    until 30 March 2012.  They were granted further leave to remain as Tier
    1 dependants until 7 August  2014.   On  7  August  2014  Mrs  Emmpally
    applied for leave to remain as a student, and the claimants applied  at
    the same time for leave to remain as her dependants.  The Secretary  of
    State granted Mrs Emmpally's application on 6 October 2014, but refused
    the applications of the claimants two days later on 8 October 2014.

 5. In the letter addressed  to  the  second  claimant,  Mr  Emmpally,  the
    Secretary of State explained that his wife, Mrs  Emmpally,  was  not  a
    government-sponsored student.  She  was  studying  CIMA,  which  was  a
    QCF/NQF level 7 course from 29 July 2014 until 25  May  2017  at  Saint
    Patrick's International College.   This  was  not  a  higher  education
    institute.  So the Secretary of State was  not  satisfied  he  met  the
    requirements of the Rules to be granted leave to remain as a  dependant
    partner of a  points-based  system  migrant.   It  had  therefore  been
    decided to refuse his application under paragraph 319C(i) of the Rules.



 6. An identical  letter  was  sent  to  the  first  claimant,  incorrectly
    describing her relationship to Mrs  Emmpally  as  that  of  a  partner,
    rather than Mrs Emmpally being her mother.  Both claimants were given a
    right of appeal as the Secretary of State made a  concomitant  decision
    to remove them from the UK by way of directions under Section 47 of the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.







The Findings of Judge Pears

 7. In his decision, the judge made inter alia the following findings:

         18.  The [SSHD] has not shown the decisions made were in accordance
             with  the  law  and  the  reasons  stated  are  impossible  to
             understand and in relation to the first [claimant]  there  are
             issues with the decision that  are  set  out  in  paragraph  4
             above.  Further, in  any  event,  the  [SSHD]  has  failed  to
             mention or consider that Mrs Emmpally was  allowed  to  switch
             categories and was granted  leave  until  2017.   I  therefore
             conclude  the  decisions  were  therefore  not  'otherwise  in
             accordance with the law' and I would  allow  the  appeals  and
             that the cases, for those reasons,  to  be  remitted  for  the
             [SSHD] to consider them appropriately.

         19.  However the [SSHD] served a One-Stop Notice  on  each  of  the
             [claimants] and the [claimants] have raised Article 8.

         20.  I find the [claimants] have met the Immigration Rules as I can
             see no reason in  law  why  they  do  not;  Mrs  Emmpally  was
             permitted to change categories, the [claimants]  in  the  past
             have changed categories and the [SSHD] has not referred to any
             Immigration Rule, factor  or  evidence  which  prevents  their
             applications being granted.  I therefore allow their appeals.

         21.  Further or alternatively the [claimants] have  raised  a  more
             than arguable basis for the exercise of discretion outside the
             Rules in relation to their Article 8 rights on  the  basis  of
             page 5FF of the skeleton argument.  The [SSHD]  wholly  failed
             to take into account relevant factors such as  the  impact  of
             the decisions on the family unit and the impact on  the  first
             [claimant], given the grant of leave to Mrs Emmpally.  I  find
             therefore I should consider this matter outside the  Rules  as
             an evaluation for the first time is necessary ...

         27.  It seems to me that, in the circumstances  of  this  case  and
             particularly as Mrs Emmpally has leave but  only  until  2017,
             the decisions to refuse to vary  leave  and  require  them  to
             leave the UK would be wholly disproportionate.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

 8. Paragraph 319C sets out the requirements for entry clearance  or  leave
    to remain as the partner of a relevant points-based system migrant.  To
    qualify for entry clearance or leave to remain  as  the  partner  of  a
    relevant points-based  system  migrant,  an  applicant  must  meet  the
    requirements listed in paragraph 319C.  If the  applicant  meets  these
    requirements, entry clearance or leave to remain will be  granted.   If
    the applicant does not meet these requirements, the application will be
    refused.

 9. The requirements  at  the  beginning  of  paragraph  319C  include  the
    following:

    (b)  The applicant must be the spouse or civil  partner,  unmarried  or
         same-sex partner of a person who:

         (i)  has valid leave to enter or remain as a relevant  points-based
             system migrant; or

         (ii) is, at the same time, being granted entry clearance  or  leave
             to remain as a relevant points-based system migrant.

10. In order to ascertain whether Mrs Emmpally is a  relevant  points-based
    system migrant, it is necessary  to  consider  319C(i)  which  contains
    restrictions and conditions on a Tier 4 (General) Student being treated
    as a relevant points-based system migrant.  In order for the student to
    be a relevant points-based system migrant, he or she must meet  one  of
    the conditions set out in sub-paragraphs (i) to (iv).

11. Condition (i) is that the relevant points-based system migrant must  be
    a government-sponsored student.  Condition (ii) is  that  the  relevant
    points-based system migrant must, among other things, be sponsored by a
    sponsor who is a recognised body or a body in receipt of funding  as  a
    higher education institution from, in the case  of  Mrs  Emmpally,  the
    Higher Education Funding Council for England.

12. Condition (iii) is that the relevant points-based system  migrant  must
    be applying for or have been granted leave  to  remain,  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student on the doctorate extension scheme.

13. Condition (iv) is that the following conditions must be met:

    (1)  The relevant points-based system  migrant  must  be  applying  for
         entry clearance, leave to enter, or leave to remain, to undertake a
         course of study that is longer than six months and either:

         (a)  have entry clearance, leave to enter, or leave to remain as  a
             Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant or as a student to  undertake
             a course of study longer than six months; or

         (b)  have last had entry clearance, leave to  enter,  or  leave  to
             remain within the three months preceding the application as  a
             Tier 4 (General) Student or as a student to undertake a course
             of study longer than six months; and

    (2)  the partner must either:

         (a)  have entry clearance, leave to enter, or leave  to  remain  as
             the partner of a Tier 4 (General) Student or  a  student  with
             entry clearance, leave  to  enter,  or  leave  to  remain,  to
             undertake a course of study longer than six months; or

         (b)  have last had entry clearance, leave to  enter,  or  leave  to
             remain within the three months preceding  the  application  as
             the partner of a Tier 4 (General) Student or as a  student  to
             undertake a course of study longer than six months; and

    (3)  the relevant points-based system migrant and the partner  must  be
         applying at the same time.

14. Mr Makol accepted that the  effect  of  paragraph  319C(i)(iv)  was  to
    prevent  a  dependent  partner,  such  as  the  second  claimant,  from
    switching from the status of a Tier 1 dependant to a Tier  4  dependant
    unless one of the conditions contained in subparagraphs  (i)  to  (iii)
    were met.

15. Mrs Emmpally was not applying  for  leave  to  remain  on  a  doctorate
    extension scheme, so the only conditions which were potentially in play
    were whether she was a government-sponsored student or whether she  was
    sponsored by a sponsor who was a recognised body or a body  in  receipt
    of funding as a higher education institution.   Mrs  Emmpally  did  not
    satisfy either of these two conditions,  as  rightly  asserted  in  the
    refusal decision.  Accordingly, the decisions appealed against were  in
    accordance with the Rules, and the judge erred in law in finding to the
    contrary.

16. There are also clear flaws in the judge's  reasoning  under  Article  8
    ECHR.  Firstly, he did not  follow  the  required  two-stage  approach,
    beginning with an analysis  of  whether  the  claimants  had  a  viable
    private or  family  life  claim  under  Appendix  FM  or  Rule  276ADE.
    Secondly, while the claimants had an arguable Article 8  claim  outside
    the Rules applying Zhang [2013] EWHC 891 (Admin), to  which  the  judge
    refers in paragraph [11] of his decision, the  judge's  proportionality
    assessment was fatally flawed by his incorrect  starting  point,  which
    was there was nothing in  the  Rules  to  prevent  the  claimants  from
    switching  their  status  from  being  Tier  1  dependants  to  Tier  4
    dependants.

The Remaking of the Decision

17. It is not necessary to either  remit  this  appeal  for  further  fact-
    finding evidence or to adjourn to enable me to hear  further  evidence.
    There is no challenge to the record of the  evidence  set  out  by  the
    judge in his decision, and I am able to  remake  the  decision  on  the
    basis of the evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal.

18. For the purposes of remaking the  decision,  Mr  Makol  invited  me  to
    follow an unreported and unappealed  decision  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Hanley.

Discussion and Findings

19. The claimants do not qualify for leave to remain under the  Rules,  and
    it is not suggested that they have a viable  family  life  claim  under
    Appendix FM or a viable private life claim under Rule 276ADE.

20. Turning to an Article 8 claim outside the Rules, I refer to  the  five-
    point Razgar test.  As the threshold for the engagement of private life
    rights is relatively low, I accept that questions 1 and 2 of the Razgar
    test should be answered in favour of both claimants with regard to  the
    establishment of private life in  the  United  Kingdom,  as  they  have
    resided here lawfully since 2010.  I am not persuaded that there  is  a
    prospective interference with  family  life,  as  it  is  open  to  Mrs
    Emmpally to return to India with her husband and  child.   She  had  no
    legitimate expectation of being able to continue to enjoy  family  life
    in the United Kingdom with her husband and child while at the same time
    embarking upon a  further  course  of  study  that  did  not  meet  the
    conditions set out in paragraph 319C(i) of the Rules.

21. Questions 3 and 4 of the Razgar test must be answered in favour of  the
    Secretary of State, and so the crucial question is whether the proposed
    interference is proportionate.  In considering this question, I bear in
    mind the factors set out in Section 117B of the 2002 Act.  As  held  by
    the Upper Tribunal in AM (S117B)  Malawi  [2015]  UKUT  260  (IAC)  the
    statutory duty to consider the matters set out in S117B of the 2002 Act
    is satisfied if the Tribunal's decision shows that it has had regard to
    such parts of it as are relevant.  An appellant can obtain no  positive
    right to a grant of leave to remain from either Section 117B(2) or (3),
    whatever the degree of his fluency in English, or the strength  of  his
    financial resources.

22. The main argument advanced on behalf of the  claimants  is  that  their
    predicament is similar to that of the successful claimant in Zhang.

23. In Zhang, the claimant  had  been  living  in  the  UK  lawfully  on  a
    continuous basis since September 2003.  In July 2011 she was offered  a
    new post at a university.  But the university made it  a  condition  of
    her taking up her employment that she must have leave to be in  the  UK
    on a visa which was not dependent upon a  certificate  of  sponsorship.
    The solution which she hit upon to resolve her visa problem was to seek
    to re-categorize her status.  If her  husband  was  successful  in  his
    outstanding application, she would fall into the category of a  partner
    of a relevant  points-based  system  migrant.  The  claimant  consulted
    solicitors who advised her that she could, indeed, go down  this  route
    but in order to do so she would have to return to China  and  make  her
    application from there.

24. By a letter dated 2 September, the Secretary of  State,  having  learnt
    the claimant had lost her previous job, told her that the expiry of her
    leave to remain under her general visa had been brought  forward  to  1
    November 2011.  She concluded that she had no option but to go back  to
    China  and  stay  there  for  as  long  as  it  took  to  surmount  the
    bureaucratic hurdles which awaited her before she could  expect  to  be
    granted leave to re-enter the UK as a partner.  The prospect  of  being
    separated from her husband caused the claimant to  suffer  a  level  of
    stress and anxiety which led to a visit to her GP on 13 September 2011.
     He diagnosed mild depression and prescribed  antidepressants.   On  15
    September 2011, the claimant returned to China in the expectation  that
    as soon as she started the process, the sooner she  would  be  able  to
    legally return to the UK.  In due course, her husband was informed that
    he had been issued with a post-study work visa and her solicitors  were
    equipped to make the necessary application on her behalf for her  entry
    clearance under the partner category.  Entry clearance was  granted  on
    25 October 2011 and communicated to the claimant on 12  November  2011.
    Regrettably by that time the university had lost patience and withdrawn
    the job offer.

25. The claimant sought to challenge,  by  way  of  judicial  review,  "the
    legality of that Immigration  Rule  the  implementation  of  which  her
    solicitors had advised her was the basis upon which she could not  make
    an application for a "partner" visa unless she returned to China so  to
    do": see paragraph [12] of Zhang.

26. The Rule under examination in Zhang was paragraph 319C(h)(i)  which  at
    the time provided that an  applicant  who  is  applying  for  leave  to
    remain, must have, or have last been granted leave:




         (i) as the partner of a relevant points-based system migrant.

27. As from 1 October 2013 a less restrictive version of sub-paragraph  (h)
    has been introduced, which would not have  prevented  the  claimant  in
    Zhang from making an in-country application  to  remain  on  a  partner
    visa.

28. In paragraph [78] of Zhang, Turner J found that the application of  the
    blanket  requirement  to  leave  the  country  imposed   by   paragraph
    319C(h)(i) of the Immigration Rules was unsustainable.  It  was  simply
    not consistent with the ratio of the decision in  Chikwamba  that  this
    paragraph, as presently worded, should continue to  form  part  of  the
    Rules.  He was not prepared to make a formal declaration on the matter.
     It was not the function of the court to  redraft  the  Rules,  but  he
    predicted the Secretary of State would in future face  difficulties  in
    enforcing requirement (h)(i) as presently worded in  all  but  a  small
    number of cases in which Article 8 was engaged.

29. On the particular facts of the case before him, he found that the  Rule
    could not be lawfully applied to the claimant.  His reasoning was  that
    she was in a loving marriage and had  no  real  option  but  to  endure
    separation from her new husband for  about  two  months.   She  had  an
    impeccable immigration record and both she and her  husband  were  very
    likely to continue to make a  valuable  contribution  to  the  economic
    wellbeing of the UK.  The claimant was the sort of applicant in respect
    of which immigration should be encouraged rather than deterred:

         Those who show the sort of promise to make a valuable  contribution
         to the UK could only be discouraged from coming here in  the  first
         place if it were the case that if they  were  to  marry  a  foreign
         national here then, as a matter of routine, that  spouse  would  be
         required to return to his/her country of origin as  a  precondition
         of 'switching' to a 'partner' visa.

30. Zhang was not appealed to the Court of Appeal,  and  the  Secretary  of
    State appears to have responded to the criticisms  of  the  Rule  under
    discussion in Zhang by relaxing it considerably.   The  restriction  is
    now limited to applicants who have last been granted entry clearance as
    a visitor (apart from one minor exception), or who  have  been  granted
    temporary admission or temporary release.  So the  mischief  identified
    by Turner J has been addressed.

31. Zhang was decided in April 2013,  and  the  legal  landscape  then  was
    significantly different from  what  it  is  now.   Any  proportionality
    assessment now has to take into account Section 117B of the 2002 Act as
    amended by the Immigration Act 2014, and the  Court  of  Appeal  in  PG
    (USA) [2015] EWCA Civ 118 held as follows at paragraph [28]:

         In the instant  case,  the  Immigration  Rules  do  not  provide  a
         'complete code' and although 'the proportionality test  (was)  more
         at large' (MM (Lebanon) and others v SSHD), the  Rules  nonetheless
         help illuminate the regulatory and policy context which  the  judge
         needed to take into account, along with a range of  other  factors.
         The First Tier Tribunal judge did not analyse what, in this  sense,
         is said to be the legitimate end  the  respondent  was  seeking  to
         achieve.  The expression by the judge at [39] of his Decision  that
         the interference may not have been  justified  at  all  appears  to
         indicate that he did not take account of the respondent's policy to
         restrict the category of relatives of migrant workers who are  able
         to join the person who is temporarily living in the United  Kingdom
         and to limit the circumstances in which someone in the  appellant's
         position can qualify as a dependent.  I stress that  the  existence
         of this policy was not in any sense necessarily determinative,  but
         it should have formed part of the judge's reasoning on the issue of
         proportionality.

32. As Mr Makol accepts, this is not a Chikwamba-type case.  The effect  of
    the Rule under scrutiny in this appeal is not to put the  claimants  to
    the inconvenience of having to go back to their home country  in  order
    to make an entry clearance application which is bound to succeed.   Its
    effect is actually more far-reaching than the version of  Rule  319C(h)
    which was  under  scrutiny  in  Zhang.   319C(i)  applies  as  much  to
    applications for entry clearance as it does to applications  for  leave
    to remain.  The claimants are simply not eligible for leave to enter or
    leave to remain as dependants of Mrs Emmpally, and so the choice  faced
    by the family is a completely different one  from  that  faced  by  the
    claimant in Zhang.  This family face the stark choice of  returning  to
    India to continue their family life together there, or Mrs Emmpally can
    choose to remain in the United Kingdom on her own to continue with  the
    course of study for which she has been granted leave to remain.

33. In view of the fact that the Rules  are  laid  before  Parliament,  and
    taking into account the guidance of the Upper Tribunal in Shahzad, I do
    not consider that the Secretary of State has  to  justify  the  purpose
    which underlies Rule 319C(i), which is to restrict severely the ability
    of PBS migrants to switch  from  other  PBS  categories  to  a  student
    category, while at the same time being able to keep in the country,  or
    bring into the country, their dependants.   Immigration  control  is  a
    desirable end in itself, as is now recognised in Section 117B(1).

34. It will be very disappointing for Mrs Emmpally not to be able to  carry
    on following a course which she commenced on 29 July  2014,  and  where
    she has paid some and maybe all of the course fees of �6,150, as  found
    by Judge Pears at  paragraph  [8]  of  his  decision.  But,  as  stated
    earlier, she did not have a legitimate expectation  of  being  able  to
    both follow this course and at the  same  time  to  continue  to  enjoy
    family life with her husband and daughter in the United  Kingdom.   The
    judge appears to have accepted the evidence of the second claimant that
    he was shocked to get the refusal, given  the  family's  past  history.
    But the Rules are clear, and the relevant  requirements  have  been  in
    place for some time.  So the blame  for  the  surprise  of  the  second
    claimant and his wife cannot be laid at the door of  the  Secretary  of
    State.

35. The first claimant is not  a  qualifying  child  for  the  purposes  of
    Section 117B(6) as she has not lived in the United  Kingdom  for  seven
    years and she is not a British national. Although  she  attends  school
    here, it is not thereby contrary to  her  best  interests  for  her  to
    return with her parents to the country of her nationality.  It would be
    contrary to her best interests if her mother chose to remain here until
    2017, but that is not something which her mother is compelled to do.

36. In conclusion, I find that  the  interference  consequential  upon  the
    refusal of leave to  remain  to  the  claimants,  and  the  concomitant
    decision  to  remove  them  under  Section  47  of  the  2006  Act,  is
    proportionate to the legitimate  public  end  sought  to  be  achieved,
    namely the maintenance of firm and effective immigration controls.

Conclusion

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  following  decision  is
substituted: these appeals against the  refusal  of  leave  to  remain,  and
against removal, are dismissed under the Rules and under Article 8 ECHR.


No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson



























