
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41783/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 September 2015                  |On 15 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR CHANDRAKANT
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, a Home office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Collins of counsel


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

      1. In this appeal, the  Secretary of State  appeals against a decision
         of the First-tier Tribunal  allowing the appeal of  Mr  Chandrakant
         ('the claimant') who appealed against a decision taken on 8 October
         2014 to refuse him leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)
         Migrant.



Background Facts

      2. The claimant is a citizen of India who was born on 4 March 1988. He
         applied for leave to remain as  a  Tier  I  (Entrepreneur)  Migrant
         under paragraph 245DD of the Immigration Rules HC395 (as  amended).
         That application was refused on the basis that  the  appellant  had
         not met the financial requirements and had not  met  the  specified
         evidence in relation to the required advertising.

Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

      3.  The  claimant  appealed  to  the  First-tier   Tribunal.    In   a
         determination promulgated on 16 March 2015, Judge Cresswell allowed
         the claimant's appeal.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the
         claimant could not satisfy  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
         Rules under either paragraph 245DD (leave to remain  as  a  Tier  1
         (Entrepreneur) Migrant) or Paragraph 276ADE (1) (leave to remain on
         the basis of private  life).  However,  the  Tribunal  allowed  the
         appeal under Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human  Rights
         outside the Immigration Rules.

Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

      4. The Secretary of State sought permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal.  On 7 May 2015 First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Kelly  granted
         the Secretary of State permission to appeal.  Thus, the appeal came
         before me.

Summary of the Submissions

      5. The grounds of appeal assert that the judge  erred  by  failing  to
         apply the Article 8 test correctly. It is asserted that  the  judge
         applied a 'near-miss' principle and  has  failed  to  identify  any
         exceptional circumstances  to  allow  the  appeal  outside  of  the
         Immigration Rules. There were two further grounds  of  appeal  that
         were effectively withdrawn at the hearing, namely  that  the  Judge
         had failed to consider Appendix FM and paragraph  276ADE  and  that
         the judge had not considered the test as to whether there would  be
         significant obstacles to the appellant's integration into India  if
         required to leave the UK.

      6. Mr Walker submitted that the  judge  had  failed  to  identify  any
         compelling circumstances or anything in the claimant's private life
         to justify allowing the appeal under Article 8. He referred to  the
         case of AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT  0260  (IAC).  He  submitted
         that when  the  claimant  came  here  as  a  student  he  knew  his
         immigration status was precarious. There was no  legitimate  reason
         for him to be allowed to remain under Article 8. The appellant  had
         a private and family life in India until 2010. There is nowhere  in
         the  reasoning  in  the  decision  to  show  what  the   compelling
         circumstances where. Mr Walker submitted that it was speculation on
         the part of the judge that there may be loss  of  employment  of  2
         British workers. He asserted that, at  paragraph  15  (iv)  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal decision, the judge had  only  the  appellant's
         verbal assurances that the business was doing well and he hoped  to
         expand. With regard to the near-miss point he  submitted  that  the
         judge had applied a near-miss approach as in paragraph 26,  despite
         setting out that she had not  applied  a  near-miss  approach,  the
         judge noted that 'the appellant cannot meet the rules but there are
         circumstances here which suggest to me that this is  a  case  where
         application of the Rules leads to a disproportionate outcome'. This
         indicated that the judge was applying a near-miss approach.

      7.  Mr Collins submitted that the crux of the findings  of  the  judge
         were in paragraphs 15 and 26. The judge clearly rejected the  near-
         miss principle. She considered the case of Patel and Others v  SSHD
         [2013] UKSC 72. The judge was clear that  the  claimant  could  not
         satisfy the Immigration Rules. The judge has identified  compelling
         circumstances outside the Immigration Rules. The claimant did  give
         evidence as to the employment of 2 workers at paragraph 10  of  his
         witness statements. The Secretary  of  State  was  represented  and
         could have cross examined  on  that  point.  The  judge  heard  and
         accepted the evidence that the claimant employed 2  people  in  his
         business. The judge has set out  in  paragraph  26  the  compelling
         circumstances. It is clear that the judge has  considered  all  the
         evidence in the round finding  that  the  claimant  has  created  a
         business providing employment and that the balance should weigh  in
         his favour. Mr Collins submitted that there has been  no  challenge
         to the balancing exercise undertaken by the judge.

Material Error of Law

      8. Turning to the judge's decision  the  judge  has  not  specifically
         addressed  the  need  to  identify  compelling  circumstances   not
         sufficiently recognised under the Rules in order  to  consider  the
         claim under Article 8. That is not to say that mere failure to  set
         out the correct approach is  an  error  if  the  substance  of  the
         decision demonstrates that the correct approach has  been  adopted.
         In this case the judge has identified a  number  of  factors  which
         clearly do not feature in the Rules. I am satisfied that the  judge
         did identify circumstances not sufficiently  recognised  under  the
         Immigration Rules. In paragraph 15 the  judge  sets  out  that  the
         claimant gave evidence (which the judge accepted) that his business
         was going well and that there was  evidence  before  her  that  the
         claimant has 2 employees in the business. At paragraph 26 the judge
         considered that the claimant had committed money to the UK  economy
         and  provided  employment  and  tax  revenue.  His  removal   would
         inevitably close his business with the loss  of  employment  for  2
         British workers.

      9. There is no 'exceptionality test' but there  is  a  requirement  to
         carry out a balancing exercise where an individual cannot meet  the
         requirements of the Immigration Rules.  The  public  interest  will
         generally  only  be  outweighed  if  an  applicant  can  show  that
         'compelling circumstances' exist - see [40] to [42] of  SS  (Congo)
         [2015] EWCA Civ 387. The judge  clearly  undertook  that  balancing
         exercise. The judge  gave  weight,  as  required  to  do  so  under
         sections 1117A and 117B of  the  Nationality  and  Immigration  Act
         2002, to the public interest in  maintenance  of  fair  immigration
         control. She also took into account that the claimant has built his
         private life in  the  knowledge  that  his  immigration  status  is
         precarious. In weighing those factors  the  judge  found  that  the
         interference in the claimant's private life was  not  proportionate
         to the legitimate aim pursued. Whilst I might  have  arrived  at  a
         different conclusion, the conclusion that  the  judge  reached  was
         open to her having heard all the evidence in the case. The decision
         is  sufficiently  well  reasoned  and  a  balancing  exercise   was
         undertaken taking the relevant considerations into account.

     10. The Secretary of State has not discharged the burden  upon  her  of
         showing that there is any material error of law in  the  First-tier
         Tribunal decision without which that decision is not susceptible to
         being set-aside.

Conclusions

     11. There was no material error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         decision and I decline to re-open it.

     12. I have considered whether any parties require the protection of  an
         anonymity direction. No anonymity direction  was  made  previously.
         Having considered all the  circumstances  and  evidence  I  do  not
         consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

Decision

     13. The Secretary of State appeal is dismissed.  The  decision  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal stands.


Signed   P M Ramshaw   Date 14 September 2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw
