
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/41536/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 January 2015                             |On 28 January 2015           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Appellant
                                     and

                              TIJANA DJORDJEVIC
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Ms K Cronin, instructed by Sturtivant & Co Solicitors
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. Whilst this is  an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
  Department  for  convenience  I  will  refer  to  the  parties   in   the
  determination as they appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.

2. The appellant, a national of Serbia, appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal
  against the decision of the Secretary of State of 14  September  2013  to
  refuse her application for leave to remain on the basis  of  her  private
  life in the UK and to remove her from the UK. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
  Cary allowed the appeal and the  Secretary  of  State  now  appeals  with
  permission to this Tribunal.



Background

3.  The  background  to  this  matter  is  not  in  dispute.  The  appellant
  originally came to the UK in 1986 when she was around 4  years  old  with
  her family who lived in London for about 1 year. The family  returned  to
  Serbia and the appellant came back to the UK in  1996  when  she  was  13
  years old to attend school. She returned to Serbia during school holidays
  and she subsequently attended Theatre school and was  granted  successive
  periods of leave to enter and remain as a  student  until  February  2006
  when she decided to leave the UK to look after her ill mother in  Serbia.
  She returned to the UK briefly in September 2006  and  travelled  between
  the UK and Serbia until she resumed her studies in February  2007.  After
  her graduation she obtained leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Post Study Work)
  Migrant from 25 November 2010 until 25 November 2012. In March  2012  her
  then representatives applied on her behalf for leave to remain under  the
  Immigration Rules on the basis of her 10 years lawful  residence  in  the
  UK. This application was refused on 23 December 2012 on  the  basis  that
  her 10 years continuous  lawful  residence  had  been  broken  between  3
  December 2002 (when she withdrew her application for leave to remain as a
  spouse because the relationship had broken  down)  and  9  December  2002
  (when she left the UK to apply for a student visa).  Also,  she  had  not
  passed the 'Life in the UK' test, although she subsequently did so  on  6
  November 2012.  The  appellant  had  no  right  of  appeal  against  this
  decision. She subsequently made an application for leave to remain on the
  basis of her private life, the refusal of that application is the subject
  of this appeal.

4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge heard oral  evidence  from  the  appellant,
  her mother, two friends, and the appellant's partner (Mr Wong, a  British
  citizen). The respondent's representatives  accepted  that  no  criticism
  could be made of the appellant in terms of her  immigration  history  and
  that she had established a 'very significant private life' in the UK. The
  First-tier Tribunal Judge considered the provisions of  paragraph  276ADE
  of the Immigration Rules and found that the appellant could not meet  the
  requirements of that provision because she had not lived in the UK for 20
  years and she still has ties with Serbia. The Judge went on  to  consider
  the appeal under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights and
  found that she had established a private life and  some  form  of  family
  life with Mr Wong, with whom she has been in  a  relationship  since  May
  2014. The Judge found that the proposed removal would interfere with that
  private life and in considering the proportionality of that  decision  he
  considered section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
  2002. The Judge found that the decision to remove the appellant would not
  be a proportionate interference with her  private  and  family  life  and
  allowed the appeal under Article 8, dismissing it under  the  Immigration
  Rules.  There  is  no  challenge  to  the  Judge's  decision  under   the
  Immigration Rules.

Error of Law

5. In her grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal  the  Secretary  of  State
  contends that, having  found  that  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the
  provisions of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules,  the  First-tier
  Tribunal Judge erred in going on to consider the appeal under  Article  8
  in light of the guidance in R (Nagre) v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin).  Mr
  Avery accepted that case law has moved on since the grounds were drafted.
  He accepted that the decision in R (on the  application  of  Esther  Ebun
  Oludoyi & Ors) v Secretary of State for the Home Department (Article 8  -
  MM (Lebanon) and Nagre) IJR [2014] UKUT 00539 (IAC) indicated that  there
  is no threshold test. However he submitted that the  First-tier  Tribunal
  Judge was still required to be satisfied that there was something in  the
  appellant's case which was not covered by the Immigration Rules and  that
  he had failed to do so. However I am satisfied from  the  decision  as  a
  whole and paragraph 39 in particular that the Judge did consider  whether
  the appellant's circumstances are covered by the  Immigration  Rules  and
  the respondent's  policies  [34].  He  considered  the  very  significant
  private life  established  by  the  appellant  along  with  her  recently
  established family life and decided to go on to  consider  Article  8.  I
  find that this course of action was open to the First-tier Tribunal Judge
  who gave adequate reasons for so doing.

6. The Secretary of State in the grounds of appeal, relying on the  decision
  in Nasim and others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 00025 (IAC),  contends  that
  Article 8 has limited use for private life cases which did not  interfere
  with a person's physical and moral integrity. The Tribunal's findings  in
  Nasim are summarised in the head note as follows;

      "The judgments of the Supreme Court in Patel and Others v Secretary of
      State for the  Home  Department  [2013]  UKSC  72 serve  to  re-focus
      attention on the nature and purpose of Article 8 of the ECHR  and,  in
      particular, to recognise that Article's  limited  utility  in  private
      life cases that are far removed from the protection of an individual's
      moral and physical integrity.

      A person's human rights are not enhanced by  not  committing  criminal
      offences or not relying on public funds. The only significance of such
      matters in cases concerning proposed or hypothetical removal from  the
      United Kingdom is to preclude the Secretary of State from pointing  to
      any public interest justifying  removal,  over  and  above  the  basic
      importance of maintaining a firm and coherent  system  of  immigration
      control."

7. Mr Avery submitted that the appellant was in the  UK  as  a  student.  He
  submitted that there are  clear  differences  between  private  life  and
  family life which the Judge failed to consider. Ms Cronin submitted  that
  all of the Judge's evaluation of the appellant's private life flowed from
  the concession made by the presenting  officer  that  the  appellant  had
  developed a very significant private life. She submitted that none of the
  oral evidence was challenged. She submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal
  Judge had an unchallenged report from an independent social worker, Diane
  Jackson, from December 2012 which describes the  distress  the  appellant
  would suffer if required to leave the UK. She submitted  that  the  Judge
  made a 'text book' decision reciting all of the  evidence,  the  relevant
  law and case law, and setting out all of his reasons for the decision.

8. Ms Cronin submitted that the Judge properly consider the factors set  out
  in section  117B  which  look  at  whether  a  person  makes  a  positive
  contribution to the UK.  In  her  submission  the  Judge  considered  the
  evidence and concluded that the appellant  contributes  to  the  economic
  well-being of the UK. She relied  on  the  decision  in  UE  (Nigeria)  v
  SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 975 and submitted that the contribution made by  an
  individual to the UK is a relevant consideration in assessing the public
  interest. Mr Avery submitted that the factors set  out  in  section  117B
  cannot be positive factors in an appellant's favour.  He  submitted  that
  the section does not say that people should be allowed to  stay  if  they
  can demonstrate those factors. He submitted that these  are  negative  or
  neutral matters. Ms Cronin disagreed submitting that these  factors  were
  set out by Parliament and must  be  given  weight  when  considering  the
  public interest.

9. Sections  117A,  117B  and  117B  were  inserted  into  the  Nationality,
  Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 by the Immigration Act 2014. The relevant
  provisions in relation to this appeal are sections 117A  and  117B  which
  provide as follows;





      117A Application of this Part

      (1) This Part applies  where  a  court  or  tribunal  is  required  to
      determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-
           (a) breaches a person's right to respect for private and  family
           life under Article 8, and
           (b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of  the  Human
           Rights Act 1998.
      (2) In considering the public interest question, the court or tribunal
      must (in particular) have regard-
           (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed in section  117B,
           and
           (b)in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals,  to
           the considerations listed in section 117C.
      (3) In subsection  (2),  "the  public  interest  question"  means  the
      question of whether an interference with a person's right  to  respect
      for private and family life is justified under Article 8(2).





       117B Article 8: public  interest  considerations  applicable  in  all
      cases

      (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the public
      interest.
      (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in  the  interests
      of the economic well-being of the United  Kingdom,  that  persons  who
      seek to enter or remain in  the  United  Kingdom  are  able  to  speak
      English, because persons who can speak English-
           (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
           (b) are better able to integrate into society.
      (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in  the  interests
      of the economic well-being of the United  Kingdom,  that  persons  who
      seek to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are  financially
      independent, because such persons-
           (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
           (b) are better able to integrate into society.
      (4) Little weight should be given to-
           (a) a private life, or
           (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,
           that is established by a person at a time when the person is  in
           the United Kingdom unlawfully.
      (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established  by  a
      person at a time when the person's immigration status is precarious.
      (6) In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
      public interest does not require the person's removal where-
           (a)  the  person  has  a   genuine   and   subsisting   parental
           relationship with a qualifying child, and
           (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave  the
           United Kingdom.

10. Section 117A makes clear that the  Tribunal  must  have  regard  to  the
  factors set out in section 117B. The Judge would therefore have erred had
  he not considered the matters set out in section 117B in considering  the
  proportionality of the decision to interfere with the appellant's private
  life. In this case the Judge took into account, as he was required to do,
  the fact that the appellant speaks English, is  financially  independent,
  has throughout had lawful residence in the UK (apart from the 6  days  in
  2002 referred to above) and the fact  that  her  immigration  status  was
  never precarious. The Judge weighed  these  factors  in  the  appellant's
  favour.  There is nothing in section 117A or 117B to suggest  that  these
  considerations are not capable of being weighed in an appellant's  favour
  or to suggest that they can only be weighed against  an  appellant  where
  s/he does not meet them. I accept Ms  Cronin's  submission  that  section
  117B (2) and (3) are matters  which  should  be  taken  into  account  as
  decreasing the 'pressing social need'. The Judge did not therefore err in
  his  consideration  of  these  factors.  It  is  also  clear   from   the
  determination that the Judge did  not  rely  only  on  these  factors  in
  weighing the appellant's private life against  the  public  interest.  He
  also weighed all of the other evidence before  him  in  relation  to  the
  nature and extent of the appellant's private life.

11. Mr Avery submitted that the Judge erred in failing to weigh against  the
  appellant the fact  that  she  did  not  meet  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
  Immigration Rules in circumstances where the Immigration Rules appear  to
  cover this situation.  However  the  Judge  gave  full  consideration  to
  paragraph 276ADE at paragraphs 37 and 38 of  the  determination.  He  was
  well aware of the extent of the ties the appellant still has with  Serbia
  and the fact that as a result she could  not  meet  the  requirements  of
  paragraph 276ADE. In considering Article  8  the  Judge  was  aware  that
  Article 8 cannot be  used  to  deal  with  a  'near  miss'  [44].   I  am
  satisfied, reading the determination as  a  whole,  that  the  Judge  was
  clearly aware of the requirements of the Immigration Rules and that  this
  was clearly a matter  to  which  he  attached  weight  in  assessing  the
  proportionality of the decision to remove the appellant.

12. The grounds of appeal further contend that the Judge erred in  attaching
  weight to the appellant's relationship with her boyfriend  as  they  have
  been in a relationship for only a few months and this does not constitute
  family life. Ms  Cronin  submitted  that  the  Judge  accepted  that  the
  appellant is in a relationship and the Judge did not err in  giving  that
  relationship some weight. She  submitted  that  Article  8  does  protect
  developing relationships. The Judge made clear at paragraph  48  that  he
  did not attach 'much weight' to  the  relationship.  The  Judge  did  not
  attach significant weight to the appellant's limited family life with  Mr
  Wong instead considering this as a factor  with  limited  weight  in  his
  overall assessment of her private life. There  is  noting  irrational  or
  perverse in this finding which was open to the Judge on the evidence.

13. I find that on the facts found by the Judge he was entitled to take  the
  view that the private life established by the appellant in this  case  is
  significant. It is clear that on the Judge's findings  the  private  life
  established in this case is not so far down the  continuum  described  by
  the Upper Tribunal in Nasim [14~15] that it is 'so far removed  from  the
  "core" of Article 8 as to be readily defeasible by state interests,  such
  as the importance of  maintaining  a  credible  and  coherent  system  of
  immigration control'.   The Tribunal said that  'At  this  point  on  the
  continuum the essential elements of the private  life  relied  upon  will
  normally be transposable, in the sense of being capable of replication in
  their essential respects, following  a  person's  return  to  their  home
  country'. I accept Ms Cronin's submission that the facts in this case are
  distinguishable from those of the appellants in Nasim. It  is  abundantly
  clear from the First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings in this case that  he
  did not consider that this appellant's private life was so far  from  the
  core of Article 8  as  not  to  be  capable  of  outweighing  the  public
  interest.

14. I have considered the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision  as  a  whole
  and I find that the decision to allow the appeal was one which  was  open
  to him on the basis of the evidence before him.

Conclusion:

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error on point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.


Signed
                       Date: 27 January 2015

A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal






























