
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41544/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th December 2015                |On 13th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY


                                   Between

                                     m a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No-one
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 20th  August  1985.   He
    appealed against a decision of the Respondent dated 29th September 2014
    refusing to grant him a residence card as confirmation of  a  right  to
    reside in the United Kingdom as the family member of  an  EEA  national
    exercising Treaty rights in the United Kingdom  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.  His  appeal  was  heard  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Majid on 27th May  2015.   The  appeal
    was dismissed in a determination promulgated on 1st June 2015.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hollingworth on 17th August
    2015.  The permission states that it is arguable that at paragraph 5 of
    the decision, where the Judge refers to relying on the reasons  of  the
    Respondent in the refusal notice and drawing the appropriate  inference
    from the omission of the Appellant to  arrange  any  representative  to
    attend the hearing, it is unclear what inference the  Judge  has  drawn
    and on what basis.  The permission states that it is also unclear  what
    weight the Judge  has  attached  to  the  statement  furnished  by  the
    Appellant as no mention is made of this in the decision.

 3. There is a Rule 24 response which states that the Judge correctly noted
    that the Appellant and  the  Sponsor  failed  to  attend  the  marriage
    interviews  and  states  that  evidence  has  not  been   provided   to
    demonstrate the genuineness of the  relationship.   The  response  also
    states that with regard  to  the  grounds  of  application  which  cite
    numerous decisions relating to other family members and  the  issue  of
    dependency, these have no relevance to the Appellant's circumstances as
    he does not fall within Regulation 8(2).

 4. The Appellant did not appear for the  hearing  of  this  error  of  law
    hearing either in person or by representative.

 5. The Presenting Officer made his submissions.

 6. He submitted that the Home Office wrote to the Appellant and asked  for
    additional documents to support his relationship with the EEA  national
    and nothing was received from him.  He submitted that the Appellant and
    his partner were asked on two occasions to attend  interviews  and  did
    not attend on either occasion.

 7. The Presenting Officer referred me to the refusal letter and  submitted
    that in the First-tier Judge's decision some of his  reasoning  may  be
    lacking but the Judge  reached  the  only  conclusion  which  could  be
    reached in the circumstances.  He submitted that there  may  be  errors
    because of a lack of reasoning but they are not material errors.

 8. He submitted that if I find there to be any material errors of  law  in
    the First-tier Judge's decision I should remake the decision, including
    the appropriate reasoning, but the outcome should be the same.

 9. I accept that the First-tier  Judge's  reasoning  in  his  decision  is
    lacking.  The Judge has however noted the terms of the  refusal  letter
    of 29th September 2014 and it is clear that he has considered the  fact
    that the Appellant and his partner have been asked on two occasions  to
    attend interviews and did not attend on either occasion  and  that  the
    Appellant was written to by the Respondent and asked for  documents  to
    support his relationship with the EEA national but these were not sent.

10. Because of the lack of reasoning in the determination I find that there
    are errors of law but I find that these are not material errors of law.

Decision

I  uphold  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision.   The  First-tier  Judge's
decision dismissing the Appellant's appeal, promulgated on  1st  June  2015,
must stand.

Anonymity has been directed.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray

