
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA418542014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On : 14 June 2016                        |On: 15 June 2016                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                md saif uddin
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Turner, instructed through Direct Access


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
("SSHD") against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Moore  allowing  Mr
Uddin's appeal, to a limited extent, against the  respondent's  decision  to
remove him and his family from the UK following the  refusal  of  his  human
rights claim.

For the purposes of this decision, I shall refer to the Secretary  of  State
as the respondent and Mr Uddin as the appellant, reflecting their  positions
as they were in the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

The appellant is a national of  Bangladesh  born  on  26  October  1968.  He
arrived in the United Kingdom in May 2005 on  a  student  visa  valid  until
October 2007 and was subsequently granted further  periods  of  leave  as  a
student and then as a Tier 1 (Post Study Work)  Migrant,  until  29  October
2010. His wife and eldest child arrived in the  UK  in  March  2007  as  his
dependants and were  granted  further  leave  in  line  as  dependants.  The
appellant's application to extend his leave as a Tier  1  (General)  Migrant
was refused in January 2011 and an  application  made  on  8  February  2011
outside the immigration rules was refused on 2 March 2011.


On  23  June  2011  the  appellant  requested  a  reconsideration   of   his
application for leave to remain, on human rights grounds.  That  application
was refused on 2 October  2014,  by  which  time  the  appellant  had  three
children.


The respondent, in her decision of  2  October  2014,  considered  that  the
appellant could not meet the criteria in Appendix FM either as a partner  or
a parent, and that he could not meet the criteria  in  paragraph  276ADE  on
the basis of his private life. The respondent considered that there were  no
exceptional  circumstances  justifying  a  grant  of   leave   outside   the
immigration rules on wider Article 8 grounds, nor  that  the  appellant  had
made out a claim under Article 3 on the basis of medical issues.


The appellant appealed against that decision and his  appeal  was  heard  by
First-tier Tribunal Judge Moore on 23 September 2015. Judge Moore  concluded
that the respondent had wrongly made the decision under the new  immigration
rules, whereas the old Article 8 positon should have been applied, and  that
there had been a failure to undertake a full  and  proper  assessment  under
section 55 of the UK Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009.  He
decided that the matter should be remitted to the respondent  for  a  proper
Article 8 assessment in line with  the  principles  in  Razgar,  R  (on  the
Application of) v. SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 and for the  best  interests  of  the
children to be properly assessed. He allowed  the  appeal  on  that  limited
basis.

Permission to appeal was sought by the respondent on the  grounds  that  the
judge had failed to consider that the appellant and his family  had  had  no
lawful basis of stay since October 2010; had erred by considering  that  the
new immigration rules were not applicable; had failed to  give  reasons  for
finding that there were significant obstacles to integration in  Bangladesh;
and had failed to determine the  appellants'  Article  8  ground  of  appeal
rather than remitting the case to the Secretary of State.

Permission to appeal was granted on 18 May 2016.

At the hearing both parties agreed that the judge had made a material  error
of law in regard to the application of the new rules. Mr Turner  asked  that
I either re-make the appeal by allowing it outright or remit the  matter  to
the First-tier Tribunal. Mr Wilding submitted that,  since  no  findings  of
fact had been made by the judge, the appropriate course  would  be  for  the
case to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.


I set aside Judge Moore's decision on the basis that he had made a  material
error in considering that the new immigration rules did not apply. That  was
plainly inconsistent with the decision in Singh v  The  Secretary  of  State
for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 74. He had also erred by  purporting
to remit the case to the Secretary of State and he  clearly  ought  to  have
determined the grounds of appeal himself.


I was minded to go on  to  re-make  the  decision  myself.  However,  I  was
persuaded by the fact that both parties were in agreement  that  a  remittal
to the First-tier Tribunal was the more appropriate course, particularly  as
no findings of fact had been made by  the  judge  and  that,  as  Mr  Turner
submitted, there would  be  further  evidence  in  regard  to  the  family's
medical issues and the best interests of the children.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is set aside  in  its  entirety.
The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to be dealt with  afresh,
pursuant to section 12(2)(b)(i) of the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement
Act 2007 and Practice Statement 7.2(b), before any judge  aside  from  Judge
Moore.










                               Signed


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede


                               Date 15th June 2016
