
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/41292/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 20 July 2016                          |On 17 August 2016                 |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                WADOOD FARIQ
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N. Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr S. Khan, Counsel instructed by Adam Bernard
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    For the sake of continuity I will refer to the parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically  the  Secretary  of
    State is the appellant in the appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

2.    The appellant appealed  against  the  respondent's  decision  dated  6
    October 2014 to refuse a human rights claim. First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Abebrese ("the judge") allowed the appeal in a decision promulgated  on
    17 November 2015.

3.    The respondent appeals against the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  on
    the following grounds:
      i) The judge failed to  give  adequate  reasons  to  explain  why  the
         relationships with other family members in the UK rendered  removal
         disproportionate. It is argued that the evidence did  not  disclose
         any particularly compelling features in  the  family  life  of  the
         appellant and his partner.
     ii)  The  judge  made  a  material  error  of  fact  in  recording  the
         appellant's status in the UK as "precarious" when, in fact, he  had
         remained in the UK unlawfully for a lengthy period of time.  Having
         identified the wrong status  the  judge  failed  to  give  adequate
         reasons to explain whether  he  had  given  little  weight  to  the
         appellant's family life given  that  his  status  had  always  been
         unlawful.
    iii) The judge made contradictory findings. In assessing  whether  there
         were insurmountable obstacles to the couple continuing their family
         life in Pakistan under paragraph EX.1  of  Appendix  FM  the  judge
         found that the appellant resided there for a substantial period  of
         his life and was accustomed to the culture  and  language  in  that
         country [29]. In assessing Article 8 outside the  rules  the  judge
         found that the appellant might have difficulty  in  re-establishing
         himself in Pakistan [35].

Decision and reasons

4.    After having considered the grounds of appeal  and  oral  arguments  I
    satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making  of
    an error on a point of law.

5.    While it seems clear from the decision that the  judge  was  aware  of
    the  appellant's  immigration  history,  and  that  he  considered  the
    appellant's family circumstances with his partner  with  some  care,  I
    have concerns about his application of the law to the facts.

6.    The test of  "insurmountable  obstacles"  to  family  life  continuing
    outside the UK contained in the rules has some qualitative  differences
    to the "compelling circumstances" test outside the rules. However, both
    tests impose  a  relatively  stringent  threshold  albeit  that  it  is
    arguable that the assessment of Article 8 outside the rules  is  likely
    to be a  slightly  higher  threshold  following  the  Court  of  Appeal
    decision in SSHD v SS (Congo) and Others [2015] Imm AR 1036.  In  light
    of that observation  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  the  judge  could
    rationally reject the claim under paragraph EX.1 but  still  allow  the
    appeal outside the rules on  the  ground  that  there  were  compelling
    circumstances that rendered removal disproportionate.

7.    However, I find that point taken alone would  be  insufficient  reason
    to set aside  the  decision.  The  respondent  has  pointed  out  valid
    concerns  about  the  judge's  proportionality   assessment   and   the
    application of the public interest considerations contained in  section
    117B. It seems clear from the appellant's immigration history  that  he
    entered and remained in the UK unlawfully. He remained in the  UK  save
    for two unsuccessful applications to regularise his stay  in  2012.  At
    the date when he made the human rights  application  in  June  2014  it
    could not be said that he had, at any point, been in the UK on anything
    other than an unlawful basis. It is difficult to see  how  the  judge's
    conclusion that the appellant had "sought  at  all  material  times  to
    remain within the law" could be sustainable in light of the appellant's
    immigration history.

8.    The judge's characterisation  of  his  stay  as  "precarious"  is  not
    legally correct within the framework of section 117B.  Section  117B(5)
    states that little weight should be given to a private life established
    by a  person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
    precarious. The section only relates to private  life  and  not  family
    life. In the context of considering the appellant's  family  life  with
    his partner in the UK the judge was  obliged  by  statute  to  consider
    section 117B(4), which states that little weight should be given  to  a
    relationship formed with a qualifying partner that is established at  a
    time when the person is in the UK unlawfully. The facts  of  this  case
    fell squarely within that provision.

9.    I do not accept that the error was merely "sloppy drafting". The  fact
    that  the  judge  wrongly  characterised  the  appellant's  immigration
    history gives some cause to doubt whether he placed appropriate  weight
    on the fact that the relationship was established at a time when he was
    remaining in the UK unlawfully. Nothing  in  the  judge's  findings  in
    paragraph 34 of the decision suggest that he applied the provisions  of
    section 117B(4). While it was open to him to consider the compassionate
    factors relating to the appellant's relationship with his  partner  and
    her family in the UK he failed to  weigh  this  against  the  statutory
    requirement to place "little weight" on that family life in the context
    of his overall proportionality assessment.  There  is  no  evidence  to
    suggest that the judge gave consideration to other factors contained in
    section 117B that were material to a proper assessment  of  the  public
    interest.

10.   While I find that the alleged contradictions in the  judge's  findings
    outlined in the third ground of appeal are not as marked as  suggested,
    the points that I have already  highlighted  above  are  sufficient  to
    render the decision unsustainable. It seems clear that  the  judge  was
    sympathetic to the family life established by  the  appellant  and  his
    partner in the UK. Unfortunately, this did  not  obviate  the  need  to
    conduct a structured approach to his findings in  accordance  with  the
    relevant case law and statutory provisions.

11.   I conclude that the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

I set aside the decision and remit the appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
for a fresh hearing


Signed   [pic]   Date 16 August 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
