
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41052/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 August 2016                              |On 15 August 2016             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         Mr EMMANUEL ADENIYI SANUSI
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Appiah, Counsel, instructed by The Legal
                    Resources Partnership

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State but nonetheless I  shall  refer  to  the  parties  as  they  were
    described before the First-tier Tribunal, that  is  Mr  Sanusi  as  the
    appellant and the Secretary of State as the respondent.

 2. The Secretary of State challenged the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Newberry in a decision promulgated on 8 February 2016 whereby  he
    granted the appeal of the appellant was born on 29 December 1983 and  a
    national of Nigeria.  The appellant had appealed against the  Secretary
    of State's refusal to grant  him further leave to remain as a spouse of
    Abosede Tololupe  Akinwumi, a British subject  settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom in a decision on 27 September 2014. The refusal letter set  out
    that the appellant had entered the UK on 1 May 2009 as  a  student  and
    made subsequent applications in order to extend his leave. On  30  June
    2014 he submitted an application for  further  leave  to  remain  as  a
    spouse of a settled person and that case was considered under  Appendix
    FM   and  paragraph   276ADE.   It  was  concluded,  however  that  the
    suitability requirements namely S-LTR2.1, under which an applicant will
    normally be refused on  the  grounds  of  suitability  if  any  of  the
    paragraphs S-LTR2.2 to 2.4 applies. S-LTR2.2  included whether

         "to  the   applicant's   knowledge   or   not   false   information
         representations document have been submitted!"

 3. The Secretary of State concluded that the appellant had  submitted,  in
    support of his application, a test certificate from ETS and  during  an
    administrative review process ETS confirmed that his  test  certificate
    was obtained through deception.  The letter of refusal stated

         "Because  the  validity  of  your  test  results   could   not   be
         authenticated your scores from the test taken on 3 July  2013  have
         been cancelled. You are specifically considered a  person  who  has
         sought leave to remain in the United Kingdom by deception following
         information provided to us by Educational Testing  Service  but  an
         anomaly with your speaking test indicated the presence of  a  proxy
         test taker."

 4.  It  was  therefore  considered  he  did  not  meet   the   suitability
    requirements for consideration of limited leave to remain in the United
    Kingdom as a partner under E-LTRP or on the  grounds  of  private  life
    under paragraph 276ADE.

 5.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Newberry  noted  the  witness  statements
    provided by the Secretary of State namely that of Mathew Harold Rebecca
    Collings and Peter Millington but noted at  paragraph  14  it  was  not
    possible to understand "what the administrative  review  is  from  this
    document or how to determine why the test was invalid".   As  such,  he
    allowed the appeal.

 6. The Secretary of State challenged this on the basis that the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had failed to provide  adequate  reasoning  for  finding
    that the respondent had failed to discharge  the  requisite  burden  of
    proof submitting that the judge's findings were inadequately  reasoned.
    The judge had not properly taken into account the documents provided by
    the Secretary of State. The judge should not have relied on the  second
    test taken  by  the  appellant  to  show  that  he  had  not  practised
    deception.

 7. Mr Clark's submission was that it was not  surprising  that  the  judge
    approached the case in the way that he did but  in  the  light  of  the
    authorities of SM and Qadir (ETS - Evidence -Burden  of  Proof)  [2016]
    UKUT 229 (IAC) and Muhammed Shehzad [2016] EWCA Civ  615  his  approach
    was clearly an error.  Both those cases were indicative of  the  weight
    that should be accorded to the evidence of the Secretary of  State  and
    there are  now  authorities  as  to  how  the  case  should  have  been
    approached.

 8. Mr Appiah submitted that the judge's approach and consideration of  the
    second English language test undertaken by the  appellant  was  crucial
    and significant in  the  sense  that  it  accorded  with  the  approach
    required.

Conclusions

 9. The First-tier Tribunal Judge's reasons were set out at paragraphs  13-
    44 and observed that the burden of proof rested on the  decision  maker
    and that had not been discharged. The  judge  considered  the  evidence
    relied on by the respondent and concluded that  the  evidence  was  too
    general in its form and substance and considered that it amounted to no
    more than bare assertions in circumstances which were unacceptable.

10. It is clear in Muhammad Shehzad and Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department as to the weight to be given to  the  Secretary  of  State's
    witnesses, Mr Millington and Miss Collings, and at paragraph 26  it  is
    stated

         "But whatever the reasons in these circumstances  in  my  judgement
         the in limine rejection of the Secretary  of  State's  evidence  is
         even sufficient to shift the evidential  burden  was  an  error  of
         law."

11. The judge, however,  promulgated his decision on 8th February 2016  and
    prior to  both SM and to Shehzad and as indicated by the judge at [36],
    R (Gazi) V SSHD (ETS- Judicial Review) IJR [2015] EWCA 784 was critical
    of the Secretary of State's evidence. The judge followed that  decision
    as can be seen at paragraph 36 of his decision.

12. Within  the  evidence  provided  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  by  the
    Secretary of State there was indeed an ETS SELT source data in  respect
    of this particular appellant in relation to his test at  the  Universal
    Training Centre on 3 July 2013 which marked his test as 'invalid'.  The
    judge at paragraph 14 does, contrary to the challenge,  refer  to  this
    document and took it into account  although commenting

         "It is not possible to understand what the administrative review is
         from this document  or  to  determine  how  or  why  the  test  was
         invalid".

13. The key point is that although the judge did not accept the strength of
    the Secretary of State's evidence in the first instance, in  the  light
    of all the circumstances as can be seen from paragraph  37,  the  judge
    addressed all the evidence in the round, identified that the  appellant
    had been invited to sit an alternative test prior to the  decision  and
    within 3 days of the initiation the appellant managed to sit a test and
    pass it with distinction.

14. The judge appears to have stated that the  second  test  taken  by  the
    appellant was taken on 3 July 2013 but that would appear to be an error
    and merely a transposing error in the typing. The judge was aware  that
    the test was taken later.  The judge  recorded  at  paragraph  33  that
    respondent had  the  retest  certificate  document  two  months  before
    issuing  the  refusal  letter.   Although  this  does  not  necessarily
    determine whether the appellant had in fact used a  proxy  tester,  the
    judge in the circumstances concluded that he had not.   He  noted  that
    the appellant had taken the test immediately on  being  asked  and  had
    passed with distinction. That was a finding open to the judge.

15. The challenge by the Secretary of State was in relation to adequacy  of
    reasoning and this challenge cannot be substantiated in this particular
    decision. The judge went into  great  detail  in  an  analysis  of  the
    specific facts and evidence of this case, had regard to the certificate
    given by ETS and took into account the further evidence provided by the
    appellant by way of discharging the evidential burden.  That is in line
    with the later authority of  SM Qadir, and,  R  (Gazi),  which  was  in
    existence at the date of decision, was critical  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's evidence.

16. As SM, which had not been promulgated states


         68. As our analysis and conclusions in  the  immediately  preceding
         section make clear, we  have  substantial  reservations  about  the
         strength and quality of the Secretary  of  State's  evidence.   Its
         shortcomings are manifest. On the other hand, while bearing in mind
         that the context is one of alleged deception, we must be mindful of
         the comparatively  modest  threshold  which  an  evidential  burden
         entails. The calls for an evaluative assessment on the part of  the
         tribunal. By an admittedly narrow margin we are satisfied that  the
         Secretary of State has discharged this burden.  The effect of  this
         is that there  is  a  burden,  again  an  evidential  one,  on  the
         Appellants of raising an innocent explanation.

17. The evidence produced by the appellant was produced in  response  to  a
    letter dated 30 June 2014 from the Secretary of State to the  appellant
    inviting him to take a fresh test from an authorised provider  and  the
    judge found that a certificate was issued on 8 July 2014 and  that  the
    respondent had this document two  months  before  issuing  the  refusal
    letter. There was no suggestion that the appellant's  second  test  was
    obtained by deception and that he was well able to pass the second test
    albeit a year later.  I am  persuaded  that  the  judge  gave  detailed
    reasoning for rejecting the Secretary of State's evidence in the  first
    instance although the  subsequent  caselaw  has  somewhat  changed  the
    landscape it is still open to an appellant to be able to find that  the
    appellant had discharged the evidential burden of proof.  His reasoning
    in this regard was brief but  adequate  in  the  circumstances   Shizad
    (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 00085 (IAC).

18. The refusal decision was based on the suitability of the appellant  and
    in this  particular  provision  SLTR2.2A  is  discretionary.   If  that
    provision were the provision that was mandatory then  the  judge  would
    have no option but to refuse the appeal. However,  it  is  quite  clear
    from paragraphs 39 to 40  that  the  judge  did  not  accept  that  the
    appellant failed to meet the grounds of suitability and  the  Secretary
    of State had exercised her discretion incorrectly.  This is because the
    Secretary of State herself  invited  the  appellant  to  take  a  fresh
    English test from an authorised provider, which the appellant did,  and
    the respondent had this document prior to issuing the  refusal  letter.
    Albeit that the judge may have, in hindsight, and with the  benefit  of
    caselaw later decided, have had an altered approach to the Secretary of
    State's evidence, it is  quite  clear  that  the  judge  gave  adequate
    reasoning for finding the appellant had produced evidence in support of
    a rebuttal of the Secretary of State's evidence, having  complied  with
    the Secretary of State's request to take a further test which he passed
    with distinction.

19. In these specific circumstances, I find there is no material  error  of
    law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  The judge proceeded to
    consider the remaining grounds for the  appellant's  eligibility  under
    Appendix FM which the appellant fulfilled.  I therefore find  that  the
    decision of Judge Newberry contains no error of law and shall stand.





Signed                                  Date 12th August 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
