
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/41061/2013
                                                               IA/41039/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5 June 2014                                |On 11 June 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                                    mr HO
                                   mrs YL

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr I Konusanac
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, HOPO


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The Secretary of State  has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Verity allowing  the  appeals  of
    the appellants against the  decision  of  the  respondent  made  on  19
    September 2013 to refuse to vary their leave to enter or remain and  to
    give directions for their removal from the UK.

2.    The  appellants  are  citizens  of  Nigeria  born  in  1978  and  1981
    respectively.  The second appellant is the wife of the first appellant.
     Although she was served with a full notice  of  decision  with  appeal
    rights, she is largely dependent on the outcome of her husband's  case.
    The judge noted with regard to the second appellant that she holds a UK
    residence permit which was valid from 11 May 2011 to  23  August  2013.
    She therefore did  not  accept  the  respondent's  conclusions  in  the
    Reasons for Refusal Letter that she was in the UK unlawfully.

3.   In the respondent's decision it was stated  that  the  first  appellant
    had entered the UK in February  2007.   The  decision  noted  that  the
    appellants had been granted limited leave to remain in the UK  from  11
    May 2011 until 23 August 2013.  The decision also noted that the couple
    had children but concluded that the criteria had not been met and  that
    there were no exceptional circumstances that required the Secretary  of
    State to consider granting leave under Article 8 of the ECHR.

4.   The judge held as follows:

         "23. ...


             In this case, the first Appellant and second Appellant  relied
             both on their private and family lives.  They both rely on the
             fact that they have lived, studied and worked  in  the  United
             Kingdom, have two children who are at  school  in  the  United
             Kingdom and have effectively put down roots in  this  country.
             However with regard to the first Appellant, it  is  abundantly
             clear, that  he  has  an  additional  ground  which  could  be
             incorporated into his private  life.   He  has  started  legal
             proceedings against his former employer, the London Borough of
             Kingston, in the Employment Tribunal.  These  proceedings  are
             for unfair  dismissal  and  for  direct  and  indirect  racial
             discrimination.  This Tribunal was given specific evidence  of
             the nature of these proceedings and  was  also  provided  with
             evidence that the matter  is  due  to  be  considered  by  the
             Employment Tribunal at a five day hearing in June 2014.   This
             Tribunal has carefully concluded that if the  first  Appellant
             together with his wife and family were removed to  Nigeria  in
             accordance with the immigration decision, it  would  virtually
             be impossible for the first Appellant  to  conduct  the  legal
             proceedings or to be involved in them if he were to be removed
             to  his  home  country.   No  evidence  was  provided  by  the
             Respondent of how the Appellant could overcome  any  of  these
             difficulties, nor was there  any  evidence  that  video  links
             could  be  established  between  the  first  Appellant's  home
             country and the Employment Tribunal sitting at  London  South.
             It therefore follows that the first Appellant  would  find  it
             almost impossible to  bring  this  claim  against  his  former
             employer if he were to be  removed  to  Nigeria.   This  would
             amount to a denial of justice for the first Appellant  in  his
             Employment Tribunal case and must therefore be regarded as  an
             interference with  his  private  life.   This  Tribunal  would
             confirm that this interference would not be  proportionate  in
             all these circumstances.  This Tribunal did consider  granting
             an adjournment until after the conclusion  of  the  Employment
             Tribunal matters.  It decided however against this approach as
             it appeared that the first Appellant needed  to  resolve  some
             issues as  to  his  immigration  status  which  were  directly
             relevant to his future employment or otherwise.  The  Tribunal
             therefore decided against an adjournment and have concluded in
             accordance with MH that the appeal should be allowed  pursuant
             to Article 8 of the ECHR and a grant  of  discretionary  leave
             until the conclusion of the Employment Tribunal matters should
             follow.

         24.  Other aspects of  Article  8  have  been  relied  on  by  both
             appellants and these relate to  the  position  of  the  second
             Appellant,  the  dependent  children,  the  place  where   the
             Appellants live, where the children attend school etc.   These
             matters have not been dealt with by this Tribunal as it  would
             seem premature to make findings on these  matters  before  the
             outcome of the Employment Tribunal is known.  On  a  practical
             level, if the Appellant won  his  case  before  an  Employment
             Tribunal  he  may  be  granted  reinstatement  by  his  former
             employer in which case presumably they would continue to  live
             in the same area and the children would continue to attend the
             same school.  If however there  was  no  reinstatement  it  is
             perfectly possible that the  first  Appellant  or  indeed  the
             second Appellant would seek employment elsewhere and that this
             in turn might necessitate the family moving and  the  children
             relocating to other schools.  It is for these reasons that  no
             findings are made with regard to the other substantive  issues
             involved in Article 8.


         Decision


         25.  The appeal is allowed pursuant to Article 8 (private life)  of
             the ECHR and a grant of discretionary leave for an appropriate
             period is recommended by this Tribunal."

5.   Permission was granted to the  respondent  on  grounds  which  asserted
    that the judge committed  errors  of  law  because  she  erred  in  her
    assessment of the appellants' removability and proportionality  of  the
    decision, misapplying case law relevant to family proceedings  and  did
    not consider to what extent the appellants' employment in  the  UK  was
    properly a factor in proportionality.

6.   Ms Holmes relied on the grounds, in particular  ground  3,  which  said
    that instead of considering the Employment Tribunal claim in isolation,
    the judge ought to have considered its relevance when compared  to  the
    other aspects of his family and private life in the UK.  His employment
    aspect of his private life, was terminated by the dismissal which  gave
    rise to the Employment Tribunal claim.  That employment may or may  not
    have been such as to engage: (a) Article 8, and (b)  render  a  removal
    decision disproportionate.


    If the answers to these questions are affirmative  in  respect  of  the
    employment, they are affirmative in respect of the Employment  Tribunal
    claim.  If the answers to those questions are negative  in  respect  of
    the employment, it follows that they must also be negative  in  respect
    of the ET claim.


7.    The appellants' representative informed me that the first  appellant's
    Employment Tribunal claim will be heard on 10 June.  It will take  five
    days and it is more likely that the decision will be given on the fifth
    day followed by written reasons.

8.   Ms Holmes said she was baffled as to why the judge did not adjourn  the
    hearing  pending  the  outcome  of  the  first  appellant's  Employment
    Tribunal claim.  She said that the first appellant has Section 3C leave
    which would have covered him until the disposal of this appeal.

9.   I  note  from  paragraphs  5  and  6  of  the  determination  that  the
    appellants' legal representative had raised Article  6  for  the  first
    time at the hearing.  This was on the basis that  the  first  appellant
    had been dismissed  from  his  employment  by  the  London  Borough  of
    Kingston and that he had issued proceedings in the Employment  Tribunal
    against his former employers.  The first appellant needed to be in  the
    UK in order to conduct his  Employment  Tribunal  case.   As  the  Home
    Office were seeking to remove him he would not  be  in  a  position  to
    conduct his case or give evidence if he was removed  to  Nigeria.   The
    Home Office Presenting Officer below asked for a short  adjournment  so
    that she could consider the arguments.   Upon  return  to  the  hearing
    room, the judge confirmed with both parties that she  had  now  studied
    all the correspondence relating to  the  Employment  Tribunal  and  was
    concerned that Article 6  issues,  together  with  Article  8  will  be
    raised.  It appeared that if the Home Office decision was  upheld,  the
    appellants would be removed from the UK together  with  their  children
    and the first appellant would be prevented from  appearing  before  the
    Employment Tribunal and  giving  evidence  in  June  2014.   The  judge
    indicated that apart from Article 6, this must  also  be  a  breach  of
    Article 8 involving the first appellant's private life.  The Presenting
    Officer indicated that she accepted that Article 6 was in issue and, as
    it dealt with civil litigation, this  must  include  employment  rights
    before an Employment Tribunal.  She had stated that she was seeking  an
    adjournment of the immigration hearing until after 1 July 2014 when the
    outcome of the Employment Tribunal proceedings  would  be  known.   The
    appellants' representative opposed the adjournment  request  indicating
    that  the  respondent  had  been  aware  of  the  Employment   Tribunal
    proceedings when the documents were  served  on  3  February  2014  and
    should  have  therefore  considered  this  matter.    He   wanted   the
    appellants' case  dealt  with  immediately  as  this  would  clear  the
    position with regard to the Employment Tribunal proceedings.   He  also
    said that the first appellant was currently  in  negotiating  with  his
    previous employer and was seeking  reinstatement.   His  visa  and  its
    renewal was one of the reasons why the London Borough of Kingston,  his
    previous employer, had dismissed him from his employment.  If the first
    appellant did not have  a  visa  he  could  not  look  for  alternative
    employment.  The Home Office should have asked for  an  adjournment  on
    receipt of the main bundle but had failed to do so.

10.  The HOPO below  accepted  that  the  first  appellant  had  proceedings
    before the Employment Tribunal but said  that  this  had  come  to  the
    notice of the Home Office on 5 February  when  the  3  February  bundle
    provided by the solicitors had been  served.   It  was  unrealistic  to
    expect them to deal with this in a matter of  days.   She  renewed  her
    request for an adjournment.   The  appellants'  representatives  stated
    that a complaint had already been made against  the  Home  Office  with
    regard  to  this  case  and  the  way  they  had  breached  their   own
    Regulations.  He referred to a letter sent by him on 16 August 2013  to
    the respondent.

11.  The judge then gave a  short  adjournment  in  order  to  consider  the
    arguments regarding the adjournment request.  Upon reconvening she made
    the following decision on the preliminary point at paragraph 18:

         "18. On this preliminary point I made the following decision:-

                  'I have considered all the legal arguments  together  with
                  the documents submitted in this case which include details
                  of the first Appellant's claim to the Employment Tribunal.
                   I have noted that the first Appellant's claim before  the
                  Employment Tribunal is due to be heard in  June  2014.   I
                  indicated to the parties that in view of these proceedings
                  it would be  disproportionate  to  remove  the  Appellants
                  until the proceedings before the Employment  Tribunal  had
                  been concluded and that it would amount  to  a  breach  of
                  Article 8  (private  life)  of  the  first  Appellant.   I
                  indicated also that I realised that  other  arguments  had
                  been made with regard to Article 8 which included both the
                  second Appellant and the two  dependent  children  and  in
                  particular family life, but that I considered it would  be
                  more appropriate for these matters to be considered  after
                  the  conclusion  of  the  proceedings  in  the  Employment
                  Tribunal  when   the   situation   regarding   the   first
                  Appellant's employment or otherwise  would  be  known.   I
                  considered  therefore  it  would  be  premature  to   make
                  findings with regard to other issues of Article  8  before
                  the outcome of  the  Employment  Tribunal  was  known.   I
                  indicated to the parties that I would allow the appeal and
                  that the first Appellant, together with his family, should
                  be granted limited leave to remain in  the  UK  until  the
                  conclusion  of  the   Employment   Tribunal   proceedings.
                  Lastly, that I would provide full written reasons for this
                  preliminary decision.'"


12.  I find that the judge did not  err  in  law  in  her  decision  not  to
    adjourn the  hearing.   Her  decision  on  the  preliminary  point  was
    properly made following consideration of the arguments before her.

13.   I  also  find  that  because  the  appellants'  Article  8  claim   is
    inextricably linked with  the  first  appellant's  Employment  Tribunal
    claim, the judge was right to find that it would be premature  to  make
    findings on other aspects of  Article  8  before  the  outcome  of  the
    Employment Tribunal is known.  Furthermore, as found by the  judge,  if
    the first appellant won his  Employment  Tribunal  he  may  be  granted
    reinstatement by his former employer, which would in turn mean that the
    respondent  would  have  to  reconsider  the  decision  to  refuse  the
    appellant leave to remain because his employment had been terminated by
    his employers.  These findings are perfectly sustainable.

14.  I therefore find that the judge did  not  err  in  law.   The  decision
    allowing the appellants' appeal shall stand.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
