
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/41302/2014
                                                               IA/41316/2014
                                                               IA/41306/2014
                                                               IA/41312/2014
                                                               IA/41325/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 September 2015                  |On 14 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                   DOO (1)
                                   OO (2)
                                   OIO (3)
                                   AOO (4)
                                   MOO (5)
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A. Burrett, Counsel, direct access
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the appellants against a  decision  of  the  First
    tier Tribunal promulgated on 27 January 2015  dismissing  their  appeal
    against a decision of the respondent to refuse them leave to remain.

 2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    appellants. This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any
    failure to comply with this direction could give rise  to  contempt  of
    court proceedings.

The Appellants

 3. The appellants are citizens of Nigeria. The first and second appellants
    are husband and wife. The other three appellants are their children.

 4. The first appellant entered the UK in 2002 as a student and on  several
    occasions was granted further leave to  remain  as  a  student.  On  15
    February 2008, he applied for leave as a  highly  skilled  migrant  and
    this was granted until 26 February 2010. However, this grant  was  said
    by the respondent to have been obtained by deception and he was  served
    with form IS.151A.

 5. On 10 March 2009 the appellants applied for leave to remain under human
    rights law. Their application was refused on 8 April  2009.  On  8  May
    2012 they applied again and this was refused on 11 July  2013  with  no
    right of appeal. Following judicial review proceedings, the  respondent
    agreed to reconsider the application and make a decision with  a  right
    of appeal. This was made on 1 October  2014  and  the  application  was
    refused.

 6. In refusing the application, the respondent, applying  the  Immigration
    Rules in force post 9 July 2012, assessed whether the appellants  could
    satisfy  the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM  or  Rule  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules. Having found that they  could  not,  the  respondent
    proceeded to consider whether  there  were  exceptional  circumstances,
    having regard in particular to Section 55 of the  Borders,  Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009, that would warrant a grant of  leave  outside
    the Rules.  The decision on 1 October 2014 stated that  the  respondent
    did not accept there were exceptional  circumstances  or  that  removal
    would be disproportionate.

First-tier Tribunal decision

 7. The appellants appealed  and  their  appeal  was  heard  by  First-tier
    Tribunal judge Thanki ("the judge").  The  judge  assessed  the  appeal
    following the five step analysis in Razgar  ([2004]  UKHL  27).  Having
    first found that Article 8 of the ECHR  was  engaged  he  proceeded  to
    consider proportionality, finding that removal would be  proportionate.
    The judge's consideration of proportionality included  an  analysis  of
    the appellants' immigration history (finding that they are  in  the  UK
    unlawfully), their circumstances in Nigeria (accounts of which  by  the
    first and second appellant were not believed) and of the best interests
    of the children.  The judge's assessment also took into account what he
    described as the "burden on the public purse".

 8. The grounds of appeal submit that:

      a. the case should have been considered under the Immigration Rules in
         force on 8th May 2012; and

      b. the judge failed to properly consider the best interest of the
         children taking into account that the eldest two have been in the
         UK for over seven years and that the oldest child is now thirteen
         having lived in the UK since she was three.

Submissions

 9. Mr Burrett, on behalf of the appellants,  submitted  that  the  judge's
    approach to the children, the eldest of whom had been in the UK for ten
    years, was fundamentally flawed. He argued that  the  judge's  starting
    point was to consider the parents and then, having found they were  not
    entitled to stay in the UK,  to  decide  the  children  should  follow.
    However, the  proper  approach  would  have  been  to  start  with  the
    children, by examining their individual circumstances  including  their
    ties to and in the UK and the impact on each  of  them  of  removal  to
    Nigeria. He pointed to paragraph [82] of the decision, where the  judge
    finds that the private life claim of all the appellants requires little
    weight because it was established whilst in the UK  unlawfully,  as  an
    example of the judge not giving separate  treatment  to  the  children,
    whose private life should not be given little weight just because their
    parents have acted unlawfully.

10. Mr Burrett further submitted  that  the  judge  failed  to  ground  his
    decision in the Immigration Rules and legislation and had he done so he
    would have given greater weight to  the  individual  interests  of  the
    children  in  remaining  in  the  UK.  Both  Section  117B(6)  of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") and  Rule
    276ADE of the Rules state that the public  interest  does  not  require
    removal of a child who has lived in the UK for  at  least  seven  years
    where "it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK".
     Mr Burrett contended that the judge, by failing to  properly  consider
    the Rules and moving straight  to  the  five  step  Razgar  assessment,
    failed to appreciate the implication  and  importance  of  two  of  the
    children having been in the UK for over seven years.

11. He further argued that the judge had failed  to  take  account  of  the
    actual circumstances of the family. The  mother  and  father  were  not
    cohabiting and it may well have  been  appropriate  to  consider  their
    circumstances separately.

12. Mr Burrett did not make any submissions with respect to the appellants'
    first ground of appeal which was that the judge should have applied the
    Immigration Rules in force prior to 9th May 2012.  In  light  of  Singh
    [2015] EWCA Civ 74 there is no merit in this ground and Mr Burrett  was
    right not to pursue it.

13.  Ms  Fijiwala  submitted  that  the  judge,  in   his   assessment   of
    proportionality under Article 8, had addressed the  best  interests  of
    the children and whether it would be reasonable to expect them to leave
    the UK. As clarified in AM (S117B) UKUT 0260, there is no need  to  set
    out the analysis twice.  The judge had considered the relevant  factors
    including their ties to the UK including their education,  friends  and
    community  and  reached  a  decision  that  was  consistent   with   EV
    (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874.

14. With respect to the fact the first and second appellants are no  longer
    living together, Ms Fijiwala  argued  that  it  is  apparent  from  the
    decision the judge has had regard to this. The judge noted at paragraph
    [17] that the first appellant sees the children daily,  takes  them  to
    school and assists with their homework. Ms Fijiwala argued that it  was
    reasonable to find that this role could continue in Nigeria.

Findings

15. Where, as in this appeal, the consequence of the respondent's  decision
    is that children will be removed from the UK,  the  best  interests  of
    those children must be "a primary consideration."

16. In EV (Philippines) the Court of Appeal set out  what  is  involved  in
    considering the best interest  of  children  and  how  this  should  be
    weighed against other factors including a poor immigration  history  of
    the parents.

         "35. A decision as to what is in the  best  interests  of  children
         will depend on a number of factors such as (a) their age;  (b)  the
         length of time that they have been here; (c)  how  long  they  have
         been in education; (c) what stage their education has reached;  (d)
         to what extent they have become distanced from the country to which
         it is proposed that they return; (e) how renewable their connection
         with it may be; (f) to  what  extent  they  will  have  linguistic,
         medical or other difficulties in adapting to life in that  country;
         and (g) the extent to which the course proposed will interfere with
         their family life or their rights (if they  have  any)  as  British
         citizens.

         36.  In a sense the tribunal is  concerned  with  how  emphatic  an
         answer falls to be given  to  the  question:  is  it  in  the  best
         interests of the child to remain? The longer  the  child  has  been
         here, the more advanced (or critical) the stage of  his  education,
         the looser his ties with the country  in  question,  and  the  more
         deleterious the consequences of his return, the greater the  weight
         that falls into one side of the scales. If it is overwhelmingly  in
         the child's best interests that he should not return, the  need  to
         maintain immigration control may  well  not  tip  the  balance.  By
         contrast if it is in the child's best interests to remain, but only
         on balance (with some factors pointing the other way),  the  result
         may be the opposite.

         37.  In the balance on the other side there falls to be taken  into
         account the strong weight to be  given  to  the  need  to  maintain
         immigration control in pursuit of the economic  well-being  of  the
         country and the fact that, ex hypothesi,  the  applicants  have  no
         entitlement to remain. The immigration history of the  parents  may
         also be relevant e.g.  if  they  are  overstayers,  or  have  acted
         deceitfully"

17. The same court also explained at paragraphs [58] - [61]:

         "58.  In  my  judgment,  therefore,  the  assessment  of  the  best
         interests of the children must be made on the basis that the  facts
         are as they are in the real world. If one parent has  no  right  to
         remain, but the other parent does, that is the  background  against
         which the assessment is conducted. If neither parent has the  right
         to remain, then that is the background against which the assessment
         is conducted. Thus the ultimate question will be: is it  reasonable
         to expect the child to follow the parent with no right to remain to
         the country of origin?

         59.  On the facts of  ZH  it  was  not  reasonable  to  expect  the
         children to follow their mother to Tanzania, not least because  the
         family would be separated and the children would be deprived of the
         right to grow up in the country of which they were citizens.

         60.  That is a long way from the facts of our  case.  In  our  case
         none of the family is a British citizen.  None  has  the  right  to
         remain in this country. If the mother is removed, the father has no
         independent right to remain. If the parents are removed, then it is
         entirely reasonable to expect the children to go with them. As  the
         immigration judge found it is obviously in their best interests  to
         remain with their parents. Although it is, of course a question  of
         fact for the tribunal, I cannot see that the desirability of  being
         educated at public expense in the UK can outweigh  the  benefit  to
         the children of remaining with their parents.  Just  as  we  cannot
         provide medical treatment for the world, so we cannot  educate  the
         world.

         61.  In fact the immigration judge weighed the  best  interests  of
         the children as a primary consideration, and  set  against  it  the
         economic well-being of the country. As Maurice Kay LJ  pointed  out
         in AE (Algeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014]
         EWCA Civ 653 at [9] in conducting that exercise it would have  been
         appropriate to consider the cost to the public purse  in  providing
         education to these children. In fact that was  not  something  that
         the  immigration  judge   explicitly   considered.   If   anything,
         therefore, the immigration judge adopted an approach too favourable
         to the appellant."

18. The approach taken by the judge in the  present  appeal  is  consistent
    with that set out in EV (Philippines). He has taken into  consideration
    a broad  range  of  factors,  as  contemplated  in  that  judgment,  in
    balancing the interests of the children against the public interest  in
    immigration control. His starting point was  to  consider  the  current
    situation of the children, whom he describes as being well  settled  at
    school and having substantial ties to the educational system in the UK.
    He then considered the  consequences  for  them  of  being  removed  to
    Nigeria. Both their parents will be removed at the same time, so  there
    will not be a separation from either parent. The judge found  that  the
    children will be able to  continue  their  education  in  Nigeria.   In
    considering their educational opportunities, the judge has  had  regard
    to difficulties with the educational system in Nigeria  (he  refers  to
    concealed fees and the duty to provide education terminating at 12) but
    also that the system is a functioning one which the  first  and  second
    appellant (who are both educated) will have the resources  and  ability
    to access for their children.

19. The judge has also considered the likelihood  of  the  first  appellant
    being able to work in Nigeria which clearly has  implications  for  the
    economic situation of the children.  Another factor he  considered  was
    that the children have been raised in a Nigerian cultural environment -
    he commented that the second appellant cooks Nigerian food  and  speaks
    to the children in their local Nigerian language (the language  is  not
    specified).

20. In addition, the judge has attached weight  to  his  finding  that  the
    appellants are unlawfully in the UK and that the second appellant  used
    deception to enter the UK.  He  has  also  had  regard  to  the  public
    expense both of educating and  housing  the  children  (who,  with  the
    second appellant, were being provided with emergency accommodation).

21. Mr Burrett submitted that the judge failed to put the children  at  the
    centre of his assessment and address why  it  would  be  reasonable  to
    expect them to leave the UK (rather than it being reasonable for  their
    parents to be removed).  However, in setting out  and  considering  the
    factors relevant to the children and their  circumstances  that  is  in
    fact what the judge has done.

22.  The  judge  has  followed  the  correct  approach  in   reaching   his
    conclusions, which were open to him on the information before  him  and
    for the reasons he gave.  I find that there is no error of law and that
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal should stand.

Notice of Decision

 1. The appeal is dismissed.

 2. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
    material error of law and shall stand.

 3. An anonymity order is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan
