
[pic]
IAC-TH-CP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41860/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st September 2015                |On 18th September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Mr Balbir Singh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Bhanji (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent's appeal against decisions to refuse to vary  his  leave
    and to remove him from the United Kingdom  was  allowed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Clemes ("the judge") in a decision promulgated  on  13th
    April 2015.  In 2012, the respondent applied for leave to remain in the
    United Kingdom indefinitely.   That  application  was  refused  on  2nd
    October 2014, when the adverse immigration decisions  were  made.   The
    Secretary of State, the appellant, found that the requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules ("the rules") were not met.

2.   The Secretary of State considered the  application  for  leave  in  the
    light of the rules as they were prior to 9th July 2012, concluding that
    paragraph 322(5) applied in his case.  As a  result,  the  respondent's
    application was refused under paragraph 286 of the rules in force prior
    to July 2012.  The application was also considered in the light of  the
    rules as they were after 9th  July  2012.   The  respondent  could  not
    succeed under the "ten year partner route" as he fell for refusal under
    section S-LTR.1.6.  On 28th July 2014,  he was convicted  of  "battery"
    and a restraining order was made.  The  Secretary  of  State  concluded
    that this made it undesirable to allow him  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom with his spouse and stepchildren.  Consideration was also given
    to the respondent's private life, the  Secretary  of  State  concluding
    that he could not show that the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)  of
    the rules were met, not least because he had not lived continuously  in
    the United Kingdom for at least twenty years and so the requirement  of
    sub-paragraph (iii) was not met.  Furthermore, he could not  show  very
    significant obstacles to his integration into  India,  the  country  of
    removal, and so the requirement of sub-paragraph (vi) was also not met.

3.   The judge heard evidence from the respondent and  also  from  his  wife
    and one of his stepdaughters.  Having done so, the  judge  went  on  to
    find that the requirements of the  rules  were  not  met,  whether  the
    current or an earlier version applied.  This was so in the light of the
    respondent's conviction on 28th July 2014.  The judge also agreed  with
    the Secretary of  State's  assessment  of  the  rules  in  relation  to
    Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE.

4.   The judge then went on to make an  Article  8  assessment  outside  the
    rules,  concluding  that  the   respondent's   removal   would   be   a
    disproportionate response  and  therefore  unlawful.   He  allowed  the
    appeal "under the Human Rights Act".

5.   The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal, on  the  basis
    that as the respondent was unable to meet the requirements of the rules
    as a result of his conviction, the judge was required to identify clear
    "exceptional circumstances" for the appeal to be allowed under  Article
    8.  The factors identified in the decision  were  insufficient,  taking
    into account the extent of the ties the respondent and his wife have to
    India.  Permission to appeal was granted  on  16th  June  2015.   In  a
    response under rule 24, the respondent contended that the judge had not
    erred in law.  He and his  spouse  were  well  settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

6.   Mr Bhanji and Mr Melvin handed up written  submissions  which  were  of
    great assistance.

Submissions on Error of Law

7.   Mr Melvin said that the judge, having dismissed the  appeal  under  the
    rules, went on to apply the "Razgar approach" and  allowed  the  appeal
    under  Article  8.   In  doing  so,   he   applied   a   threshold   of
    "reasonableness", in relation to the  respondent's  removal  to  India.
    However, the findings of fact made by the judge  were  insufficient  to
    show obstacles to family life being continued in India.  The  Secretary
    of State's case was that the judge was required to identify "compelling
    reasons" in the light of  SS  (Congo)  to  explain  why  an  assessment
    outside the rules was required.   The  findings  of  fact  appeared  to
    reflect what was required under the rules and the decision appeared  to
    show that substantially  the  same  reasons  identified  as  justifying
    dismissal under the rules were relied upon in order to allow the appeal
    under Article 8.

8.   In addition, in considering whether the respondent's removal  to  India
    would be a lawful step, the judge ought  to  have  taken  into  account
    EX.1.(b), the "insurmountable obstacles" test.  This was  explained  in
    the recent decision of the Court of Appeal in Agyarko [2015]  EWCA  Civ
    440, where this part of the rules was  described  as  imposing  a  high
    hurdle and a significantly more demanding test than whether it would be
    reasonable to expect a couple to continue their family life outside the
    United Kingdom.  The judge simply asked the question whether  it  would
    be reasonable for the respondent's spouse to accompany him or join  him
    in India.  The evidence showed that she has retained  substantial  ties
    to India.

9.   In addition, the judge's reasoning appeared  to  rely  on  speculation,
    including the prospects of success in  the  leave  application  if  the
    respondent had not committed an offence.   In  fact,  the  offence  was
    committed while the decision on the application was being  reconsidered
    by the Secretary of State.

10.  Finally, the judge failed to take into account at all section  117A  to
    C of the 2002 Act, relevant in the assessment of the  "public  interest
    question".  The respondent's private life was precarious, in the  light
    of his limited leave in the United  Kingdom.   The  position  might  be
    different in relation to family life but the section  and  the  factors
    identified there were required to be taken into account.

11.  Mr Bhanji said that the respondent relied upon  the  findings  of  fact
    made by the judge.  Reliance was placed on the evidence of  the  spouse
    and  the  oldest  stepdaughter  in  particular.   The   findings   were
    summarised at paragraphs 13 and 14 of the decision,  with  the  judge's
    analysis following thereafter.  The Secretary of State  disagreed  with
    the outcome but had failed to identify an error of law.

12.  Section 117A to C of the 2002 Act did not take matters further  in  the
    light of the clear findings of fact.  The judge was  entitled  to  take
    into account delay on the Secretary of State's part, which was a factor
    in the Article 8 context.   The  "insurmountable  obstacles"  test  was
    always hard to meet, as recent case law showed but  in  this  decision,
    the judge had properly and carefully weighed all the factors.  This was
    so notwithstanding the absence of any express mention  of  SS  (Congo),
    the "insurmountable obstacles" test or EX.1 of the  rules.   The  judge
    had taken into account all relevant matters, inherently, in making  his
    findings at paragraphs 13 and 14 of the decision.  There were  positive
    findings in the light of the evidence of the witnesses  and  the  judge
    took into account the ties established in the United Kingdom and  those
    that remained with India.

13.   It  was  clear  from  the  findings  that   there   were   "compelling
    circumstances" even though the judge did not expressly use that phrase.
     The respondent was an integral part of the family and the breadwinner.
      The  judge  was  entitled  to  find  family  life  even  though   the
    stepchildren were adults, because of the strong emotional ties.  So far
    as section 117A to C was concerned,  one  could  argue  the  degree  of
    precariousness in relation to the respondent's private life.

14.  In a brief response, Mr Melvin said that the decision  simply  did  not
    show that the judge had applied the reasoning in SS (Congo).

Findings and Conclusions on Error of Law

15.  At the heart of the Secretary of  State's  challenge  is  a  contention
    that the decision is one which contains insufficient  reasons  to  show
    precisely why the appeal was  allowed  under  Article  8,  having  been
    dismissed under the rules.  Mr Bhanji's careful response  is  that  the
    decision contains fully reasoned findings of fact which show compelling
    circumstances in the respondent's case, the  judge  being  entitled  to
    conclude that the appeal fell to be allowed under Article 8,  following
    an assessment outside the rules.

16.  There is no doubt that the decision contains clear findings of fact  in
    the light of the evidence,  particularly  the  evidence  given  by  the
    respondent's oldest stepdaughter.  There is also a clear summary of the
    Secretary of State's case, as set out in the letter  which  accompanied
    the adverse decisions.

17.  The difficulty, however, lies in paragraphs 12 to 15 of  the  decision.
    These contain the judge's analysis.  There are clear findings that  the
    respondent cannot meet the requirements of  the  rules.   Paragraph  13
    begins with agreement with the Secretary of  State's  assessment  under
    Appendix FM of the rules and the judge in the same paragraph  makes  an
    adverse finding regarding private life ties.  He finds that  there  are
    no significant obstacles to the respondent's  integration  into  India.
    What swiftly follows in paragraph 14 is an Article 8 assessment outside
    the rules, the judge proceeding to apply  Lord  Bingham's  "five  stage
    test" in Razgar.  Notwithstanding a clear finding in paragraph 13  that
    the judge is "not satisfied that [the respondent] has established  such
    a degree of a private life in the United  Kingdom"  to  enable  him  to
    succeed under the rules, paragraph 14 includes the following:

         "I can and do conclude that ...  refusal  of  his  application  and
         rejection of his appeal would be disproportionate  because  of  the
         nature and degree of his private life."

    Mr Melvin is right to point out that those two  conclusions,  which  do
    not sit happily together, have  been  reached  without  regard  to  the
    guidance given recently by the Court of Appeal in SS (Congo).

18.  What is required in the light of  that  case,  where  a  conclusion  is
    reached  that  a  claimant  cannot  succeed  under  the  rules,  is  an
    assessment of whether there are "compelling reasons"  or  circumstances
    requiring an assessment outside the  rules.   Although  the  judge  has
    referred to the respondent's  family  and  private  life  in  the  same
    paragraph and subsequently, and although he has taken into account  the
    years spent by the respondent in the United Kingdom, his marriage,  the
    period of delay between early 2013 and the date of decision in  October
    2014, and indeed the circumstances of  the  offence  committed  by  the
    respondent, there is, with respect, no explanation of why  those  facts
    amount to "compelling reasons".   As  the  author  of  the  grounds  in
    support of the application for permission to appeal noted, the evidence
    showed  that  both  the  respondent  and  his  spouse   have   retained
    substantial ties to India.  The findings of fact  do  not,  with  great
    respect to Mr Bhanji,  stand  out  in  themselves  as  showing  why  an
    assessment outside the rules was  required  or  indeed  how  the  judge
    reached the conclusion that the public  interest  in  the  respondent's
    removal was outweighed.

19.  Furthermore, Mr Melvin is right to draw attention  to  the  absence  of
    any mention of section 117A to C of the 2002 Act.  The factors set  out
    there must be taken into account by a Tribunal in deciding the  "public
    interest question" and in weighing the competing  interests.   Guidance
    from the Upper Tribunal in Dube [2015] UKUT  00090  and  Forman  [2015]
    UKUT  00412  is  that  a  Tribunal  need  not  set  out  by  rote   the
    considerations contained in section 117B but  the  decision  must  show
    that they have been taken into account and given effect.   In  relation
    to private life, for example, the weight to be given to  ties  in  this
    context is reduced where a claimant's immigration status is precarious.
     Mr Bhanji is right to say that the degree of precariousness might be a
    matter of argument in a particular case but the decision in the present
    appeal does not show that the judge  took  into  account  the  relevant
    statutory  consideration  or  what  impact  it  had.   In  reaching   a
    favourable conclusion in relation to family life, the judge was, again,
    required to take into  account  the  section  and  to  explain  whether
    particular factors strengthened or weakened the respondent's case.

20.  There is also force in Mr Melvin's submission  that  in  assessing  the
    proportionality  of  removal,  assuming  that  reasons  were   properly
    identified for making an assessment outside the rules, the judge relied
    entirely, it appears, on guidance from EB (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL  41,  in
    which a relatively low threshold of  reasonableness  is  identified  in
    relation to an expectation that a spouse will follow a husband or  wife
    to the country of removal.   The  rules  in  their  current  form,  for
    example  in  EX.1,  identify  a  higher  threshold  of  "insurmountable
    obstacles", considered recently by the Court of Appeal in  Agyarko  but
    not taken into account by the judge in  the  present  appeal.   On  the
    other hand, the Secretary of State made  no  mention  of  EX.1  in  the
    letter giving  reasons  for  the  adverse  decisions  and  the  judge's
    attention may not have been drawn to that part  of  the  rules  at  the
    hearing.

21.  In any event, the absence of reasons showing why  the  judge  moved  to
    make  an  assessment  outside  the  rules,  having   found   that   the
    requirements  of  the  rules  were  not  met,  and  the  absence  of  a
    substantial consideration of the factors set out in section 117A  to  C
    of the 2002 Act amount to material errors of law and I  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

22.  In a brief discussion regarding the appropriate venue for the  remaking
    of the decision, the Newport hearing centre was identified as the  most
    suitable, as the respondent's family live in  Southampton.   Mr  Melvin
    suggested that the appeal should be remade in the  Upper  Tribunal,  as
    the evidence had been fully aired.  I have considered  this  suggestion
    very carefully.  I conclude, however, that in the  light  of  paragraph
    7.2 of the Senior President's Practice  Statement  made  in  2012,  the
    appropriate venue is the First-tier Tribunal, where up-to-date evidence
    may be given.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal, containing material errors of  law,
is set aside.  It will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal at  the  Newport
hearing centre before a judge other than First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Clemes.


No anonymity direction has been requested or is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

