
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/41340/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 21 July 2015                      |On 24 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                         DAVID ELIAS ALARCON COLQUE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J. Trumpington, Counsel instructed by Howe & Co.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    For the sake of continuity I will refer to the parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal  although  the  Secretary  of  State  is
    technically the appellant in the appeal before the Upper Tribunal.





Background

2.    The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision to refuse  to
    grant him and his dependent family members leave  to  remain  on  human
    rights grounds.  First-tier Tribunal Judge McMahon allowed  the  appeal
    in a decision promulgated on 31 March 2015.  The Secretary of State was
    granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

3.    The grounds of appeal argue that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  failed
    to give adequate reasons to  explain  why  the  family  should  not  be
    removed and that he failed to explain why it would be  unreasonable  to
    expect the appellant's two children to leave the UK.  The grounds  went
    on to allege that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to  have  proper
    regard to sections 117A-D of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 ("NIAA 2002"). The grounds argue that the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge failed to give sufficient weight to countervailing factors and in
    particular the fact that their private life in the UK  was  established
    at a time when the family remained in the United Kingdom unlawfully. As
    such  their  private  life  should  be  accorded  little  weight.   The
    Secretary of State's grounds of appeal went on to argue that there were
    in fact no exceptional factors to show why this family  should  not  be
    removed.

4.    The appeal comes before the  Upper  Tribunal  to  decide  whether  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a point
    of law.

Decision and reasons

5.    After having considered the grounds of appeal and submissions made  by
      both parties I conclude that the First-tier Tribunal decision does not
      disclose an error of law.

6.    The First-tier Tribunal Judge wrote a clear and detailed  decision  in
      which he took into account all of the relevant factors.  It was  quite
      clear that the judge was aware  of  the  immigration  history  of  the
      family including the fact that the parents and  children  entered  and
      remained in the UK unlawfully.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  took
      into account the fact that they had never been granted leave to remain
      and remained here unlawfully as well as the fact  that  the  appellant
      and his wife had been working in the UK and in all likelihood had paid
      no income tax or national insurance contributions [13].

7.    However, the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  went  on  to  consider  the
      position of the appellant's two sons.  He noted the young age that the
      children arrived in the UK.  The oldest child was 7 years old when  he
      arrived and the youngest was 3 years old.  The children had  lived  in
      the UK for the last nine years and therefore  spent  the  majority  of
      their childhood  here.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  went  on  to
      consider the ties that the  family  had  established  in  the  UK.  In
      considering the best interests  of  the  children  he  quite  properly
      referred himself to the decisions in ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011]  UKSC
      4, Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74 and the Tribunal decision in  JO  and
      Others (section 55 duty) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 00517.

8.    The First-tier Tribunal Judge then went on  to  consider  whether  the
      two children met the requirements of paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  of  the
      immigration rules and correctly identified that  the  main  issue  was
      whether or not it was reasonable to expect the children to  leave  the
      UK.  In assessing this issue the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  not  only
      took into account the ties that the two boys have to the UK, which  he
      found to be substantial, but also took into account whether there were
      any countervailing factors that might nevertheless make it  reasonable
      to expect the children to leave the UK [29].

9.    The First-tier Tribunal Judge quite clearly gave weight  to  the  fact
      that the parents had shown a blatant  disregard  for  the  immigration
      rules by remaining in the UK without leave [29].   However,  he  found
      that there  were  few  other  countervailing  factors  that  might  be
      relevant. The parents had been able  to  support  the  family  (albeit
      through work that was  done  without  permission)  and  had  not  been
      reliant on public funds.

10.   Even though the First-tier Tribunal Judge considered that he  was  not
      obliged to take into account the factors referred to in sections  117A
      and 117B NIAA 2002 in relation to the assessment under the immigration
      rules, which is likely  to  be  correct,  he  nevertheless  took  into
      account  those  factors.   In  particular  he  made  clear  that   the
      maintenance  of  effective  immigration  control  is  in  the   public
      interest. He took into account the fact that that the two children had
      a good standard of English and that  their  parents  spoke  reasonable
      English. The two children were  also  very  well  integrated  into  UK
      society.  He mentioned once again that the family  members  had  never
      held immigration status [31].

11.   After having taken into account all of the relevant circumstances  the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge concluded that it would not be reasonable to
      expect either of the children to leave the UK and as a result they met
      the requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the immigration rules [33].

12.   The grounds of appeal do no more than set out disagreements  with  the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision.  It  is  quite  clear  that  the
      judge took into account all of the  circumstances  of  the  case  when
      considering whether it would be reasonable for the children  to  leave
      the UK. The decision shows that the fact that the family had no  leave
      at any point was quite clearly at  the  forefront  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge's mind. He took this into account amongst all the other
      relevant factors. In the circumstances of this case I find that it was
      open to the judge to conclude that the children  now  had  such  close
      ties to the UK that it would unreasonable to expect them to leave. For
      these reasons I find that the First-tier Tribunal decision relating to
      the two children does not disclose any material error of law.

13.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  went  on  to  consider  whether  the
      parents, who did not meet the requirements of the  immigration  rules,
      nevertheless succeeded under Article 8 outside the immigration  rules.
      The First-tier Tribunal Judge correctly referred to the step  by  step
      analysis set out in Razgar v SSHD [2004]  INLR  349.  He  went  on  to
      consider the public interest consideration set out in section 117B  of
      the NIAA 2002 and gave specific recognition  to  the  requirement  for
      little weight to be given to a private life established at a time when
      a person has been in the UK unlawfully [37].

14.   He went on to consider section  117B(6),  which  relates  to  parental
      relationships   with   a   qualifying   child.    In    essence    the
      "reasonableness" test was the same  as  that  contained  in  paragraph
      276ADE. The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  already  given  adequate
      reasons to explain why it  would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
      children to leave the UK.  As such it was  open  to  him  to  conclude
      that, despite the fact that substantial weight must be  given  to  the
      need to maintain  an  effective  immigration  policy  [39],  the  best
      interests  of  the  children  still  outweighed  the  public  interest
      considerations.  I am satisfied that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      took into account  all  of  the  relevant  factors  and  weighed  them
      carefully before coming to his conclusions.  The findings were open to
      him to make on the evidence and could not be said to be irrational  or
      perverse.

15.   For these reasons I conclude  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal did not involve the  making  of  an  error  of  law  and  the
      decision shall stand.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law

The First-tier Tribunal decision shall stand



Signed      [pic]      Date  23 July 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

