
 [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/41118/2014
     IA/41123/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |   Decision & Reasons          |
|                                             |Promulgated                    |
|On 7 October 2015                            |   On 16 October 2015          |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               CHARANJIT KAUR
                                 saab singh
                        (anonymity directionNOT MADE)

                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. S. Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. R. Singer, Counsel, instructed by Paul John & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by the Secretary  of  State  against  the  decision  of
   First-tier Tribunal Judge  N  M  K  Lawrence  in  which  he  allowed  the
   Appellants' appeals against the refusal of  the  Secretary  of  State  to
   grant further leave to remain as a Tier 4 student and dependant.


2. For the purposes of this appeal I shall refer to the Secretary  of  State
   as the Respondent and to Mrs. Kaur  and  Mr.  Singh  as  the  Appellants,
   reflecting the positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.


3. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was  arguable  that
   the judge did not have jurisdiction to allow the appeal, or to  remit  it
   to the Respondent to exercise a  non-existent  discretion,  having  found
   that Mrs. Kaur did not meet the requirements of the immigration rules  as
   she had not had sufficient funds in her account for 28 consecutive days.


Submissions


4. Mr. Kandola relied on the grounds of appeal.   He  submitted  that  there
   was no lawful basis for  remitting  the  appeal  under  paragraph  245XD.
   There was  no  discretion  under  paragraph  245AA  regarding  evidential
   flexibility as this was not the case of a missing document.  There was no
   issue of common law fairness or unfair treatment and  the  appeal  should
   have been dismissed.


5. For the Appellants Mr. Singer submitted that this  was  as  near  a  near
   miss as could be imagined.  He referred to the case of Patel [2013]  UKSC
   72.  The funds had been in the control of the family and when  Mr.  Singh
   transferred the funds he assumed that they would reach his wife's account
   quicker than they did.  I was referred to paragraph [3]  of  Mr.  Singh's
   witness statement.


6. Mr. Singer submitted that that the judge  clearly  thought  that  it  was
   ridiculous that the application had been refused and  that  decisions  to
   remove the Appellants had been made in these circumstances.  He submitted
   that, although he might have exercised his discretion in a way which  was
   inelegant, uppermost in his mind were the issues of common law  fairness,
   proportionality under Article 8 and the  fact  that  the  Respondent  had
   failed to consider granting leave in  the  circumstances.   He  submitted
   that it was clear that  the  judge  wanted  the  Respondent  to  consider
   whether the decisions were proportionate under Article 8.


7. However he accepted that there was no reference in  the  decision  either
   to Article 8 or to the common law duty of fairness.  The complaint of the
   judge was that the decision lacked commonsense.  He  submitted  that  the
   judge had not considered Article 8 as he had  wanted  the  Respondent  to
   look at this issue, otherwise he himself would become the primary  finder
   of fact.


8. In conclusion he submitted that it  was  clear  that  the  judge  felt  a
   degree of sympathy for  the  Appellants  and  wanted  the  Respondent  to
   consider granting leave on an alternate basis.  This is why  the  appeals
   were remitted back to the Respondent.


9. In response Mr. Kandola submitted that it  had  been  accepted  that  the
   Appellants did not meet the requirements of the immigration rules.  Given
   this, it could not be said that the decision was not in  accordance  with
   the law.  I was referred to the case of EK (Ivory Coast) [2014] EWCA  Civ
   1517 on the scope of common law fairness.  Here there was no  culpability
   on the part of the Respondent.


10. In relation to the  submission  that  the  judge  had  remitted  it  for
   consideration under Article 8, there was no reference in the decision  to
   Article 8.  An application had been made for further leave to remain, not
   for leave to remain under Article 8.  However, the judge could have  gone
   on to consider Article 8.  He submitted that the judge would have to have
   found that there were exceptional  or  compelling  circumstances  arising
   from the failure to meet the requirements of the immigration rules.   Mr.
   Kandola submitted that there were none.  The remedy was to make  a  fresh
   application.


Error of law decision


11. I found that the decision involved the making of an error on a point  of
   law.  The judge did not have discretion to remit the appeal  for  failure
   to meet the requirements of the immigration rules.  It is clear from  the
   decision, and it is accepted by the Appellants, that they  did  not  meet
   the requirements of the immigration rules, as Mrs. Kaur had the funds  in
   her account for 27, not 28 days.  The judge remitted the appeals  without
   reference either to Article 8 or  having  found  that  the  decision  was
   unlawful as being unfair at common law.  It is not at all clear from  the
   decision on what basis he remitted the appeals to the Respondent.


12. Article 8 was raised in the grounds  of  appeal  before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal but the judge did not go on to consider Article 8.  He  gave  no
   reasons for his failure to consider the appeals under Article 8, but  the
   issue had been raised by the Appellants in the grounds of  appeal  before
   him.


13. I announced that I found the decision involved the making  of  an  error
   of law.  I proceeded to remake the decision.


Decision on remaking


14. It is accepted that the Appellants cannot meet the requirements  of  the
   immigration rules for failure  to  meet  the  financial  requirements  of
   paragraph  245XD,  and  accordingly  I  dismiss  the  appeals  under  the
   immigration rules.


15. I find that there was no culpability on the part of the Respondent  such
   as to lead to a finding that there was any unfairness  in  the  decision.
   Mrs. Kaur failed to meet the requirements of the rules for  a  reason  in
   her control.  She failed to arrange her finances such that the  necessary
   funds were in her account for 28 days.


16. I have considered the Appellants' appeals under Article 8 in  accordance
   with the steps set out in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  It  was  not  submitted
   that the decision was a breach  of  their  right  to  family  life.   The
   Appellants will be returning to India together.  No evidence of any other
   family in the United Kingdom was provided.  I find that the decisions  do
   not interfere with their family life.


17. In relation to private life, the Appellants  have  been  in  the  United
   Kingdom since November 2010.  Mrs. Kaur came as a student and  Mr.  Singh
   came as her dependent.  I find that they have been  here  for  over  four
   years and, given the low level at which private life  is  established,  I
   find that they have established a private life sufficient to  engage  the
   operation of Article 8.


18. Continuing the steps set  out  in  Razgar,  I  find  that  the  proposed
   interference with this private life would be in accordance with the  law,
   as being a regular immigration decision taken by UKBA in accordance  with
   the immigration rules.  In terms of proportionality, the Tribunal has  to
   strike a fair balance between  the  rights  of  the  individual  and  the
   interests of the community.  The public interest  in  this  case  is  the
   preservation of orderly and fair immigration control in the interests  of
   all citizens.  Maintaining the integrity of the immigration rules is self-
   evidently a very important  public  interest.   In  practice,  this  will
   usually trump the qualified rights of the individual, unless the level of
   interference is very significant.  I find that in this case, the level of
   interference would not be significant and that it would be proportionate.


19. I have taken into account  the  provisions  of  Section  117B.   Section
   117B(1) provides that the maintenance of effective  immigration  controls
   is in the public interest.  I have taken into account the fact  that  the
   Appellants have failed to meet the requirements of the immigration rules.




20. In relation to the other factors in section 117B, the  Appellants  speak
   English (117B(2)).  In relation  to  their  financial  independence,  the
   Respondent was not satisfied that they met the financial requirements  of
   the immigration rules as Mrs. Kaur failed to  meet  the  requirements  of
   paragraph 245XD.  Although I find that the  immigration  rules  were  not
   met, I find that Mr. Singh had  transferred  the  money  to  Mrs.  Kaur's
   account, and that the Appellants had the required funds between them, but
   they had not  arranged  their  finances  properly  for  the  purposes  of
   paragraph 245XD (117B(3)).  However a  positive  finding  in  respect  of
   English language skills and financial independence is not enough  on  its
   own to outweigh other relevant factors.


21. In relation to the nature of the failure to  meet  the  requirements  of
   the immigration rules, I am also mindful of paragraphs [56] and  [57]  of
   Patel, "a near-miss under the rules cannot provide substance to  a  human
   rights case which is otherwise lacking in merit".


22. The Appellants came to the United Kingdom with temporary  leave.   Their
   private life  has  been  established  when  their  leave  to  remain  was
   precarious, so little weight can be attached to it (117B(4)).  There  was
   no expectation that leave would be granted on a permanent basis.


23. Mrs. Kaur initially came to the  United  Kingdom  with  a  student  visa
   valid for two years until May 2012.  In February 2012  she  finished  the
   course for which she had been granted a visa.  She was  then  granted  an
   extension for two years until August 2014.  In her witness statement  she
   said that she has done the work for this  course,  but  the  college  has
   closed and her work has not been sent to the awarding body.   The  course
   she has applied for is at the same level but is only for one year.


24. I find that Mrs. Kaur has already had  an  extension  of  two  years  in
   order to reach level 7.  She has achieved the aim for which she  came  to
   the United Kingdom, completing the first course in February 2012.   There
   is nothing to stop her from continuing her studies in India, the  country
   where she has spent the vast majority of  her  life.   Neither  is  there
   anything to stop her from making a fresh application.


25. I find that the Appellants will be returning to India, their country  of
   origin, where they have spent the vast majority of their lives.   I  find
   that they have social, cultural, family and linguistic ties to India.  No
   evidence was provided that either of them has any  medical  needs.   Mrs.
   Kaur will be returning with the benefit of the education she has received
   here.


26. There is a significant public interest in refusing leave  to  remain  to
   those who have not satisfied the requirements of the  immigration  rules.
   I find, taking into account all of the circumstances of  the  Appellants,
   that they have failed to show on the balance of  probabilities  that  the
   decision is a breach of their rights to a private life under Article 8 or
   indeed any other rights protected by the Human Rights Act 1998.


Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law and is set aside.

I remake the decision, dismissing the appeals under  the  immigration  rules
and on human rights grounds.




Signed                                  Date 15 October 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain


