
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41570/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10th October 2014                            |On 20th October 2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           PERCY KOJO ANTWi-AGYEi
                          (no anonymity direction)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Parkinson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    No representation


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against the determination  of  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Elliman promulgated on 10th June 2014.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and I will refer to him as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a male citizen of Ghana born 23rd October 1978  who  in
    January 2013 applied for a residence card as confirmation of a right to
    reside in the United Kingdom.  The application was made  on  the  basis
    that the Appellant was married to  a  French  citizen,  Audrey  Cynthia
    Franck, to whom I shall refer as the Sponsor.

 4. The application was refused on  12th  July  2013.   On  that  date  the
    Secretary of State issued a Notice of Immigration Decision refusing the
    application with reference to regulations 7 and 8(5) of The Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (the  2006  regulations)  and
    issued a reasons for refusal letter of the same date.

 5. In giving reasons for refusal the Secretary of  State  did  not  accept
    that the proxy marriage undertaken by the Claimant and Sponsor in Ghana
    on 30th September 2012 was a valid marriage.   Therefore  the  Claimant
    was not the family member of an EEA citizen as required by regulation 7
    of the 2006 regulations as he was not the Sponsor's spouse.

 6. The Secretary of State went on to consider Regulation 8(5) of the  2006
    regulations, and whether the Claimant was an extended family member  of
    the Sponsor, on the basis that he was in a durable relationship with an
    EEA national.  The Secretary of State decided that  this  was  not  the
    case, as insufficient evidence had  been  provided  to  show  that  the
    parties were in a relationship, as they had not provided any supporting
    documentation such as joint  bank  accounts,  utility  bills,  mortgage
    statements or tenancy  agreements  to  show  that  they  were  residing
    together.

 7. The Secretary of State did not consider Article 8 of the 1950  European
    Convention  on  Human  Rights  (the  1950  Convention).   The  Claimant
    appealed contending that the Secretary of State was wrong  to  conclude
    that a genuine and valid marriage had not taken place,  and  contending
    that the marriage was recognised  under  Ghanaian  law,  and  therefore
    should be recognised under United Kingdom law.  It was  contended  that
    the  Claimant  is  therefore  the  Sponsor's  spouse  as  required   by
    regulation 7.  It was also claimed that the refusal  decision  breached
    Article 8 of the 1950 Convention on the basis  that  the  Claimant  and
    Sponsor lived together and intend to live together as husband and  wife
    in the United Kingdom.

 8. The appeal was heard by Judge Elliman (the judge)  on  23rd  May  2014.
    The judge found that a valid marriage had taken place and therefore the
    Claimant satisfied regulation 7 of the 2006 regulations and the  appeal
    was allowed on that basis.  The judge did not consider Article  8,  nor
    the issue of a durable relationship, which in fact had not been  raised
    as a Ground of Appeal.

 9. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal contending, in summary, that the judge had erred by failing to
    apply the principles in Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law)  [2014]  UKUT
    00024 (IAC).

10. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    PJM Hollingworth, who found that an arguable error of law had arisen in
    relation to the extent of the issues to be determined in the context of
    the recognition of the validity of the marriage.

11. Directions were issued that there should be a hearing before the  Upper
    Tribunal to ascertain whether the First-tier Tribunal had erred in  law
    such that the decision should be set aside.

Error of Law

12. The appeal initially  came  before  me  on  1st  September  2014.   The
    Claimant appeared without legal representation.  He said  he  had  been
    let down by his solicitors and he had not seen the Secretary of State's
    application for permission, nor the  grant  of  permission  to  appeal.
    Those documents were provided  to  him,  and  the  Claimant  thereafter
    applied for an adjournment to enable him to instruct a  new  solicitor.
    There was no objection on behalf of the Secretary of State.

13. The hearing was therefore adjourned in the interests of justice,  until
    10th October 2014 at 10am.  Directions were made orally at the  hearing
    and subsequently in writing, that the Claimant was to  serve  upon  the
    Presenting Officers' Unit, the bundle of documents that he had  already
    served upon the Upper Tribunal.

14. The appeal was next listed for  hearing  on  10th  October  2014.   The
    Claimant did not  attend.   I  therefore  considered  Rule  38  of  The
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 which provides that if a
    party fails to attend, the Tribunal  may  proceed  with  a  hearing  if
    satisfied that the party has been  notified  of  the  hearing  or  that
    reasonable steps have been taken to notify the party  of  the  hearing,
    and that it is in the interests of justice to proceed.

15. I was satisfied that proper notice of the hearing had  been  given,  as
    the hearing date of 10th October 2014 at 10am had  been  fixed  at  the
    hearing on 1st September 2014 when the Claimant had been present.

16. In addition the Claimant had complied  with  the  directions  to  serve
    documentation upon the Presenting Officers' Unit, and  I  was  provided
    with a copy of the letter sent by the Claimant enclosing the documents,
    and which referred to the adjourned hearing date of 10th October  2014.



17. I observed that the Tribunal had in error, on 10th September 2014  sent
    out a notice of hearing  to  the  Claimant  at  his  previous  address.
    However, on 15th September 2013 the Tribunal had sent directions to the
    Claimant at his correct address, and  these  directions  confirmed  the
    next hearing date to be 10th October 2014 at 10am at Field House.

18. Having satisfied myself that proper notice  of  the  hearing  had  been
    given, I noted that there  was  no  correspondence  from  the  Claimant
    requesting an adjournment, and  no  explanation  for  his  absence.   I
    decided that it was in the interests of justice to  proceed  with  this
    hearing, taking into account that the Claimant's application  had  been
    refused as long ago as July 2013.

19. I heard submissions from Mr Parkinson who relied upon grounds contained
    within the application for permission to appeal,  submitting  that  the
    judge had not considered the Kareem principles which was  an  error  of
    law.

20. I decided that the judge had materially erred for the reasons given  in
    the application for permission.  Kareem was published January 2014, and
    therefore should have been referred to by the  judge  in  the  decision
    which was  promulgated  on  10th  June  2014.   Kareem  indicated  that
    consideration of whether a person's marriage is valid always has to  be
    undertaken in the context  of  the  national  legislation  of  the  EEA
    Sponsor's country of  nationality.   The  Sponsor  in  this  appeal  is
    French, and the judge did not consider whether French law would  regard
    a proxy marriage as valid.  Because of that error the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal was set aside.

Re-Making the Decision

21. Mr Parkinson submitted that the appeal must be dismissed as  there  was
    no evidence before the Upper Tribunal to prove that  French  law  would
    recognise a proxy marriage.

22. In my view the legal position is set out  in  Kareem,  and  I  set  out
    below, in part, paragraph 17 of that decision;

    In light of the connection between the  rights  of  free  movement  and
    residence and the nationality laws of the Member  States,  we  conclude
    that, in a situation where the marital relationship  is  disputed,  the
    question of whether there is a marital relationship is to  be  examined
    in accordance with the laws of the Member State from  which  the  Union
    citizen obtains nationality  and  from  which  therefore  that  citizen
    derives free movement rights.

23. The position was confirmed in TA and Others  (Kareem  explained)  Ghana
    [2014] UKUT 316 (IAC) the head note of which states;

    Following the decision in Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT
    24, the determination of whether there is a  marital  relationship  for
    the purposes of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 must  always  be
    examined in accordance with the laws of the Member State from which the
    Union citizen obtains nationality.

24. I also set out below paragraph 20 of TA;

    20.  Given that which I set out above, it is difficult to see  how  the
         Upper Tribunal in  Kareem  could  have  been  any  clearer  in  its
         conclusion that when consideration is being  given  to  whether  an
         applicant has undertaken a valid marriage for the purposes  of  the
         2006  Regulations,  such  consideration  has  to  be  assessed   by
         reference to the laws of the legal system of the nationality of the
         relevant Union citizen.

25. The Sponsor in this appeal is French.  No evidence has  been  submitted
    to prove that the proxy marriage,  where  neither  party  attended  the
    ceremony in Ghana, would be recognised under French law.  Therefore the
    burden of proof, the standard of which is  a  balance  of  probability,
    which is upon the Claimant, has not been discharged.  The Claimant  has
    not provided evidence to prove that a valid marriage has  been  carried
    out.  Therefore the Claimant has not proved that he is the spouse of  a
    French citizen, he has therefore not proved that he is a family  member
    as defined by regulation 7 of the 2006 regulations.

26. The issue of a durable relationship was  not  raised  as  a  Ground  of
    Appeal before the First-tier Tribunal but as it was contended that  the
    parties are in a relationship I will consider this.

27. Again, I find that the burden of proof has not been discharged  by  the
    Claimant.  The Secretary of State in the refusal letter, pointed to the
    lack of documentary evidence to  prove  that  the  parties  were  in  a
    relationship which could be described as durable, and pointed  out  the
    lack of documentary evidence that they lived together.  This issue  has
    not been addressed by the Claimant.  No further documentary evidence to
    prove a durable relationship has  been  submitted.   The  Claimant  has
    submitted further witness statements made by himself and  the  Sponsor.
    These are contained at pages 1-4 of the bundle submitted to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  They are not dated.  The parties state that they  have  been
    living together since August 2012.  Other than their assertions,  there
    has been no satisfactory evidence submitted to prove this.  Neither the
    Claimant nor his spouse attended the Upper  Tribunal  hearing  to  give
    evidence, there were no other witnesses called to  give  any  evidence,
    either oral or written.

28. In consideration of  Article  8  I  firstly  consider  Appendix  FM  in
    relation to family life.  I  do  not  find  that  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM are satisfied.  A formal  application  has  not  been  made
    under Appendix FM.  The Claimant has not submitted evidence of  English
    language ability, nor any evidence that the financial requirements  can
    be satisfied.  I do not find that the Claimant can rely upon EX.1 as he
    has not proved that he is the Sponsor's spouse and he  has  not  proved
    that he and the Sponsor have been living  together  in  a  relationship
    akin to marriage for at least two  years  before  the  application  was
    made.  Indeed, the evidence in the witness  statements  would  indicate
    that this was not the case.

29. I therefore conclude that the appeal cannot succeed under Appendix FM.

30. I have considered paragraph 276ADE in relation to  private  life.   The
    Claimant has not lived in the United Kingdom for at least twenty years.
     I do not find that the Claimant can satisfy paragraph  276(vi)  as  he
    has not proved that there would be very significant  obstacles  to  his
    integration into Ghana if he  had  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.   I
    therefore conclude that the appeal cannot  succeed  with  reference  to
    paragraph 276ADE.

31. I do not find that it is necessary to consider Article  8  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.  However if Article 8 was to be  considered  outside
    the rules, I would follow the Razgar five stage  approach.   I  am  not
    satisfied that the Claimant has proved that he  has  family  life  that
    would engage Article 8.  He has a private life in the  United  Kingdom.
    It is unclear exactly how long he has been in this country.  It is  not
    a case where comprehensive  evidence  of  his  private  life  has  been
    produced.  However the threshold of engagement is not especially high.

32. Substantial weight has to be given  to  the  maintenance  of  effective
    immigration control which is in the public interest.  The fact that the
    Claimant  cannot  satisfy  the  2006  regulations  carries  substantial
    weight.  There is no removal decision in force and it is  open  to  the
    Claimant to make a further application for a residence card if he deems
    this appropriate, and if he has further evidence to prove  that  he  is
    either a family member or extended family member  of  an  EEA  citizen.
    The decision to refuse a residence card is in accordance with the  law,
    and is proportionate and does not breach Article 8.

Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and
was set aside.

I substitute a fresh decision.

The Claimant's appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made no anonymity  direction.   There  has  been  no
request for anonymity and the Upper Tribunal makes no anonymity order.





Signed                              Date: 13th October 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


FEE AWARD

The Claimant's appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.





Signed                              Date: 13th October 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
