
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41452/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                        |               Decision & Reasons    |
|                                         |Promulgated                          |
|On 27th January 2016                     |               On 22nd February 2016 |
|                                         |                                     |


                                   Before


                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And


                                 MASOOM ALI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs R Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs Hussain, Legal Justice Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Caswell made following a hearing at Bradford on 18th May 2015.



Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Pakistan born  on  6th  August  1984.   He
    arrived in the UK on 10th January 2010 with leave until 30th April 2013
    which was subsequently extended until August 2014 and then curtailed so
    as to expire  on 29th April 2014.  He made an in-time  application  for
    leave to remain as a  Tier  1  Entrepreneur  supported  by  an  English
    language certificate from ETS.  On 30th July 2014 he was informed  that
    the certificate from ETS was no longer valid and was invited to take  a
    new test with an approved provider to be submitted  by  24th  September
    2014.

 3. The judge accepted the claimant's evidence in its entirety.

 4. He told her that when the Home Office wrote to him to request  that  he
    provide another test they gave him certified  copies  of  his  passport
    which they said would allow him to sit it.  He booked his test for  the
    next available date which was 6th September 2014 but when he arrived he
    was told that the certified copies would not be accepted as  they  were
    not official.  The next available date was 11th October  2014  and  his
    test was rescheduled.

 5. On 13th September 2014 he  attended  Sheffield  Hallam  with  his  Home
    Office file and they said that they would accept him for  the  test  on
    11th October 2014. Since he knew that 11th October was the  date  after
    the date he had been given to submit  a  test  he  wrote  to  the  Home
    Office, on 22nd September 2014, explaining the situation.  He  provided
    the Post Office tracking slip recording that it had  reached  the  Home
    Office but he received no reply to his request for more time.

 6. On 9th October 2014 the  Respondent  refused  the  application  in  the
    following terms;

         "On  30th  July  2014  we  wrote  to  you  providing  you  with  an
         opportunity to submit an alternative secure English  test  by  24th
         September 2014 to meet the English language  requirements.  As  you
         have not responded  to  our  request  your  application  falls  for
         refusal under paragraph 322(9) of the Immigration Rules.

         The Secretary of State is satisfied that you have failed to produce
         within a reasonable time information, documents or  other  evidence
         required to establish your claim out remain under  the  Immigration
         Rules."

 7. The judge said that the claimant  had  acted  perfectly  reasonably  in
    cooperating with the process  and  the  timetable  was  not  under  his
    control.  He was entitled to believe that the Home  Office  would  open
    letters on the date received so that sending his  letter  by  next  day
    delivery on 22nd September  2014  was  adequate.   He  could  not  have
    anticipated any delay in their process of opening correspondence.

 8. She concluded as follows:

         "On the evidence before me I do not find that the Respondent  acted
         fairly and appropriately with regard to  the  Appellant's  request.
         The  Appellant  acted  reasonably  throughout.    The   delay   was
         necessitated not by any default of  his  but  by  the  Home  Office
         furnishing him  with  certified  copies  of   his  passport   which
         contrary to the Home Office assertion were not  acceptable  to  the
         test provider.  Having  by  his  own  efforts  satisfied  the  test
         provider by other means and having obtained the next available test
         date the Appellant should have been allowed further time  to   take
         the test and submit the certificate.  There is no dispute that this
         certificate  is  valid  and  he  does  meet  the  English  language
         requirement."

         It was held in Naveed [2012] UKUT 14  that  general  principles  of
         fairness apply in relation to the exercise by the Respondent of her
         powers under the Rules.  In  the  appeal  before  me  I  find  that
         fairness required the Home Office to givn the Appellant  additional
         time to take the test  on 11th October 2014 and submit the  result.
         If that extra time had been  given  he  would  have  satisfied  the
         Respondent's request.  It follows that the Respondent's decision is
         not in accordance with the law and  the  Immigration  Rules  and  I
         allow the appeal."

The Grounds of Application

 9. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the claimant had not been subject to any unfairness. The  Tribunal  had
    incorrectly relied on Naveed and had failed to adequately  explain  the
    principles  of  common  law  fairness  applicable.  The  refusal  under
    paragraph 322(9) was lawful and the exercise of discretion  under  that
    paragraph was considered appropriately.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Woodcraft  on  1st  September
    2015 for the reasons stated in the grounds.

The Hearing

11. Mrs Petterson relied on her grounds somewhat unhappily  and  said  that
    she was in difficulty because  there  had  been  a  concession  by  the
    Presenting Officer at the hearing that correspondence had been received
    by the Home Office, establishing that the claimant had asked  for  more
    time to submit his test result. She accepted that there was  a  factual
    error in the refusal letter when it was said that the claimant had  not
    responded to the request to submit an alternative secure English test.

12. There is no error in the judge's decision.   The  judge  was  perfectly
    entitled to accept claimant's evidence which indeed is unchallenged  by
    the Secretary of State.  It is clear that he relied on the Secretary of
    State's  advice  that  certified  copies  of  the  passport   would  be
    acceptable and had attempted to obtain another test certificate on  6th
    September 2014 which was well within the  60  days  allocated  to  him.
    When he discovered that it was not going to be  possible  to  take  the
    test in time he contacted the Secretary of State, before the expired of
    the 60 days, to tell her that he was in difficulty and to ask for  more
    time.

13. Plainly the author of the refusal was not aware of the claimant  having
    written to the Home Office.  However, once that became apparent it  was
    quite open to the judge to  find that decision of 9th October 2014  was
    not lawful, being based upon a  factual  mistake,  and  accordingly  to
    allow the appeal.

Decision

14. The Secretary of State's challenge  fails.  The  claimant's  appeal  is
    allowed and the judge's decision stands.


No anonymity direction is made.

Signed



Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
