

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41566/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Promulgated                          |
|On 17 November 2014                  |On 18 November 2014                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                           David Nwachukwu Ilukwe
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Manning, instructed by Samuel Louis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision promulgated on 16 June  2014  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Shanahan which refused the appeal against the
    Secretary of State's decision dated 1 October 2013  refusing  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant.

 2. In order to address the  appellant's  error  of  law  challenge  it  is
    expedient to set out the history of this matter.

 3. The appellant applied for leave to  remain  as  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)
    Migrant on 29 November 2011.

 4. That application was refused on 2 November 2012. That  refusal  was  on
    the basis that the documentary requirements for his financial documents
    had not been met.

 5. The appeal against refusal of 2 November 2012 was dismissed  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Osborne in a  determination  promulgated  on  25  January
    2013.

 6. The appellant was granted permission to appeal that  decision  and  the
    matter came before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hall on 13 May 2013.

 7. Judge Hall found that First-tier Tribunal Judge  Osborne  had  made  an
    error on a point of law and set the decision aside. He found that to be
    so as it was not correct that the appellant's Nigerian bank had  to  be
    shown to be regulated by the UK Financial Services Authority. This  was
    an error conceded for  the  respondent  as  at  [17]  of  Judge  Hall's
    decision.

 8. Judge Hall also found at [19] that there was a further error  in  Judge
    Osborne's decision as the absence of a conversion  of  the  appellant's
    Nigerian funds into sterling should have  been  dealt  with  under  the
    appellant's evidential flexibility policy.

 9. Finally, Judge Hall concluded at  [20]  that  any  other  omissions  or
    shortcomings  in  the  appellant's  documents  were  capable  of  being
    remedied under the respondent's evidential flexibility policy. As  that
    policy had not been applied here, Judge Hall proceeded  to  remake  the
    appeal by allowing it as not in accordance with the law.

10. The respondent then requested  further  documents  from  the  appellant
    which he provided on 11 June 2013.

11. The respondent's new  decision  dated  1  October  2013  sets  out  the
    documentary requirements at length and states that they were  not  met,
    the appellant being awarded no points against the Appendix A  criteria.
    The letter does not specify in what way the  appellant  had  failed  to
    meet the documentary requirements however.

12. Notwithstanding the fact that he did not know why his  application  had
    again been refused, the appellant  again  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  His appeal was  dismissed  in  the  determination  of  Judge
    Shanahan. Her reason for refusing the appeal was that, as  put  forward
    for the respondent at the hearing before her, the appellant  had  still
    failed to provide a conversion of his Nigerian funds into sterling; see
    [7] and [10].

13. The appeal against Judge Shanahan's decision thus came before  me.  The
    first ground was that  there  has  never  been  a  requirement  in  the
    Immigration Rules to provide a conversion of the  Nigerian  funds  into
    sterling. The respondent's position is that she will  conduct  her  own
    conversion if none is provided. Mr Smart conceded that to be so  before
    me. There has never been any dispute here that the appellant had enough
    funds at all times whatever currency conversion rate was applied. I was
    entirely content  that  Judge  Shanahan  had  erred  in  requiring  the
    appellant to have provided a conversion of his Nigerian funds.

14. The difficulty before me was that Mr Smart maintained that this was not
    material as the appellant had never remedied the defects of  the  first
    application as set out in the first refusal  letter of 2 November 2012.
    As I understood the argument for the respondent, the matters from the 2
    November 2012 refusal remained at  large  before  me  as  Judge  Hall's
    decision was defective as evidential flexibility could not  assist  the
    appellant to the extent set out in his decision.

15. After allowing the parties time to consider this  jurisdictional  issue
    and address me on it, my conclusion  was  that  the  issues  before  me
    related to the refusal letter of 1 October 2013  and  not  the  earlier
    refusal letter. If the respondent had wanted to continue  rely  on  the
    matters set out in the earlier refusal, she could have said so  in  the
    refusal letter of 1 October 2013. She could have said something to this
    effect before Judge Shanahan. She could have  said  so  in  a  Rule  24
    response to the grant of permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    She could have attempted to do  so  in  a  cross-appeal  against  Judge
    Shanahan's decision. She did not. I was not prepared to accept that she
    could take that position before me now, additionally so on no notice.

16. As should be clear from [6], it is my view that Judge Shanahan erred in
    finding that the appellant had failed to provide a currency  conversion
    of his Nigerian funds. That is not a  requirement  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and I set aside her determination for that reason.

17. In re-making the decision I return to the point  made  in  paragraph  4
    above that there is nothing of substance in the  refusal  letter  of  1
    October 2013 indicating why  the  appellant  had  failed  to  meet  the
    Immigration Rules. Nothing other than the absence of  a  conversion  of
    the Nigerian funds was relied on before Judge Shanahan and nothing  was
    before me as to why the appellant does not meet the Immigration  Rules,
    having  provided  on  11  June  2013  the  evidence  requested  by  the
    respondent. Where those matters are  so,  I  find  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities  that  the  appellant  meets  the  requirements  of   the
    Immigration Rules as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant.

Decision

18. I find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an  error
    on a point of law and set it aside. I re-make  the  appeal  as  allowed
    under the Immigration Rules.


Signed: [pic]                                         Date: 17 November
2014
UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT










