
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41315/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 26 August 2014                             |On 2 September 2014          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M LEWIS

                                   Between

                       MR vishalkumar sureshbhai patel

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Ell, Counsel instructed by Maxwell Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


The History of the Appeal

1.   The Appellant Mr Vishalkumar Sureshbhai Patel is a  citizen  of  India.
    He appealed against the refusal  of  the  Respondent  to  grant  him  a
    residence  card  under  Regulation  17  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations  2006  made  on  the  sole  basis  that  his
    marriage to an EEA national was a marriage of convenience.  His  appeal
    was heard by Judge Whalan sitting at Taylor House on 23 May 2014.  Both
    parties were represented.  In a determination promulgated  on  12  June
    2014 the judge allowed the appeal under the Regulations.

2.   The Respondent sought permission to appeal in  the  following  succinct
    terms:

         "1.  Failing to take into account and/or resolve conflicts of  fact
             or opinion on material matters


             a.   It is respectfully submitted that the  Immigration  Judge
                  has failed to take into account and resolve  the  conflict
                  of  fact  or  opinion  in  relation  to  the   appellant's
                  inability to communicate with each  other.   It  is  noted
                  that this was raised in the Reasons for Refusal Letter  as
                  the main issue for  the  belief  that  the  Appellant  had
                  entered into a marriage of convenience.  It  is  submitted
                  that the Immigration Judge  has  failed  to  address  this
                  issue at all in their determination.


             b.   It is respectfully submitted that by failing  to  address
                  the issue of communication between the appellant  and  his
                  spouse, the Immigration Judge's findings in respect of the
                  genuine  nature  of  the  marriage  are  flawed.   It   is
                  respectfully  submitted  that  the   Immigration   Judge's
                  findings as to why the appellant is in a genuine  marriage
                  take into account several peripheral  factors  (living  at
                  the same address and a terminated pregnancy) yet  fail  to
                  deal  with  the  fundamental  issue  of   a   failure   to
                  communicate with each other  from  commencement  of  their
                  relationship to the present day.  It is submitted that the
                  Immigration Judge's failure to put  this  in  the  balance
                  with other negative factors (the  appellant's  history  of
                  visa fraud and a failure to attend  college  whilst  on  a
                  student visa) has led to inadequate findings in respect of
                  the genuine  nature  of  the  marriage.   As  such  it  is
                  considered that the Immigration Judge has materially erred
                  in law by failing to address this fundamental issue of the
                  appellant's ability to communicate with his spouse.


         Permission to appeal is respectfully sought.


         An oral hearing is requested."

3.    On  27  June  2014,  as  subsequently   supplemented   by   procedural
    directions, Judge Ransley granted permission to appeal in  terms  which
    essentially summarised the judicial findings.

4.   The Appellant, the Sponsor and another person  attended  the  error  of
    law hearing before me, which took the  form  of  submissions.   I  have
    taken these into account, together with the permission application, the
    Refusal Letter and the Rule 24 response of the Appellant.   I  reserved
    my determination.

Determination

5.   The essential submission of the Respondent is that  in  evaluating  the
    positive and negative considerations  the  judge  did  not  resolve  an
    asserted conflict of evidence about the inability of the Appellant  and
    the Sponsor to communicate with  each  other  and  did  not  take  that
    fundamental issue into account.

6.   The Refusal Letter reproduces corresponding sections of the  interviews
    of the Appellant and the Sponsor on a number of matters  including  the
    way in which they communicated with  each  other.   It  then  discusses
    three issues: asserted inconsistencies between the interviews about how
    they  communicated,  the  Appellant's  immigration  history   and   the
    Appellant's character since arriving in the UK.  From  this  discussion
    it concludes that the marriage was one of convenience and  rejects  the
    application.

7.   The judge heard the evidence of the Appellant (paras 10-12) and of  the
    Sponsor (paras 13-17) and considered their  interviews  (paras  18-19).
    He also considered witness statements of  six  people  and  documentary
    evidence.

8.   The judge considered the three factors -  asserted  inconsistencies  in
    the interviews, the Appellant's immigration history and the Appellant's
    character - in paragraph 32.  He found that the evidence justified  the
    Respondent in forming a reasonable suspicion that the marriage was  one
    of convenience.  This was based on the transcripts  of  the  interview,
    which include questions about communication between  the  parties.   He
    rejected other aspects of the Appellant's evidence and  concluded  that
    he was knowingly involved in a fraud:

         "Looking at the questions and answers carefully,  I  conclude  that
         both parties were, broadly speaking, purporting to  give  the  same
         information, albeit on occasion in slightly different  detail.   It
         was the Appellant's insistence in giving his evidence in English, a
         language in which he is not really very proficient  even  in  2014,
         that led inevitably to some apparent confusion."


    He treated the Appellant's evidence with some caution  (paragraph  33).
    He considered the extensive documentary  evidence  and  found  that  it
    established on the balance of probabilities that the Appellant and  the
    Sponsor had lived at the same address since  their  marriage  in  April
    2012 (paragraph 34).  Noting some inconsistency in their oral evidence,
    he balanced against it the factor of the  Sponsor's  pregnancy  by  the
    Appellant, subsequently terminated, leading to their decision to marry:


         "Doing  my  best  to  construe  this   evidence,   therefore,   and
         notwithstanding the Appellant's previous involvement in a dishonest
         or fraudulent attempt to obtain leave to remain and work in the UK,
         I conclude that their marriage is not one  of  convenience  entered
         into for the predominant purpose  of  securing  residence  rights."
         (paragraph 35).


    He accordingly allowed the appeal.


9.   I  find  that  the  judge  took  into  account  all  relevant  factors,
    including the asserted conflict of evidence about the  ability  of  the
    Appellant and the Sponsor to communicate with each other.  He  balanced
    the  various  considerations,  including  that  one,  and   reached   a
    conclusion which was properly open to him from the evidence.

10.  No error of law is disclosed.  The determination is upheld.

Decision

11.  The original determination does not contain an error  of  law,  and  is
    upheld.

Signed
    Dated: 1 September 2014



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Lewis
