

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/41696/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 November 2014                           |On 02 December 2014          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                          RAMI SAMIR SULEIMAN SALAH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Singh instructed by I A S
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Jordan who was born on  24  March  1980.
      On 26 February 2013, he applied for a residence card  as  confirmation
      of his permanent right of residence in the UK as the spouse of an  EEA
      national under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 (SI 2006/1003 as
      amended).  On 20 September 2013, the Secretary  of  State  refused  to
      issue such a residence card on the basis that the appellant had failed
      to establish that his spouse (from whom he had separated) had  resided
      in the UK in accordance with the  EEA  Regulations  for  a  continuous
      period of five years.

   2. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In  a  decision
      promulgated on 23 June 2014, Judge Burnett dismissed  the  appellant's
      appeal under the EEA Regulations.

   3. Before the Judge, the appellant also relied upon his relationship with
      a British citizen, Ms Reed and her four year old son.   Judge  Burnett
      concluded that the appellant could not  succeed  on  the  basis  of  a
      relationship with Ms Reed or her son under  Appendix  FM  and  further
      could not establish a claim based  on  his  private  life  under  para
      276ADE.  Neither of those finding is  challenged.   In  addition,  the
      Judge considered the appellant's claim to remain under  Article  8  of
      the ECHR.  First, he concluded that the relationship between  Ms  Reed
      and the appellant did not constitute "family life" for the purposes of
      Article 8.  Nevertheless, he went  on  to  consider  the  "nature  and
      quality of the relationship" as an aspect of the  appellant's  private
      life.   Judge  Burnett  concluded  that  there  were  no  "exceptional
      circumstances" such as to outweigh the public interest given that  the
      appellant could not meet the requirements of the Rules.   Finally,  he
      concluded  that  balancing  "all  the  known  factors  and   competing
      interests" the respondent's decision was "clearly proportionate".

   4. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  on  a  number  of  grounds
      relating to the Judge's decision to dismiss the appeal  under  Article
      8.  Permission was granted by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  V  A
      Osborne) on 12 August 2014.  Thus, the appeal came before me.

Submissions

   5. Mr Singh, who represented the appellant, recognised that he could  not
      make good the ground in paragraph 4 of the grounds that the Judge  had
      failed to make a "clear finding" in relation to whether the  appellant
      had family life.  The Judge clearly did that  in  paragraph  52  when,
      having considered the evidence, he stated:

           "I do not therefore find that  this  constitutes  'family  life'
           within the meaning of the Convention."

   6. Instead, Mr Singh made a  number  of  submissions.   First,  Mr  Singh
      submitted that the Judge had fallen into error  in  finding  that  the
      relationship between Ms Reed and the appellant did not  give  rise  to
      "family life" based upon a distinction between the appellant being her
      "boyfriend" but not her "partner".  Mr Singh submitted that given  the
      evidence of the relationship between the appellant and Ms Reed it  was
      irrational of the Judge not to  find  that  there  was  "family  life"
      between them.  Secondly, Mr Singh submitted that the Judge had  failed
      to properly consider whether there  were  "exceptional  circumstances"
      outside the Rules which did not cater for the situation where they did
      not "live together".   Thirdly, he submitted that the Judge had failed
      to consider the best interests of Ms Reed's child in  accordance  with
      s.55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009  given  the
      evidence concerning the appellant's relationship with Ms  Reed's  son,
      namely that he spent most weekends with Ms Reed and her son  and  that
      he spent time alone with her son babysitting so that Ms Reed could  go
      out.

   7. Mr Richards, on behalf of the Secretary of State, submitted that there
      had been no material error  of  law.  First,  he  submitted  that  the
      distinction drawn by the Judge between Ms Reed being  the  appellant's
      "boyfriend" but not her "partner" was simply her  evidence  which  the
      Judge accepted.   Mr Richards submitted that the Judge had  considered
      Ms Reed's evidence at paras 38 and 39 of  his  determination  and  had
      noted Ms Reed's evidence that she was proceeding cautiously in  making
      any commitment  to  the  appellant  given  his  uncertain  immigration
      status.  Mr Richards submitted that it was properly open to the  Judge
      to find that there was no "family life" between her and the appellant.
       In any event, Mr Richards submitted that the Judge had considered the
      "nature  and  quality  of  the  relationship"  as  an  aspect  of  the
      appellant's private life.  Secondly, Mr Richards  submitted  that,  in
      relation to s.55 of the 2009 Act, there was nothing before  the  Judge
      dealing with the best interests of Ms Reed's son.  The fact  that  the
      appellant saw him  on  weekends  and  babysat  for  Ms  Reed  did  not
      strengthen the appellant's claim.  Mr Richards submitted that it would
      be extraordinary if the appellant could not succeed on  the  basis  of
      his relationship with Ms Reed but could do so on the basis that he saw
      her son on weekends and babysat for him.  Mr Richards  submitted  that
      the Judge's failure to consider s.55 was not material; he  would  have
      given the point 'short shrift'  and  he  invited  me  to  dismiss  the
      appeal.

Discussion

   8. Dealing first with the issue of whether the  Judge  erred  in  law  in
      finding that there was no "family life" between the appellant  and  Ms
      Reed, the Judge set out Ms Reed's evidence at paras 34  and  38-39  as
      follows:

           "34.  She explained that she had first met the appellant in 2010
                 and got to know him through an internet dating  site.   She
                 was not looking for a relationship at the time as  she  had
                 just come out of a 17 year relationship.  They had  got  to
                 know each other and their relationship  got  more  intense.
                 She did  not  live  with  him  as  she  did  not  want  the
                 relationship to be too intense and for there to be too much
                 reliance.  She did not want her son to get too  emotionally
                 attached...

                 ....

             38. She stated that the appellant was her "boyfriend"  not  her
                 partner.  They had discussed marriage and he had asked  her
                 to marry him at the Queens Jubilee.  She stated  she  would
                 have  had  a  baby  with  the  appellant  earlier  if   the
                 appellant's situation had been different, but she  was  "on
                 guard".  They had been quite serious  the  last  couple  of
                 years and that is why she had attended the Tribunal.

             39. She confirmed that they had been  on  holiday  together  to
                 Egypt. Her son was 4 nearly 5 and the appellant had spent a
                 considerable time with  him.   They  saw  each  other  most
                 weekends and he saw her son then.  Her son was born on 18th
                 July 2009.  She stated that the appellant  had  spent  time
                 alone with her son as he babysits so she can go  out.   The
                 relationship was as it was  as  she  did  not  want  to  be
                 reliant upon the appellant until his situation  was  sorted
                 out.  She stated it would be nice to be able to move on and
                 they were living in limbo at the moment.  She  stated  that
                 one way or another they would know the  position  once  the
                 decision was made."

   9. At para 52 the Judge reached the following conclusion on the basis  of
      that evidence:

           "He has a relationship with Ms Reed.  The  appellant's  evidence
           seemed to conflict with Ms Reed's evidence as to  when  and  how
           the relationship started.  However, it was clear from Ms  Reed's
           evidence, that she has been cautious and guarded because of  the
           appellant's immigration status.  She does not refer  to  him  as
           her partner and makes  a  distinction  between  "boyfriend"  and
           "partner".   This  perhaps  demonstrates  the   depth   of   the
           relationship and whether it will continue.   They  do  not  live
           together and have never done so. I do not  therefore  find  that
           this  constitutes  "family  life"  within  the  meaning  of  the
           convention.  However, I have in any event considered this aspect
           in the proportionality exercise and the nature  and  quality  of
           the relationship. "

  10. The concept of "family life" under Article 8 is not clearly defined in
      the case law.  Its existence is ultimately a question of fact  and  it
      is for an appellant, in an appeal before the First-tier  Tribunal,  to
      establish that his or her relationship with another amounts to  family
      life.  It is well recognised that the subsisting relationship  between
      a married couple  and  the  relationship  between  parents  and  their
      children amount to family life for the purposes of Article 8.  It  has
      also been recognised that family life may continue  between  a  parent
      and an adult child who, for example, continues to  have  a  dependency
      upon  his/her  parents  by  continuing  to  live  with  them  and   be
      financially dependent upon them such  that  he  or  she  has  not  yet
      acquired an independent life (see  Ghising  (Family  Life  -  Adult  -
      Gurkha Policy) [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC)).  It is equally clear that the
      notion of a "family" and the "family  life"  protected  by  Article  8
      requires no particular form and the issue is one  of  substance  based
      upon "the real existence in practice of close personal ties" (see K  v
      UK (1986) 50 DR 199 at [207]).   The  law  is  summarised  in  Lester,
      Pannick and Ehrberg (eds) Human Rights  Law  and  Practice  (3rd  Edn,
      2009), at 4.8.44 as follows:

           "The existence of a formal union between adults  accompanied  by
           some evidence of cohabitation or consummation is  sufficient  to
           give rise to the existence of family life.  Indeed,  engagements
           to  marry,  when  accompanied  by  sufficient  evidence  of  the
           strength of intention or establishment of  relations,  may  give
           rise to family life.  But the notion of family life goes  beyond
           the mere formal and covers other 'de  facto  family  ties'.   It
           includes the relationship between unmarried adults even  if  not
           formally  or  legally  endorsed  or  recognised,  provided  such
           relationships are sufficiently enduring.   Key  factors  of  the
           stability of the relationship, the intention of the parties  and
           (though by no means determinative) cohabitation."

  11. In the instant appeal, the Judge was entitled to take at face value Ms
      Reed's evidence that she saw the appellant as her "boyfriend" but  not
      yet her "partner".  She expressed in her evidence caution in  pursuing
      their relationship because of his situation.  Her  evidence  was  that
      she did not  live  with  the  appellant  and  she  did  not  want  the
      relationship to become "too intense" and for there  to  be  "too  much
      reliance" or for her son to become "too emotionally attached"  to  the
      appellant.  She was "on guard".  The Judge  fully  took  into  account
      that they had been on holidays together and that the appellant saw  Ms
      Reed (together with her son) most weekends and  babysat  for  her  son
      when Ms Reed went out.  On this evidence, it was open to the Judge  to
      conclude that the nature of their relationship at present was not such
      as to give rise to "family life" protected  under  Article  8  of  the
      ECHR.  The Judge did not misdirect himself as to the need to  consider
      the "nature and quality" of the relationship.  Whilst Art 8  does,  of
      course, require protection for developing  future  family  life,  that
      obligation however only arises if there is existing family life  as  a
      base for that development.  I reject Mr Singh's submission that  there
      was only one rational outcome on these facts, namely that family  life
      existed between the  appellant  and  Ms  Reed.   His  factual  finding
      required a judicial assessment of the evidence and his conclusion  was
      not one which  no  reasonable  judge  could  reach,  namely  that  the
      evidence did not establish the "close  personal  ties"  of  sufficient
      strength to amount to  family  life  under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR.
      Consequently, I reject Mr Singh's submission that the Judge  erred  in
      law in concluding that no family life had been established between the
      appellant and Ms Reed.

  12. I now turn to Mr Singh's remaining submission concerning  the  Judge's
      approach to Article 8 of the ECHR.

  13. First, it is clear that the Judge made no specific reference  to  s.55
      of the 2009 Act and the best interests of Ms Reed's four year old son.
       However, the Judge can only deal with the circumstances presented  to
      him in the evidence.  The evidence was that the appellant  spent  time
      with Ms Reed's son on the weekend and babysat on occasion in order for
      Ms Reed to go out.  Ms Reed's own  evidence  was  that  she  exercised
      caution in her relationship with the appellant  because  she  did  not
      want "her son to get too emotionally attached" (see  para  34  of  the
      determination).  There was no specific evidence  that  Ms  Reed's  son
      would suffer any harm or prejudice if the appellant were removed.   It
      was, in my judgment, inevitable that the Judge would  decide  on  this
      evidence that the best interests of Ms Reed's  son  were  to  continue
      being brought up by his mother which she  had  done  alone  since  her
      previous seventeen year relationship had come to an end in 2010.

  14. Secondly, in any event, the child's  best  interests  could  not  have
      conceivably outweighed the public interest reflected in the fact  that
      the  appellant  had  no  lawful  basis  for  being  in  the  UK.   His
      relationship with the appellant was formed  at  a  time  when  he  had
      separated from his EEA spouse and, although he had a residence card as
      a family member of an EEA national issued on 6 March  2008  and  valid
      until 6 March 2013, his right of residence,  given  his  inability  to
      establish that his separated wife was exercising Treaty rights did not
      exist.  Although his position might not be considered as precarious as
      that of a person who required leave to remain in the UK and had  none,
      as the evidence of both the appellant  and  Ms  Reed  recognised,  his
      immigration status was uncertain.  Only in  exceptional  circumstances
      will the removal of an individual where the relationship was formed in
      such circumstances be disproportionate under Article  8  of  the  ECHR
      (see R (Nagre) v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) at [38]-[41]).

  15.  The  Judge   considered   whether   there   were   any   "exceptional
      circumstances" in the sense of "compelling reasons"  to  outweigh  the
      public interest in effective immigration control.  Mr Singh  submitted
      that the Judge had failed to give clear reason  for  his  finding  and
      that it was clearly irrational for the Judge to state at [54] that the
      appellant  could  continue  his   relationship   with   Ms   Reed   by
      correspondence, telephone calls and occasional visits.  Given that the
      appellant could not meet the requirements of any  of  the  Immigration
      Rules, the Judge correctly approached  the  issue  of  Article  8  by,
      having reached the decision in  relation  to  the  Rules,  considering
      whether  there  were  "exceptional  circumstances"   which   presented
      "compelling  reasons"  to  outweigh  the  public  interest.   (see  MF
      (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 and R (Nagre).   The  Judge  did
      not, as Mr Singh  submitted,  simply  determine  that  there  were  no
      "arguable" circumstances falling outside the Rules  which  could  give
      rise to  exceptional  circumstances  which  Mr  Singh  submitted,  was
      contrary to the Court of Appeal's disapproval of Gulshan (Article 8  -
      New Rules - Correct Approach) [2013]  UKUT  00640  (IAC)  in  R  ((MM)
      Lebanon)  and  Others  v  SSHD  2014  EWCA  Civ  985  at  [129].   The
      unfortunate truth for the appellant was  that  there  simply  were  no
      "compelling circumstances" which could possibly  outweigh  the  public
      interest.  It was, perhaps, unrealistic of the Judge to consider  that
      the appellant's  relationship  with  Ms  Reed  (even  if  it  did  not
      constitute family life) could continue  by  correspondence,  telephone
      calls and occasional visits.  However, the evidence did not  establish
      that there would be unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  sufficient  to
      outweigh the public interest on the `evidence.

  16. In his submissions, Mr Singh pressed the point that the appellant  was
      not legally represented at the hearing.  It was, nevertheless, for the
      appellant to establish his claim under  Article  8  including  leading
      such evidence as he wished to rely on.  Both he and Ms Reed gave  oral
      evidence concerning their relation which was, after all, not the basis
      of his original application  based  upon  his  relationship  with  his
      separated EEA spouse.   The  Judge  clearly  and  fully  recorded  the
      evidence of the appellant and Ms Reed concerning  their  relationship.
      He was entitled to conclude that the relationship did  not  amount  to
      family life under Article  8  and  that  there  were  no  "compelling"
      circumstances which were justified, on  the  evidence,  the  grant  of
      leave to the appellant outside the Immigration Rules under Article 8.

  17. For these reasons,  the  Judge  did  not  materially  err  in  law  in
      dismissing the appellant's appeal.  His decision stands.

Decision

  18.  Accordingly,  the  appellant's  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal   is
      dismissed.


                               Signed




                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                               Date:
