
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41518/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 October 2015                   |On 29 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                ZAFRAN RASHID
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal. I find that no
particular issues arise on the facts of this case that give rise to the
need for a direction. For this reason no anonymity direction is made.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, Mr Zafran Rashid, is a citizen of Pakistan.  He  appeals
    against the decision of the Secretary of State  dated  7  October  2013
    refusing to vary his leave to remain as a student and giving him notice
    of removal to Pakistan.  The decision was based originally on the  fact
    that this would result in further leave exceeding the maximum permitted
    for study below degree level.  He was later granted leave and notice of
    appeal was then given against a subsequent decision dated 29  September
    2014 responding to an application made on 29 June 2014.

 2. The grounds of refusal were based on the lack of a CAS and for lack  of
    maintenance in consequence of that.  The appeal was dismissed by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Kimnell in a decision promulgated on  13  May  2015
    ("the  Decision").   The  Appellant  did  not  attend   that   hearing.
    Solicitors instructed for that hearing indicated that they were without
    instructions and could not therefore proceed.

 3. The Judge found at paragraph 11 of the Decision that whichever decision
    it was that the Appellant wished to appeal the burden  was  on  him  to
    establish on the balance of probabilities that he met the  requirements
    of the Rules and no evidence had been submitted. Therefore  the  appeal
    should be dismissed because  the  Appellant  failed  to  discharge  the
    burden upon him.

 4. It is not clear what grounds were provided with the Appellant's  notice
    of appeal against the Decision but I have assumed for the  purposes  of
    this hearing that those were the original grounds which  is  consistent
    with the grant of permission.

 5. The Appellant asserts that he produced the relevant documents and  that
    the Secretary of State could and should have sought documents if  those
    were not produced.  He  also  relied  on  case  law  in  support  of  a
    proposition  that  the  Section  47  decision  to  remove  was  not  in
    accordance with the law.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted on 15 July 2015 on the basis  that  it
    was arguable that the Judge failed to consider  the  grounds  asserting
    that the Appellant had provided a CAS and that the Secretary  of  State
    could and should have sought it if it was missing.  The  Appellant  did
    not attend the hearing before me.  I am satisfied  that  he  was  given
    notice of the hearing to the address given in the notice of appeal.  No
    communication has been  received  from  him.   No  application  for  an
    adjournment has been made.  In the circumstances I considered it to  be
    in the interests of justice to continue with the hearing.

 7. Dealing with the points made in the original grounds of appeal, on  the
    basis that those were the grounds before me, insofar as  an  issue  was
    raised in relation to the Section 47  decision,  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State was made on 29 September 2014.  That  postdates  the
    changes made to that section in consequence of the judgment in Ahmadi v
    Secretary of State [2013] EWCA Civ 512.  The  decision  to  remove  was
    therefore not unlawful.  There is therefore no issue in that regard.

 8. In relation to missing documents, a CAS is not a document in itself but
    is a reference number  which  is  subject  to  checking  based  on  the
    information in the application.  The application itself notes that  the
    Appellant did not have a CAS and there was therefore no  error  in  the
    Judge finding that the Appellant had not discharged the burden of proof
    for that reason.

 9. Mr Melvin submitted before me that the onus  is  on  the  Appellant  to
    ensure that documents are produced and it is not for the  Secretary  of
    State to deal with  omissions  in  the  application.   In  relation  to
    paragraph 245AA Mr Melvin submits and I accept that this  paragraph  is
    not intended to remedy the omission of required documents as  paragraph
    245AA(c) makes clear.  What paragraph 245AA is designed for is to  deal
    with missing documents in a sequence or documents which are not in  the
    right format or which are perhaps copies as opposed to  originals.   It
    is not to provide for the lack of a specified document such as a CAS.

10. Although the reasoning given in the Judge's decision  could  have  been
    fuller the outcome discloses  no  error  of  law.   Any  error  in  the
    reasoning is not material since the appeal permits of no other  outcome
    than a dismissal on  the  facts  of  this  case.  I  am  therefore  not
    satisfied that the First-Tier Tribunal Decision involved the making  of
    a material error of law and I uphold the Decision.

Notice of Decision

The First-Tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making  of  a  material
error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.


Signed   [pic]    Dated 28 October 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
