

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Numbers: IA/41225/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                               | Determination          |
|                                                   |Promulgated             |
|On 16th July 2014                                  |On 4th August 2014      |
|                                                   |                        |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                  Between:

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               TAIROU SOUCOUNA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:          No appearance


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    I shall refer to the  parties  as  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The
      Appellant is a citizen of Mali born on 10th November 1980. His  appeal
      against the Respondent's decision of 25th September 2013  refusing  to
      issue a residence card as confirmation of a  right  of  residence  was
      allowed by the First-tier Tribunal on 19th April 2014.  The  Secretary
      of State appealed.

2.     Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Hollingworth on 3rd June 2014 on the grounds that it was arguable that
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox has erred in law in allowing the  appeal
      under Regulation 6 of the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006  when
      there was insufficient evidence to  show  that  the  EEA  Sponsor  was
      exercising Treaty rights.

3.     The  Appellant  did  not  attend   the   hearing.   The   Appellant's
      representatives sent a fax on the morning of the hearing stating  that
      notice of hearing was received on 16th June 2014 and they did not have
      sufficient time to prepare. The Appellant had failed to  put  them  in
      funds  to  enable  them  to  instruct  counsel;  they   requested   an
      adjournment if the decision was to be remade.

4.    It was clear from the  court  file  and  the  determination  that  the
      Appellant's bundle dated 13th December 2013 had not been considered by
      the First-tier Tribunal. Mr Bramble submitted that there was an  error
      of law in the determination because the Judge had failed  to  show  on
      what basis the EEA Sponsor was exercising Treaty rights. There was  no
      evidence of working, merely an intention to  set  up  self-employment.
      The Respondent had refused the application and there  was  no  further
      evidence before the Judge.

5.    Mr Bramble submitted that the decision should be  remade  taking  into
      account the Appellant's bundle  of  further  evidence.  This  evidence
      amount to a letter from the EEA Sponsor's employer, a contract and two
      payslips. It was  insufficient  to  show  that  the  EEA  Sponsor  was
      working. There were no bank statements to show that  the  EEA  Sponsor
      was being paid in accordance with the payslips. The contract  was  not
      signed by the employer and did not show  the  EEA  Sponsor's  address.
      There were no  witness  statements  from  the  Appellant  or  the  EEA
      Sponsor. The Appellant had failed to provide  sufficient  evidence  to
      satisfy the  EEA  Regulations.  Mr  Bramble  opposed  the  adjournment
      request because there was no reason why the Appellant could not attend
      the hearing.


Discussion and conclusions

6.    I find that the First-tier Tribunal made an error of law  in  allowing
      the appeal under the EEA Regulations because  there  was  insufficient
      evidence to show that the EEA Sponsor was  exercising  Treaty  rights.
      The evidence before the Judge amounted to:
      (i)   two letters from HMRC dated 20th and 22nd May 2013; one relating
           to  a  proposed  schedule  of  payments  of  national  insurance
           contributions and the other confirming that the EEA Sponsor  had
           contacted HMRC with a view to registering for self assessment;
      (ii)  a letter from an accountant, dated 3rd June 2013,  stating  that
           the EEA Sponsor was a self-employed  cleaner  and  her  accounts
           were up to date;
      (iii) a bank statement for the period of 1st March to 7th May 2013.


7.    I find that this evidence  was  insufficient  to  show  that  the  EEA
      Sponsor was working as a self-employed cleaner.  The  bank  statements
      pre-dated the request to register as a self-employed  person  and  the
      provenance of the deposits in the account was unknown. The letter from
      the accountant was vague. It did not indicate  when  the  EEA  Sponsor
      started working as a cleaner or her hours or rates of pay. There  were
      no business accounts attached to corroborate the claim  that  the  EEA
      Sponsor's affairs were up to date. The letters from HMRC indicated  an
      intention to become self-employed.

8.    Accordingly, I find that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      contained a material error of law and I  set  the  decision  aside.  I
      refuse the Appellant's request to adjourn the remaking of the decision
      because the Appellant has failed to establish a good  reason  for  his
      non-attendance. I am satisfied  that  he  was  aware  of  the  hearing
      because it was served on his representatives on  16th  June  2014  and
      they have confirmed that the Appellant was unable to provide them with
      funds to instruct counsel. There was no reason why the Appellant could
      not attend the hearing himself. The Appellant has failed to show  that
      the appeal could not otherwise be justly determined.

9.    I have considered the documents in the Appellant's bundle  dated  13th
      December 2013. The letter dated 29th November 2013 states that the EEA
      Sponsor has been an employee since 16th October 2013. There is unusual
      spacing around the EEA Sponsor's name and  the  date.  Copies  of  two
      payslips were submitted indicating  that  payment  was  made  by  bank
      transfer. There were no  bank  statements  to  corroborate  these  two
      payments. The contract was signed by the  EEA  Sponsor,  but  not  her
      employer.  It  was  dated  17th  October  2013   and   was   therefore
      inconsistent with the employer's letter. The  pay  schedule  indicated
      that the above pay rates applied until 1st October  2012.  Looking  at
      the evidence in the round, I find that the  Appellant  has  failed  to
      show on the balance of probabilities that the EEA Sponsor was  working
      for Healthvision as carer or that she was working as  a  self-employed
      cleaner.

10.   The Appellant has failed to show that the EEA  Sponsor  is  exercising
      Treaty rights in accordance with Regulation 6 of the EEA  Regulations.
      In the circumstances of this case, the refusal of a residence card did
      not breach Article 8 of the European Convention of  Human  rights.  It
      was open to the Appellant to submit a further application and  provide
      sufficient evidence to satisfy the Regulations.

11.   I find that the Judge erred in law in allowing the appeal  under  the
      EEA Regulations 2006 and I set the decision, dated  19th  April  2014,
      aside and remake it as follows: The  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
      refusal of a residence card is dismissed.





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
21st July 2014
