

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41668/2013
      IA/41675/2013
     IA/41617/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23rd September 2014                        |On 2nd October 2014          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                           ROC YACOEL BASSAMA + 2
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms O Ukachi-Lois instructed by J R Immigration Ltd

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. First-tier Tribunal  judge  Petherbridge  allowed  the  appeal  of  Mr
      Bassama and his two children in a determination  promulgated  after  a
      hearing on 22nd May 2014 to the extent that it  was  remitted  to  the
      Secretary of State for a decision to be taken after full consideration
      of the father and  the  two  children's  human  rights  and  the  best
      interest of the children.


   2. Quite simply this judge has failed to undertake  the  requirements  of
      the appeal before him which is to determine the appeal on the  grounds
      raised and on the basis of the evidence before him.  Although  it  may
      well be that the Secretary of State had failed to adequately  consider
      the claimants' human rights and the best interests of the children  in
      accordance with s55, that is no excuse for the judge to fail  to  hear
      and determine the appeal before him given the extent of  the  evidence
      before him and the arguments and submissions raised.

   3. The decision of the judge in so far as Article 8 is concerned  is  set
      aside and remitted to Judge Petherbridge to enable him to complete the
      hearing and reach a decision on all grounds  as  were  pleaded  before
      him.

          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the decision in so far as it relates to Article 8.

    I re-make  the  decision  in  the  appeal  by  remitting  it  to  Judge
    Petherbridge to enable him to complete his determination.







                                    Date 29th September 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
