
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
IA/41977/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 12th July 2016                          |On 27th July 2016                |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                          Annie Stacia Alicia SMITH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Jaufurally, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Jamaica  born  12th  January  1988.   She
    appealed against the decision of  the  Respondent  dated  10th  October
    2014, refusing to vary her leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  on
    account of her Article 8 ECHR family/private life and giving directions
    for her removal.

 2. The Appellant arrived in the UK in 2002 as a minor.  She travelled on a
    visitor visa and came to stay with her older sister Cleopatra  who  was
    resident here.  The Appellant's parents were both deceased and she  had
    been looked after in  Jamaica  by  another  sister,  Paula.  After  the
    Appellant arrived in the UK, Paula who had been looking  after  her  in
    Jamaica claimed she could no longer accommodate her.  She has  remained
    in the UK since that time.

 3. The Appellant made application for indefinite leave to  remain  on  9th
    January 2003 on the basis  that  her  sister  in  the  UK  has  assumed
    responsibility for her.  This application was refused without  a  right
    of appeal.  The Respondent was asked to  reconsider  her  decision  and
    although she agreed to do so, the process took two years  to  complete.
    The refusal was maintained.

 4. However a fresh decision was made on 28th July 2005 and  that  decision
    contained removal directions together with a right  of  appeal  against
    the decision.

 5. Regrettably that decision never reached the Appellant.  It  appears  it
    was sent in error to the Appellant's former representatives despite the
    fact that the Appellant's  current  representatives  had  informed  the
    Respondent that they were now on record as acting for her.

 6. The Appellant's representatives had in fact made  enquiries  about  the
    progress of the Appellant's case, but it was not until May 2010,  after
    they made a formal complaint to the Respondent about the delay  in  the
    matter, that they were served with a copy of the 2005 refusal decision.



 7. Following this ,the Appellant was then issued with  a  One-Stop  Notice
    which was completed and returned by her in October 2010. The case still
    did not progress and the Appellant was informed by  the  Respondent  in
    August 2013, that there would be further delays until  her  application
    could be dealt with.

 8. She was asked to complete another One-Stop Notice and finally  on  10th
    October 2014 the Respondent made the decision which is the  subject  of
    this appeal.  By this time the Appellant had been in the United Kingdom
    twelve years, had attended secondary school here where  she  had  taken
    her GCSEs and had obtained an A level in psychology.

 9. In 2010 the Appellant's sister Cleopatra gave birth to the  Appellant's
    nephew C.  The Appellant and C are close, especially since  C's  father
    sadly died in 2012.

10. The Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's refusal of 10th October
    2014, came before the First-tier Tribunal on 1st October 2015, which in
    a decision promulgated on 18th November 2015 dismissed her appeal.

11.  The  Appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  the  FtT's   decision.
    Permission was refused initially by the FtT but granted  on  a  renewed
    application before the Upper Tribunal.

12. The grant of permission succinctly sets out the issue before  me  which
    is that it is arguable that the FtT erred when it came to consideration
    of the best interests of the Appellant's 5  year  old  nephew  C.   The
    relevant parts of the grant are set out here below.

         "Although  the  judge  considered  the  best   interests   of   the
         appellant's nephew, it is arguable that the findings  lack  clarity
         and it is not clear how  the  findings  feed  into  the  Article  8
         assessment.  I grant permission on all grounds, but note  that  the
         ground concerning delay is weaker.

         On the one hand, the judge accepted that it is in the child's  best
         interests to benefit from the love and support he received from the
         appellant and the judge  concludes  that  the  appellant's  removal
         would be very disruptive and an emotional shock for him.  It is not
         challenged that the appellant is the child's  aunt  and  they  live
         together in the same household and that the  appellant  has  caring
         responsibilities for him.  The judge then went on to conclude  that
         regardless of the  decision  the  status  quo  is  unlikely  to  be
         maintained because the appellant will ultimately move  on  and  the
         relationship will undergo 'radical change'  at  some  time  in  the
         future.  It is arguable that any decision that  the  appellant  may
         take in relation to employment and relationships that may take  her
         out of the family home, would not have the same consequences  of  a
         removal to Jamaica"

13. Thus the matter  comes  before  me  to  decide  initially  whether  the
    decision of the FtT contains such error that it must be set  aside  and
    remade.

Error of Law Hearing

14. Mr Jaufurally on behalf of the Appellant, adopted the  renewed  grounds
    seeking permission and relied upon the grant of permission itself.   He
    submitted that the FtT clearly erred in that [36] is contradictory  and
    therefore unclear.  He said that the judge had found, that he "did  not
    doubt that the Appellant's removal would  be  very  disruptive  and  an
    emotional shock to C" but then started speculating on what might happen
    should the Appellant be allowed to  remain.  It  was  no  part  of  the
    judge's task to start pondering on what might or might not happen.

15. Further since the Appellant's relationship with C is one of the central
    planks of her case, there needs to be clarity in the judge's  findings.
    The judge's  findings  at  [36]  appear  equivocal.  As  the  grant  of
    permission points out any decision  that  the  Appellant  may  take  in
    relation to employment and relationships that may take her out  of  the
    family home would not have the same consequences as removal to Jamaica.



16. Mr Jaufurally pointed out further, that the judge had failed to  factor
    into the balancing exercise, the fact that the Appellant had  now  been
    here in the UK for twelve years, since the age of 14 years.  The  delay
    on the part of the Respondent (including the error of wrongly informing
    her past representatives of the 2005 decision) should also be  factored
    into the balancing exercise. although this had been characterised as  a
    weaker argument in the grounds, nevertheless it was a matter raised and
    a finding needed to be made.  Cumulatively, those errors meant that the
    decision could not stand and it should be set aside to be remade.

17. Mr Walker did defend the decision, but accepted that if I were to  find
    an error of law because of lack of clarity in the FtT's  findings  then
    the appropriate course would be to remit the appeal to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for that tribunal to remake the decision at a fresh hearing.

Consideration

18. I find I am in agreement with Mr Jaufurally's submissions. I  find  the
    decision of the FtT is flawed for material error  because  there  is  a
    lack of transparency in its reasoning. When [35] is read it appears the
    judge is drawing a conclusion that the  ties  that  exist  between  the
    Appellant and her sister Cleopatra extend  beyond  the  emotional  ties
    which normally exist between adult siblings.  The judge  then  says  at
    [36] that he did not doubt that the Appellant's removal would  be  very
    disruptive and an emotional shock from C's point of view.   It  is  not
    clear how those findings feed into the Article 8 assessment, or  indeed
    of the judge has kept them in mind when conducting the  proportionality
    exercise. The reason for this is that the judge then starts speculating
    on the Appellant's future rather than keeping to  the  evidence  before
    him. This affects the whole of the judge's decision making.

19. Whilst C's best interests are not a trump card, there does need to be a
    clear finding to show that those interests have been  looked  at  as  a
    first consideration and have been placed into the balance.

20. Likewise the fact that the Appellant has been here since the age of  14
    years, with some of the delay in her case  being  attributable  to  the
    Respondent, also needs to be considered.

21. I find therefore that there is no alternative to setting  the  decision
    aside in its entirety.  The  decision  will  have  to  be  remade.   No
    findings can be preserved.

22. Both representatives were of the view that should I find  an  error  in
    the FtT decision on account of a lack  of  clear  reasoning,  then  the
    fairest course for disposal of this matter would be to remit it to  the
    First-tier Tribunal (not Judge Higgins) for that tribunal to remake the
    decision.  I agree that this is the appropriate course and direct  that
    there should be  a  full  rehearing  in  the  FtT  with  nothing  being
    preserved from the original decision.

Notice of Decision

23. The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  hereby  set  aside  for
    material error.  The matter will be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
    (not Judge Higgins) for a fresh rehearing.

24. Anonymity direction is not made.



Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     23 July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts
