
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41762/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 14th March 2014                              |On 26th March 2014         |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                               reenahit lepcha
                        (ANOYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Bagral, Counsel instructed by Colvin & Partners
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of India born on 10th December  1973.
    On 7th May 2010 she was given leave  to  enter  the  UK  as  a  Tier  4
    (Student) Migrant  until  31st  July  2012.   On  28th  July  2012  the
    Appellant applied for leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules  on
    Article 8 ECHR grounds.  That application was refused for  the  reasons
    given in a Notice of Decision dated 24th September 2013.  At  the  same
    time,  the  Respondent  decided  to  remove  the  Appellant  under  the
    provisions of Section 47 Immigration, Asylum and Nationality  Act  2006
    as amended.  The Appellant appealed, and her appeal was heard by  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Beach (the Judge) sitting at Taylor House on
    8th January 2014.  He decided to  allow  the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds for the reasons given in his Determination dated  22nd  January
    2014.  The Respondent sought leave to appeal that decision, and on 11th
    February 2014 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. In allowing the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds,  the  Judge  followed
    the format given by the  questions  of  the  late  Lord  Bingham  in  R
    (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27.  The Judge found that during  her  time
    as a student in the UK the Appellant had  established  a  private  life
    which would be interfered with by her  removal  to  such  a  degree  of
    gravity as to engage the Appellant's Article 8 ECHR rights.  The  Judge
    went on to find that although such interference was in accordance  with
    the law and necessary in a democratic society, however the interference
    was disproportionate. In reaching that conclusion, the  Judge  attached
    greater weight to the Appellant's medical condition than to the  public
    interest.  Whilst lawfully in the UK, the Appellant had been  diagnosed
    with breast cancer in 2011  and  had  received  both  radiotherapy  and
    chemotherapy.  The Appellant was now in remission, but was required  to
    take a medication known as Tamoxifen for a period  of  five  years  and
    undergo  regular  reviews.    The   Appellant   was   in   receipt   of
    physiotherapy.  The Judge found  credible  that  the  Appellant's  only
    relative in India was a sister who lived  in  a  remote  area  and  had
    limited means.  Therefore it was likely that the Appellant would not be
    able to access the medication and medical treatment which she continued
    to  need.   The  Judge   referred   to   the   decisions   in   Okonkwo
    (Legacy/Hakemi; health  claim)  [2013]  UKUT  00401  (IAC)  and  Akhalu
    (Health claim: ECHR Article 8) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 400 (IAC).

 4. At the hearing, Mr Wilding argued that the Judge had erred  in  law  in
    coming to this conclusion.  He referred to the grounds  of  application
    and argued that the approach of the Judge to the Article  8  issue  was
    wrong following the decisions in MF (Article 8  -  new  Rules)  Nigeria
    [2012] UKUT 00393 (IAC); Gulshan (Article  8  -  new  Rules  -  correct
    approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC); and R (On the application of  Nagre)
    v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin).  Further, the Judge had erred in law by
    failing to carry out a full consideration of all relevant factors  when
    assessing proportionality.  The Judge had only taken into  account  the
    Appellant's medical condition and the availability of medical treatment
    in India.  This was the wrong approach following  the  decision  in  MM
    (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 279.  In this  case  the  Appellant's
    medical condition was well below the high threshold to found  a  breach
    of Article 3 ECHR decision.  That being the case, the Judge was obliged
    to take into account other factors.

 5. In response, Ms Bagral submitted that the Judge had not erred  in  law.
    He had come to a decision open to him upon the evidence and  had  given
    sufficient reasons for that decision.  The Judge had not  followed  the
    approach given in Gulshan, but that did not amount to a material  error
    of law because it followed that if the Judge found the decision of  the
    Respondent to be disproportionate, then he  was  satisfied  that  there
    were arguably good grounds for granting leave  to  remain  outside  the
    Immigration Rules on the basis that there were compelling circumstances
    not sufficiently recognised under them.  In reaching his decision,  the
    Judge had followed a structured approach, accepting that the  Appellant
    did not qualify for leave to remain under the Immigration  Rules.   The
    Judge had applied the  correct  tests  when  finding  the  Respondent's
    decision to be disproportionate on the basis of the Appellant's medical
    needs.

 6. I preferred the submissions of Mr Wilding and found that  the  decision
    of the Judge contained an error of law so that it should be set  aside.
    I agree with the argument of Ms Bagral that it was not an error of  law
    for the Judge not to follow the approach given in Gulshan, but  if  the
    Judge was then  to  carry  out  an  assessment  of  proportionality  in
    accordance with the decision in Razgar, it was  necessary  for  him  to
    demonstrate that he had carried out a balancing exercise  by  referring
    to and assessing the weight to be attached  to  all  relevant  factors.
    This the Judge had failed to do.  The Judge had made no mention of  the
    public interest or the weight to be attached to it, and also  had  made
    no mention of the fact that there  was  very  little  evidence  of  the
    nature and extent of the Appellant's private life in the UK.   Instead,
    according to what the Judge wrote, his only consideration had been that
    the Appellant continued to require medical  treatment  which  might  be
    difficult for her to access if she returned  to  India.   This  was  an
    inadequate assessment of proportionality amounting to an error  of  law
    and therefore I set aside the decision of the Judge.

Re-made Decision

 7. I proceeded to re-make the decision upon the evidence that  was  before
    the Judge.  There was no further evidence adduced.   However,  I  heard
    further submissions.  Mr  Wilding  argued  that  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent was  proportionate.   The  Appellant's  case  was  not  that
    treatment was not available to her in India, but that she preferred  to
    continue her treatment in the UK.  That was a  position  which  carried
    little weight.  What was of greater significance was that the Appellant
    had spent only a short time in the UK, and that there was little detail
    of her private life there.

 8. In response, Ms Bagral said that she adopted the  submissions  made  to
    the Judge.  The Appellant's circumstances carried  the  greater  weight
    because she had fallen ill when lawfully in the UK, and  her  treatment
    on the NHS had  been  exempt  from  charge.   The  Appellant  had  been
    prevented from completing  her  studies,  and  was  still  in  need  of
    significant medical treatment which she would not be able to access  in
    India.

 9. The facts of this matter, which have never been in  dispute,  are  that
    the Appellant entered the UK in May 2010 with permission to study until
    July 2012.  She has remained lawfully since.  The Appellant was  unable
    to complete her studies as she was diagnosed with breast cancer in July
    2011.

10. The Appellant originates from a mountainous area of India situate  near
    West Bengal, although she had lived in Mumbai for two  years  prior  to
    coming to the UK.  Both her parents are deceased, and the only relative
    with whom the Appellant has any contact in  India  is  her  sister  who
    lived in a remote area.  Her sister was a housewife whose  husband  was
    unemployed.  They had two young children.

11. Following the diagnosis  of  breast  cancer,  the  Appellant  had  been
    treated with chemotherapy and  radiotherapy  which  had  now  finished.
    However, the Appellant required an annual mammogram check, and for  the
    next five years she would have to take a  daily  dosage  of  Tamoxifen.
    She had also been diagnosed with Type 2 diabetes  for  which  she  took
    medication.

12. The Appellant shared accommodation in the UK with two  friends  who  to
    some extent had supported her during her illness.  She had also had the
    services of a Macmillan nurse.

13. The oncology  treatment  still  required  by  the  Appellant,  and  the
    medication, are available in India.

14. I find that the public interest in this case carries much weight.   The
    Appellant was admitted to the UK for a limited period of time in  order
    to study on the basis that she would return to India.  Although it  was
    most unfortunate to say the least that  the  Appellant  was  unable  to
    complete her studies through reasons beyond her control,  and  although
    the Appellant does not have an adverse immigration history, it  is  the
    case she does not qualify for leave to  remain  under  the  Immigration
    Rules, and therefore the economic well-being of the country represented
    by the need to maintain an effective  immigration  control  must  carry
    considerable weight.

15. On the other side of the balance, during her short period in the UK the
    Appellant has developed a private life with the two friends  with  whom
    she shares accommodation and who have given her some degree of  support
    during her illness.  The Appellant has only her sister in India to whom
    she could turn for help, and that help would be  very  limited  as  her
    sister lives in a remote area in  somewhat  impecunious  circumstances.
    However, the Appellant had lived independently in Mumbai in  the  past.
    The Appellant still requires medical treatment as detailed  above,  but
    that treatment does exist in India.  The fact that  the  Appellant  may
    have difficulties in accessing that treatment is not  determinative  of
    this appeal.  The Appellant's circumstances can be  distinguished  from
    those considered in Okonkwo, and the Appellant's case  can  be  put  no
    higher than that it would be more convenient for her  to  continue  her
    medical treatment in the UK which is what she would prefer to  do.   In
    my view, such a consideration carries little weight,  and  less  weight
    than the public interest.  I therefore find that the  decision  of  the
    Respondent  does  not  amount  to  a  disproportionate  breach  of  the
    Appellant's Article 8 ECHR rights.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I remake the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not an order pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I find no  reason
to do so.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

