
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V3

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/41656/2013
                                                               IA/41680/2013
                                                               IA/41694/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13th November 2015                |On 5th January 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                          mrs KF (first Appellant)
                          mr WZ (second Appellant)
                          miss FN (third Appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr R De Mello (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are  citizens  of  Pakistan  born  respectively  on  1st
    February  1960,  17th  August  1990  and  27th  July  1992.   They  are
    consequently all adults.  They are respectively mother, son and niece.

 2. The Appellants had made combined applications for  residence  cards  as
    confirmation of a right of residence as the family members  of  an  EEA
    national.  Their applications were refused by the Secretary of State by
    Notice of Refusal dated 3rd September 2013.  The first Appellant had an
    extensive immigration history.  Previous applications had been made for
    a residence card back in September 2010.  That decision was refused  by
    the Secretary of State,  dismissed  on  appeal  on  23rd  May  2011  by
    Immigration Judge Kaler and following a grant of permission  to  appeal
    their appeals in respect  of  claims  pursuant  to  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention  of  Human  Rights  were  dismissed  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal by Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun  following  a  hearing  on  16th
    December 2011 promulgated on 9th February  2012.   Thereafter  a  fresh
    application was made seeking a residence card as a  confirmation  of  a
    right to reside on 20th March 2013.

 3. The first Appellant states she is the mother of  a  Pakistani  national
    [HZ] who was married to [FM] a  Portuguese  national.   [HZ]  had  been
    issued with a residence card on 27th October 2007 which expired on 27th
    October 2012.  Thereafter he was issued on 3rd May 2011 with indefinite
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom under  the  UK  immigration  long
    residency Rules.  It was noted by the Secretary of State in the  Notice
    of Refusal in September 2013 that [HZ] was currently divorcing his  EEA
    national Sponsor [FM].

 4. The Secretary of State's argument was that in order for  the  Appellant
    to qualify for a  residence  card  under  the  Regulation  satisfactory
    evidence needed to be provided in regard to [FM]  and  that  the  first
    Appellant's son had not obtained his  residency  through  the  European
    (EEA) Regulations and therefore she could not  apply  for  a  residence
    card as his family members as he did not have leave under the  European
    (EEA) Regulations.  Therefore for the purpose of  the  application  the
    Appellants were considered as the family members of [FM].   The  Notice
    of Refusal pointed out that  if  the  Appellants  wished  to  apply  as
    dependants of [HZ] that they could submit an application under  the  UK
    Immigration Rules for consideration.  It was noted that this  had  been
    done on 20th March 2013 but that the Appellants failed to submit  their
    Sponsor's passport/ID card although it was noted that it was  allegedly
    submitted with the previous application.  The Secretary of State  noted
    information held by the Home Office that the  Portuguese  passport  for
    [FM] had been reported lost or stolen to the relevant authorities since
    February 2011 and therefore that could not be relied upon  as  evidence
    of the EEA national Sponsor's identity.  As a  result  the  application
    was refused on the ground that the applicants had not provided evidence
    in the form of either a valid national passport or ID card as  evidence
    that their family member was an EEA national as claimed.

 5. The Appellants appealed and the appeal came before Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Ghani sitting at Birmingham on 1st December 2014.   In  a
    determination promulgated on 30th December 2014 the Appellants' appeals
    were allowed under the 2006 EEA Regulations.

 6. On 13th January 2015 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds of Appeal to
    the Upper  Tribunal.   On  16th  February  2015  Designated  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Macdonald granted permission to appeal.  Judge Macdonald
    noted that the grounds of application contended  that  the  second  and
    third Appellants could not succeed under Regulation 8(2)  as  they  are
    not "presently dependent on in the same household as the EEA national."
     Judge Macdonald noted that it was contended that the approach  by  the
    judge was said to be confused  and  misconceived  and  that  Regulation
    10(6)(a) and (b) cannot be taken in isolation.   He  acknowledged  that
    the case did not appear to be straightforward and that the  application
    by the Appellants was for  a  residence  card  presumably  as  extended
    family members under Regulation 8.  He took the view that if the appeal
    was going to be allowed on that basis,  then  the  Secretary  of  State
    would have to exercise her discretion under Regulation 17(4).   However
    the judge had granted the appeals  under  Regulation  10  in  reasoning
    which was arguably unclear.

 7. To add to the issues despite having succeeded on  the  appeal  on  28th
    February 2015 grounds for a cross-appeal were lodged by the Appellants'
    legal representatives.  On 17th March 2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Astle granted the Appellants permission  to  cross-appeal  despite  the
    fact that they had succeeded before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Judge
    Astle noted that the grounds of the  cross-appeal  contended  that  the
    Secretary of State accepted that the Appellants are family  members  of
    an  EEA  national.   He  considered   that   that   statement   was   a
    misunderstanding of the Secretary of State's letter giving reasons  for
    the decision and that the Secretary of State was simply setting out the
    basis on which the applications were  to  be  considered.   However  he
    noted that it was argued, amongst other  things,  that  the  judge  had
    failed to address various issues arising out of the  Sponsor's  status.
    He considered that the grounds raised were sometimes contradictory  and
    at times confusing but that in the light of the permission having  been
    granted to the Secretary of State he considered  that  it  was  in  the
    interests of justice  that  they  should  be  ventilated  and  that  he
    therefore extended time and granted permission to proceed.

 8. On 27th March 2015 the Secretary of State responded to the cross-appeal
    pursuant to Rule 24 stating that  the  Secretary  of  State  could  not
    identify on what basis the Appellant had been  granted  permission  and
    that Judge Astle had  merely  noted  that  the  grounds  are  sometimes
    contradictory and confusing but he had considered in the  interests  of
    justice the Appellants' grounds should be ventilated.  The Secretary of
    State contended that the judge had  failed  to  identify  any  arguable
    error of law for granting the Appellant permission for leave to  appeal
    and opposed the application.

 9. It was on that basis that the appeal came before me to consider whether
    or not there was a material error of law in the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge - Judge Ghani.  There were extant before me  cross-
    appeals albeit that the current status  is  that  the  Appellants  have
    succeeded on their appeal as a result of Judge  Ghani's  determination.
    For the purpose of continuity throughout the legal process Mrs  KF  and
    her nephew and niece are referred to herein as the Appellants  and  the
    Secretary of State as the Respondent.  The Appellants appear  by  their
    instructed Counsel Mr De Mello.  Mr De  Mello  is  familiar  with  this
    matter.  He appeared as  the  instructed  Counsel  for  the  Appellants
    before the First-tier Tribunal and he is the author of the  grounds  of
    cross-appeal.  The Secretary of  State  appeared  by  her  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer Ms Everett, at the error of law hearing.

10. The approach adopted by the Appellants' legal representatives by way of
    describing their document of  28th  February  2015  as  a  cross-appeal
    appeared to me to be wrong in  law.   What  that  document  effectively
    constitutes is a Rule 24 response to the grant of permission to  appeal
    given to the Secretary of State by  Immigration  Judge  Macdonald.   It
    seemed inappropriate that the matter was then referred to  Judge  Astle
    with a view to granting permission.  As it happens Judge Astle's  grant
    of permission does not add a great deal due to the very vague nature of
    its content.  That is specifically referred to in the Rule 24  response
    to that grant of permission provided by the Secretary of  State.   That
    in itself, had the proper legal process been followed, would  not  have
    taken place and what that document effectively is is a Rule 25 response
    to what should have been a Rule 24 response (wrongly couched as a cross-
    appeal) by the Appellants.

11. When the matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  there  was  a
    material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge,
    one thing that was clear was the complexity of the issues  and  I  have
    tried above to set out the historical factors in some detail.   I  also
    impressed upon the parties at the hearing that I was  only  considering
    the issue as to whether or not there was a material error of law in the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  Mr De  Mello  was  to  a  certain
    extent in a position of conflict.  In one breath it must have  been  to
    his client's advantage  to  have  the  appeal  dismissed  and  for  the
    original decision of Judge Ghani to stand but in the other he sets  out
    extensive legal argument as to why there are failings in the First-tier
    Tribunal decision and invites a reference to the European Court  as  to
    whether the family members of [HZ] acquired derivative rights by virtue
    of the fact that he is the ex-spouse of an EEA worker at  the  time  of
    his divorce.

12. I was persuaded by the more simplistic approach adopted by Ms  Everett.
    There was merit in her submission that  it  is  not  possible  for  the
    Appellants to satisfy Regulation 10 since none of them have  ever  been
    granted any sort of EEA leave and there are  therefore  no  rights  for
    them to retain and that the judge has  erred  in  finding  [HZ]  has  a
    retained  right  of  residence  even  though  he  already   found   the
    requirement of Regulation 10(5)(a) has not been met.

13. I was consequently satisfied that there was a material error of law  in
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  On giving directions  I
    acknowledged  that  the  issue  outstanding  was  whether  or  not  the
    Appellants  have  acquired  derivative  rights  of  residence  as   the
    purported family members of an EEA national.  I gave directions  as  to
    the  filing  of  additional  evidence  including  skeleton   arguments,
    statutory material and case law and reserved the matter to myself.   It
    is on that basis that the appeal comes back before  me  for  rehearing.
    The Appellants continue to be represented by their  instructed  Counsel
    Mr De Mello.  The Secretary of State now appears  by  her  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer,  Mr  Duffy.   I  am  grateful  for  the  additional
    documents provided.  Mr Duffy has provided his own  skeleton  argument.
    The Appellant's instructed solicitors have lodged an up-to-date bundle.
     Such bundle includes an up-to-date witness statement from the  Sponsor
    dated 29th October 2015.  Mr De Mello has himself  provided  a  further
    detailed skeleton argument and a substantial bundle of authorities upon
    which he seeks to rely.

Preliminary Important Facts

14. I start by reminding myself of the issue in this case namely whether or
    not the Appellants have acquired derivative residence  rights  pursuant
    to the 2006 EEA Regulations as the purported family members of  an  EEA
    national.  An agreed chronology is relevant.
    29th June 2007    [HZ] and [FM] marry.
    26th June 2010    The three Appellants arrive in the UK.
    21st September    The three Appellants submit their first EEA residence
                        card application.
    11th January 2011 Application refused by the Secretary of State.
    15th March 2011   [HZ] (hereinafter called  the  Sponsor)  applied  for
                        indefinite leave to remain in the UK on  the  basis
                        of ten years' continual residence.
    3rd May 2011  Sponsor granted indefinite leave to remain.
    25th May 2011 The appeal of the three Appellants is dismissed by First-
                        tier Tribunal Judge Kaler.
    24th October 2011 Following  permission  being  granted  to  the  Upper
                        Tribunal an error of law is found by Upper Tribunal
                        Judge Eshun.
    9th February 2012 Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Eshun  remakes  the  decision
                        dismissing the appeal.
    24th May 2012 The Sponsor  applies  to  be  naturalised  as  a  British
                        citizen.
    14th August 2012  Sponsor's British citizenship is approved.
    20th March 2013   Appellants renew application for a residence card.
    3rd September 2013     Renewed application is refused by  Secretary  of
                        State.
    16th May 2013 Sponsor and his wife [FM] are granted decree absolute.
    30th December 2014     Appellants'  appeal  is  allowed  by  First-tier
                        Tribunal Judge Ghani.
    31st July 2015    I find error of law and set  aside  decision  of  the
                        First-tier Tribunal Judge and give  directions  for
                        rehearing of this matter.

    It is against that  chronology  that  the  appeal  appears  before  me.
    Further I  note  the  application  had  previously  been  made  for  an
    anonymity order due to the second Appellant's mental  capacity.   There
    are no documents relating to same but  it  is  not  an  issue  that  is
    contentious before  the  Tribunal.   For  the  purpose  of  the  second
    Appellant's protection I maintain the anonymity direction and it  would
    be inappropriate for the direction to apply to one Appellant and not to
    all three.

15. I previously directed that there could  be  further  witness  statement
    evidence produced by  the  Sponsor.   I  am  referred  to  his  witness
    statement dated 29th October 2015 set out at pages 4 to  6  within  the
    Appellants' supplementary bundle.  Mr Duffy indicates that he does  not
    challenge that witness statement and on that basis  that  statement  is
    admitted in evidence.  Consequently thereafter the appeal  proceeds  by
    way of submissions/discussion only.

Submissions/Discussion

16. As a starting point both legal representatives rely on  their  detailed
    skeleton arguments.  For the purpose of this decision I indicate that I
    have read thoroughly both skeletons and  taken  on  board  the  content
    therein.  It is not my contention to recite swathes of these  skeletons
    and I note that they form the starting point for the  submissions  made
    by the legal representatives.

17. Mr De Mello uses his skeleton  to  amplify  his  submissions  that  the
    Appellants are family members of [FM] (a Portuguese national).  It  has
    to be remembered that  these  applications  are  based  on  claims  the
    Appellants have acquired derivative residence rights as  the  purported
    family members of the EEA national i.e. as the family members of  [FM].
    It is accepted by both parties that it would be open to the  Appellants
    to make a separate application as dependants of  their  Sponsor,  [HZ],
    and that they could pursue  such  applications  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.  When addressing the submissions Mr De Mello does  not  strictly
    follow the order within his skeleton argument.  His opening  submission
    relates to what is described in  his  skeleton  as  his  sixth  ground,
    namely that the Sponsor's EU rights would be breached if the Appellants
    are removed.  He submits that [HZ] is  a  British  citizen  and  an  EU
    citizen and that he travels to the EEA for his work.  He comments  that
    the Sponsor has set out why it is essential for him to have his  family
    live with him in the UK and that that  will  facilitate  his  work  and
    provision of services in the EEA.  I accept that [HZ] is, as submitted,
    an accountant and that he has an international clientele which requires
    him on occasions to travel throughout Europe.   Mr  De  Mello  contends
    that following S&G v Minister voor Immigratie, [2014] Imm AR 843 [2014]
    EUECJ C-457/12 that the Appellants have obtained derivative  rights  as
    being family members of the union citizen in the home state.  That is a
    right of residence stemming from  [HZ]'s  cross-border  activities  and
    that the Secretary of State should have considered such  position  when
    looking at the exercise of discretion to be  allowed  under  Regulation
    17(4) of the EEA  Regulations  2006  independently  of  any  derivative
    rights which flow from Article 45 TFEU.  He further refers me  in  some
    detail to the  interpretation  of  Article  45  TFEU  to  be  found  at
    paragraphs 36 to 46 in S & G.  He submits  that  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State is not in  accordance  with  the  law  and  that  in
    particular no regard has been paid with reference to Article 7  of  the
    EU Charter to the third party rights of  [HZ]  if  the  Appellants  are
    removed.

18. Mr De Mello poses the question as to whether the term family member  in
    relation to Article 45 has the meaning as set out within the Directive.
     It is his contention that freedom of movement  has  been  extended  to
    other family members and that it is a question of fact for the domestic
    courts to exercise firstly  the  degree  of  relationship  between  the
    parties and secondly the Sponsor's right to travel i.e. the element  of
    dependency that is raised.

19. Mr De Mello takes me to the Sponsor's witness statement of 30th October
    2014 that was before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  He points out that
    within that witness statement the Sponsor's itinerary and travel across
    Europe are raised in his capacity  as  a  company  sole  director.   He
    points out that these issues  were  not  addressed  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge and that that forms part of the cross-appeal.  He  asked
    me to accept the Sponsor regularly travels across Europe and that there
    is an emotional relationship between him and his  family  and  that  if
    they are not granted residency that would seriously interfere with  his
    community rights.

20. Mr De Mello then refers me to the decision in Carpenter v Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2003] QB 416 - a decision of  the  Court
    of Justice of the European Communities when the court was asked  for  a
    preliminary ruling to the answer  to  the  question  whether  the  non-
    national spouse could derive right of residence in his or her  spouse's
    Member State of origin from, inter alia, Article  49  of  the  European
    Treaty on the freedom to provide services.   He  seeks  to  equate  the
    situation to the present position pointing out  that  in  Carpenter  Mr
    Carpenter exercised his community rights in two  respects,  firstly  by
    travelling to another Member State for professional  reasons  to  carry
    out self-employed activity there, and secondly  by  providing  services
    across the frontier without having  personally  to  travel  to  another
    Member State.  He takes me to paragraphs 29 and 30 of the  findings  of
    the court pointing out that Mr Carpenter  was  found  to  have  availed
    himself of the right freely to provide services guaranteed  by  Article
    49, namely cross-border services, and that that right could  be  relied
    upon by a provider as against the state in which he is  established  if
    the services are provided for persons  established  in  another  Member
    State.  Mr De Mello seeks to equate this position to that to  be  found
    by the Sponsor.  He then goes on to submit that  the  findings  of  the
    court therein state:
         "39. It is clear that  the  separation  of  Mr  Carpenter  and  the
             applicant would be  detrimental  to  their  family  life  and,
             therefore,  to  the  conditions  under  which   Mr   Carpenter
             exercises a fundamental freedom.  That freedom  could  not  be
             fully effective if Mr  Carpenter  were  to  be  deterred  from
             exercising it by obstacles raised in his country of origin  to
             the entry and residence of his spouse.
         ...
         46.  In view of all the  foregoing,  the  answer  to  the  question
             referred to the court is that Article 49 EC, read in the light
             of the fundamental right to respect for family life, is to  be
             interpreted as precluding, in circumstances such as  those  in
             the main proceedings, a refusal by the Member State of  origin
             of a provider of services established in that Member State who
             provides services to recipients established  in  other  Member
             States, of the right  to  reside  in  its  territory  to  that
             provider's spouse who is a national of a third country."

    Mr De Mello submits that the principles  in  Carpenter  apply  in  this
    case.  He submits that the family  members  therefore  have  a  derived
    right of residence and consequently they should all succeed.

21. Mr De Mello then submits that the Sponsor's mother is a  family  member
    of the Sponsor's ex-wife.  He acknowledges that no residence  card  has
    been issued to her.  He however seeks to rely on guidance  given  in  R
    (McCarthy) and Others v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2015] 3 WLR 61 where at paragraph 62 it states:
         "... Even though the court declare and do  not  create  rights  the
         fact remains that ... the Member States are, in principle, required
         to recognise a residence card issued under Article 10 of  Directive
         2004/38 for the purposes of entry into their  territory  without  a
         visa."

    Consequently he submits that although the first Appellant was not given
    a residence card that does not mean she does not possess  those  rights
    and that a residence card is merely  declaratory  of  the  rights.   He
    therefore submits that the first Appellant is a family member, for  the
    purpose of European legislation, of [FM].  His argument is that  [FM]is
    an EU national and that the Appellants are ex-family  members  of  [FM]
    with retained right of residence under Article 13 of the  Directive  or
    Regulation 10(6)(a) and (b).  He notes the first Appellant is supported
    by a son -  the  Sponsor  -  and  that  she  is  self-sufficient.   His
    contentions are, under Regulation 4(1)(c), on the basis that  she  does
    not have recourse to public funds and is supported by the Sponsor.

22. Thereafter he turns to the positions of the second and third Appellants
    and in his view states that this is the most difficult part of his case
    but he takes me  to  the  reference  in  Macdonald  pointing  out  that
    paragraph 3(2)(a) of the Directive (Article 3. Beneficiaries) refers to
    "other family members" of the Sponsor and ex-wife and their position is
    that they are dependent upon him and were members of his household when
    they lived in Pakistan.  He seeks to rely on the authority of Secretary
    of State for the Home Department v Rahman [2013] 2 WLR 230.  That  case
    analysed Article 3(2)(a) of the  Council  Directive  2004/38/EC  as  to
    where a citizen of the European Union resided in a Member  State  other
    than that of which he was a national the host  Member  State  would  be
    required to "facilitate entry  and  residence"  for  any  other  family
    members irrespective of nationality, not falling under  the  definition
    of "family member" in Article  2(2)  of  the  Directive,  who,  in  the
    country from which they had come, were  dependent  on  members  of  the
    union citizen's household.

23. Mr De Mello considers in detail the findings of the European  Court  in
    Rahman.  He starts by pointing out that account has to be taken of  the
    actual wording of Direction 2004/38  and  that  whilst  it  confers  an
    automatic right of entry and residence on "family members" mentioned in
    Article 2(2), Article 3(2) thereof provides  merely  that  each  Member
    State must "facilitate" entry and residence for extended family members
    and that it is clear from such provisions that the European legislature
    intended to draw a distinction within the family of the  union  citizen
    between the closest members who have an actual and automatic  right  to
    enter and reside in the territory of the host  Member  State  with  the
    union citizen and more distant family  members  who  do  not  enjoy  an
    individual right of residence under Directive 2004/38.  He acknowledged
    each case turns on its own  circumstances  and  requires  an  extensive
    examination of their personal circumstances and that Member States have
    an unfettered discretion to facilitate as they wish entry and residence
    for a person coming within the scope of the provisions.

24. Mr De Mello concedes that within the Regulations there are no  specific
    provisions for extended  family  members  to  get  an  extension  of  a
    residence card in the event of divorce or even otherwise and  that  the
    nearest comparison is to be found  in  Regulation  17(4)  of  the  2006
    Regulations but contends that the difficulty with  that  Regulation  is
    that at the time the Sponsor's divorce occurred an EEA national did not
    include a British citizen.  He submits that the Regulations  failed  to
    take account of Article 3.2 and Rahman and that the  second  and  third
    Appellants appear to be without remedy if that is  followed  under  the
    Regulations.

25. Thereafter he submits if that argument is not accepted then he seeks to
    rely on Articles 20 and 21 of the Regulations  and  Article  7  of  the
    Charter.  He acknowledges that the  Sponsor  is  not  an  EEA  national
    because he is a British citizen but submits the fact that  the  Sponsor
    has acquired British citizenship does not extinguish his former  rights
    acquired under EU law.  He further asks me to look at Articles  20  and
    21 and submits that if the first Appellant succeeds  then  because  the
    Appellants are family members of [FM] that their  appeals  fall  within
    the scope of EU  law  and  accordingly  each  of  them  singularly  and
    cumulatively retain rights of residence exclusively on  their  personal
    circumstances including under Article 7 of the Charter  of  Fundamental
    Rights.  He submits that it is appropriate to look at Article 7 and  by
    reference thereto to Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  of  Human
    Rights.  He acknowledges the Regulations are silent but  contends  that
    these are important points.  For all these reasons he asks me to  allow
    the appeal.

26. In response Mr Duffy states that it is  appropriate  to  look  at  this
    matter and interpret treaty  rights  through  the  prism  of  the  2006
    Regulations.  He submits there are no comparable Regulations  in  place
    to address the issues in  S&G  and  Carpenter  and  that  can  only  be
    construed on the basis that the government did not find it necessary to
    do so.  He acknowledges that when the Appellants arrived in the UK  had
    they produced sufficient evidence of dependency upon the Sponsor it  is
    arguable that the first Appellant could potentially have  succeeded  at
    that time under Regulation 7(1)(c).  However he submits that the second
    and third Appellants could never have succeeded under  the  Regulations
    as they do not qualify under any of  the  limbs  of  Regulation  7  and
    whilst they would be potentially said to engage  Regulation  8(2)  that
    requires that they be dependent upon the EEA national not the spouse of
    the EEA national.  He points out it has never been  the  submission  of
    the Appellants that they were dependent upon [FM] but that their  claim
    is that they were, and continue to be, dependent upon the  Sponsor  who
    is not an EEA national for the purpose of the Regulations.

27. He points out that Regulation 7 and 8 identify what are family  members
    and therefore there is no need to go to the  Charter  to  consider  it.
    Whilst it was originally possible that  sufficient  evidence  had  been
    provided for  the  first  Appellant  to  succeed  under  Regulation  7,
    dependence was not made out.  The second and third Appellants would, he
    submits, need to try and show that they can  succeed  under  Regulation
    8(2).  However he takes me back to Regulation 2(a) which would  require
    the Appellants to be dependent on an EEA national  i.e.  [FM],  and  so
    whilst they could potentially succeed, Regulation 8(2) requires them to
    be dependent on an EEA national at the relevant point they  could  have
    contended they were members of the household but he submits  that  they
    were  never  ever  dependent  upon  [FM].   Further  he  submits   that
    Regulation 7(3) prevents a person who  is  an  extended  family  member
    under Regulation 8 from being treated as a  family  member  until  they
    have been issued with a residence card and reminds me Regulation  17(4)
    states that the issue of a  residence  card  is  at  the  Secretary  of
    State's discretion.  Therefore as the second and third Appellants  have
    never been issued with a residence card they have no rights to  retain.
    He points out that the Directive and Regulations need to  give  reasons
    for approval and there is  no  mechanism  or  independent  right  to  a
    residence card.   It  is  a  factual  assessment  and  until  there  is
    recognition by the Secretary of State there is no mechanism to  proceed
    under Regulation 8.  Therefore he submits that as the second and  third
    Appellants have not  been  issued  with  residence  cards  they  cannot
    succeed.

28. Mr Duffy points out  that  although  Mr  De  Mello  makes  much  of  an
    allegation of self-sufficiency, as the case is all about dependency  it
    would be bizarre if they were to be found to  be  self-sufficient.   He
    reminds me of Regulation 10(6) of the 2006 Regulations.  On  the  basis
    the first Appellant cannot meet Regulation 10(6)(a) as she claims to be
    dependent upon the Sponsor she cannot succeed  under  that  Regulation.
    He thereafter goes on to remind me that pursuant to Regulation 2 an EEA
    national is not a British citizen but if Regulation 10(6)(b) were  read
    as widely as that then almost anyone would apply.  The  Regulations  he
    submits are about movement of EEA nationals and that  there  is  not  a
    relevant EEA national here to consider.  He points out that the  phrase
    "family member" in Regulation 10(6)(b) is a reference to the concept of
    "family member" in Regulation 7 and  that  because  the  Sponsor  is  a
    British citizen and is outside of the Regulations the  first  Appellant
    cannot claim to be his "family member" even though he is her  son.   On
    that basis he submits that none of the Appellants can possibly retain a
    right of residence.  Further he points out that if they  returned  they
    would not have any impact on the Sponsor's free movement and  therefore
    to give Regulation 10(6)(b) such a wide meaning is  wrong.   He  points
    out that the Sponsor is a British citizen  and  therefore  outside  the
    Regulations and that the Appellants cannot bring themselves within  the
    Regulations by seeking to rely on the authorities of S&G and  Carpenter
    where the facts were very different and free movement  did  not  arise.
    It has never been suggested, he points out, that the Sponsor would have
    to give up his job and go to live in Pakistan.  In  such  circumstances
    he submits that the Appellants' appeals must fail.

29. In brief response Mr De Mello points out that  it  was  never  implicit
    that the Regulations should implement Carpenter nor has  it  ever  been
    suggested by reference to Regulation 8  that  [FM]  was  not  a  family
    member.  He takes  me  in  some  detail  once  again  to  his  skeleton
    particularly at paragraphs 1 to 3 thereof and seeks to rely upon it.

Findings

30. I have set out above in very considerable detail the  submissions  that
    are made to me.  I think it is important to do so.  It is important  to
    do so because they reflect the manner in which  this  appeal  is  being
    addressed.  These are appeals under the EEA Regulations 2006  by  which
    the Appellants seek derivative residence cards.  To succeed  under  the
    Regulations the Appellants have to show that they meet the requirements
    of either Regulation 7 or Regulation 8.   I  agree  with  the  succinct
    submissions made by Mr Duffy on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State.
    Whilst, potentially, provided there had  been  evidence  of  sufficient
    dependency upon the Sponsor, the first Appellant could  have  succeeded
    at that time under Regulation 7(1)(c), that  was  not  shown  and  that
    remains the case.  However I further agree on an interpretation of  the
    Regulations that the second and third Appellants  could  never  succeed
    under Regulation 7 and whilst I acknowledge potentially they  could  be
    seen to engage Regulation 8(2) that would require a dependency upon the
    EEA national i.e.  [FM],  and  not  the  Sponsor.   Throughout  factual
    evidence provided in this appeal it has always been the  contention  of
    the Sponsor and the Appellants and their legal representatives that the
    dependency of the Appellants is on the  Sponsor  and  not  [FM].   That
    seems to me to be a perfectly sustainable finding both in fact  and  in
    law.

31. Much has been made in Mr De Mello's  submissions  upon  a  reliance  on
    authorities relating to the EU Directives relating to the ability of  a
    spouse to travel in Europe with her EU  husband.   The  authorities  of
    McCarthy, S&G and Rahman all emphasise that each case turns on its  own
    facts.  The general principle is not one that  the  courts  in  the  UK
    resile from.  However there are issues raised by Mr De  Mello  which  I
    find to be completely  unsustainable  as  matters  of  fact  which  are
    challenged by the Secretary of State.  It is the  Sponsor's  contention
    that it is essential for him to have his family live with him in the UK
    which will facilitate his work and provisions of service  in  the  EEA.
    Factually such a situation does not arise.  This is not  a  case  where
    the Appellants seek to travel with  the  Sponsor  across  Europe.   The
    Sponsor carries out a  lot  of  his  business  in  Europe.   He  is  an
    intelligent man with a good job.  He is a British  citizen.   He  is  a
    corporate  accountant.   The  role  that  he  fulfils  is  one  that  I
    anticipate is filled by many in these days of  cross-European  business
    arrangements.  It makes absolutely no sense in law or fact  to  contend
    that based on that factual matrix the Appellants should  succeed  under
    European legislation relying on the authorities of S&G,  Carpenter  and
    Rahman.  If that were to be the case then  quite  simply,  providing  a
    dependency could be established, then the floodgates would  potentially
    open.

32. However this appeal is not about the Sponsor's  rights.   It  is  about
    Appellant's rights and it is about  an  interpretation  as  to  whether
    someone is entitled to a derivative right of residence under  the  2006
    Regulations.  I am satisfied that such rights cannot be maintained.  In
    any event pursuant to Regulation 17(4) grant of the residence  card  is
    discretionary.  In order to succeed as I have already  indicated  under
    Regulation 8(2) a dependency would be necessary on the EEA national and
    it could never in any event be contended that there was a dependency of
    the Appellants upon [FM].  Further I  find  the  link  submitted  (even
    though reliance is made I note to certain authorities) to be so tenuous
    as to be unsustainable.  Carpenter  related  to  an  application  by  a
    spouse and child.  Clearly in such circumstances there was a dependency
    upon the EEA national.  That cannot be and is not  the  case  here.   I
    remind myself that it is accepted and conceded that the  Sponsor  is  a
    British citizen and is outside the Regulations.  Consequently it is not
    even possible for the first Appellant to claim that  she  is  a  family
    member under the Regulations of the Sponsor yet alone that she  is  the
    family member of the Sponsor's ex-wife.  This is an  appeal  under  the
    Regulations.  It is not an appeal under the provisions of the  European
    Charter.  For all the above  reasons  whilst  I  am  sure  it  will  be
    disappointing to the Appellants I am satisfied that they  do  not  meet
    the  provisions  of  the  2006  Regulations  and  their   appeals   are
    consequently dismissed.

33. Prior application was made for anonymity and granted,  and  I  maintain
    it.

Decision

34. The Appellants' appeals under the Immigration (European Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 do stand dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

