
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/41053/2013
     IA/41066/2013
     IA/41073/2013
     IA/41091/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 April 2014                              |On 15 May 2014               |
|Prepared 30 April 2014                        |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                       mr jaykumar ashwinlal sukhadia
                        mrs viveka jaymumar sukhadia
                            miss nishtha sukhadia
                             miss nishi sukhadia

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Miss D Ofei-Kwatia, of Counsel instructed by
     Messrs Aschfords Law
For the Respondent:    Miss A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The first two appellants are  the  parents  of  the  third  and  fourth
    appellants.  They appeal, with permission, against a decision of  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Burns who in a determination promulgated  on
    4 March 2014 dismissed the appellant's appeals against  a  decision  of
    the Secretary of State to  refuse  leave  to  remain  on  human  rights
    grounds.

2.   The appellants are citizens of India.  The first appellant was born  on
    15 June 1976 and entered Britain with the second appellant on  15  June
    2001.  They had visitor visas valid from 31 May 2001 until 30  November
    2001.  After November 2001 they overstayed and have remained in Britain
    without leave since that date.

3.   On 7 March 2004 their first child died at birth.  On 26 April 2005  the
    third appellant Nishtha was born.  On 16 February 2009  an  application
    for leave to remain outside the Rules was received  and  refused  on  3
    August 2009.

4.   An application for judicial review was then made.   That  was  refused.
    On 13 April 2010 the fourth appellant was born.  On 16  September  2010
    representations were made requesting removal documents to be served  in
    order for the first appellant to receive a right  of  appeal.   Further
    representations were made in August 2012 and in July 2013, by  request,
    further submissions were submitted.

5.   On 24 September 2013 the decision was made to  refuse  the  appellants'
    leave to remain.

6.   The application in 2009 was made  on  the  basis  that  the  first  two
    appellants had lived in Britain for seven years and six months and  the
    third appellant was already attending school on a full-time basis.   It
    was claimed that the children were integrated  into  the  UK  education
    system.  When the further representations were made it is  argued  that
    the principal appellants had lived in Britain for over twelve years and
    it was stated that the  children,  who  had  been  born  here,  had  no
    experience of any other way of life and considered that  they  belonged
    in the United Kingdom.  Their culture  was  here  and  they  considered
    Britain to be their home, had no ties to India and nothing to return to
    there.

7.   It was   argued that as the third appellant had been  born  in  Britain
    the provisions of  paragraph 276ADE of the Rules were satisfied and the
    appellants did not fall under any of  the  grounds  for  refusal  under
    Section S-LTR.  Numerous letters of support and documentation  to  show
    the integration of the appellants into Britain had been submitted.

8.   The refusal letter of 24  September  2013  referred  to  the  terms  of
    Appendix FM.  It was pointed out that the appellants were  not  British
    and the principal appellant would  not  be  considered  eligible  as  a
    partner or parent for the purposes of Article 8 of the  ECHR.   Section
    EX1 of Appendix FM was considered.  While  it  was  accepted  that  the
    principal appellant had a genuine parental relationship  with  a  child
    who had lived in Britain continuously for seven years it was considered
    that it was not unreasonable for the child to leave  Britain.   It  was
    not accepted that with support from family members  she  would  not  be
    able to integrate into a society that would not be  dissimilar  to  her
    own.  It was not considered that the third appellant was at a stage  of
    education which was crucial.  It was pointed out that she  had  already
    changed schools in Britain.  It  was  considered  that  there  were  no
    insurmountable obstacles preventing family life continuing in India.

9.   It was not considered that the  principal  appellants  had  established
    private life in Britain under the provisions of paragraph 276ADE.

10.  At the hearing Judge Burns heard evidence noting that the reason  given
    by the principal appellants for why they had not returned to India  was
    because they liked Britain.  Judge Burns noted that the representations
    made had not indicated  how  the  appellants  had  managed  to  support
    themselves in Britain. The first appellant denied that he had worked in
    Britain and said he was supported by family and  then  said  that  they
    were supported by a Mr Shah.  It was pointed out to him  that  in  2009
    when the application for leave to remain had  been  refused  the  third
    appellant was only 4 and he was asked why  they  had  not  returned  to
    India then.  He said that that they had not  returned  because  of  the
    heat.  In India he had helped in his parents' business.  He had married
    in 1998.  He was asked why he had said in his witness statement that he
    had not wanted to return to India because family members did not accept
    his marriage because he and his wife were of different  castes  and  it
    was put to him that it was unlikely that his parents  were  opposed  to
    the marriage if he had worked with them for three years  after  he  was
    married.  He replied that his parents would make adverse comments about
    his wife.

11.  He said that he could not return  to  live  with  his  parents  or  his
    wife's family because a man could not go  to  stay  with  his  in-laws.
    However, he maintained contact and had good relations with  his  family
    and he had a brother in India.  He indicated that he  might  have  some
    savings.

12.  The second  appellant  gave  some  evidence  regarding  their  life  in
    Britain.  They had a two bedroom flat for which they paid rent but  the
    rent had been provided by very generous friends.  She had worked  in  a
    shop for three or four years but had stopped in July 2013.  Her husband
    had also helped out with friends  who  had  shops.   She  gave  further
    details of the family's expenditure.

13.  In paragraphs 22 onwards of the determination Judge Burns set  out  his
    findings of fact.  He found that he could  not  accept  either  of  the
    witnesses as credible and did not accept their reasons for  overstaying
    in Britain.  He stated that he believed they had arrived here  with  no
    intention of ever returning to India and there was a strong  suggestion
    that their reasons were economic but it might well be that they  merely
    liked it here.  He did not accept that they were not accepted in  India
    as they had worked and lived with the  first  appellant's  parents  for
    some time.  He stated that it was obvious that they had been working in
    Britain earning some significant income.

14.  He noted the submissions regarding the third  appellant  and  concluded
    that it would not be disproportionate for  the  family  to  leave.   He
    referred to the judgment in the Supreme Court in Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74
    and stated that the best interests of the children lay in remaining  in
    the family unit and the family would return to India together.  He said
    that he had no doubt that the  children  would  quickly  readjust  -the
    eldest child had done so when she had changed school.

15.  He referred to the determination in Gulshan [2013] UKUT  00640  and  to
    the judgment in Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin).  He stated that  he  did
    not accept the argument that the family satisfied the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE(vi) "since they failed for the reasons  given  in  the
    refusal letter".  He concluded that it would  not  be  unreasonable  to
    expect the third appellant to leave  Britain  in  the  company  of  her
    parents and sibling.

16.  The grounds of appeal claimed that the judge had not engaged  with  the
    facts that the appellants would have no ties with India  and  that  all
    their ties were now in Britain and that he had not taken  into  account
    the length of time that the first two appellants had  lived  here.   It
    was also argued that the judge had  failed  to  give  adequate  or  any
    reasons for finding the appellants did not satisfy the requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE(iv) and that it was insufficient  to  state  that  the
    third appellant would be returning "in the company of her  parents  and
    her siblings".  It was emphasised that  the  third  appellant  had  now
    lived in Britain for more than seven years  and  had  been  born  here.
    Reference  was  made  to  the  determination  of  the  Tribunal  in  EM
    (returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT 98 (IAC).

17.   Further  reference  was  made   to   the   Immigration   Directorate's
    Instructions on the guidance on the application of EX.1  considering  a
    child's best interests.  This stated that the facts in each case should
    be considered taking into account a number  of  factors  including  the
    child's health, whether or not the child would   be  leaving  with  its
    parents and the wider family ties in Britain.  Further  relevant  facts
    were  whether or not the child will be likely to be able to reintegrate
    readily into life in another country and whether the parents  or  child
    would be able to enjoy the  full  rights  of  being  citizens  in  that
    country. It was claimed that the judge had failed to  engage  with  the
    contents of an independent social worker's report before him  and  that
    he had not given proper reasons for his decision.  It was  argued  that
    the decision was disproportionate.

18.  Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Andrew granted  permission  to  appeal
    stating that it was  arguable  that  the  judge  had  given  inadequate
    reasons or had  not addressed  matters  referred  to  in  the  skeleton
    argument including, inter alia, the reasons for his  finding  that  the
    appellants could not meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE She also
    considered that it was  arguable  that he had  not  properly  addressed
    the rights of the appellants under Article 8 or the best  interests  of
    the children or engaged with  the social work report which  was  before
    him.  Moreover he had not considered the delay  by  the  respondent  in
    making the decision.

19.  At the hearing of the appeal before me Miss Ofei-Kwatia relied  on  the
    grounds of appeal.  She stated there was an error of law  in  that  the
    judge had not dealt with a number of issues before him.  She emphasised
    that the third appellant was a child who had lived in Britain for seven
    years  and  stated  that  the  provisions  of  paragraph  276ADE   were
    freestanding provisions. She claimed that the judge  had  placed  undue
    weight on the fact the family would be returning as a family unit.

20.  Miss Ofei-Kwatia argued  that  the  judge  had  not  distinguished  the
    relevant factors set out in the  determination  in  EA  (Nigeria).   In
    particular, he had not taken into account that the third appellant  had
    developed private life here which  was  outside  that  of  the  nuclear
    family.  The judge  had  not  considered  the  school  report  to  show
    progress here and indeed had not considered the letters from the  third
    appellant's teachers.  Moreover, he had  not  properly  considered  the
    social work report and indeed the issue of the language spoken  by  the
    children.

21.  She went on to argue that the decision of the  judge  was  inconsistent
    and that he had not taken into account the best interests of the child.
     She referred to the decision and the Administrative Court in Tinizaray
    [2011] EWHC 1850 (Admin). Weight should have been placed on the  social
    worker's report.  She stated that the decision was unlawful  by  virtue
    of the length of residence and lack of time in the  home  country-  the
    principal appellants had come here when they were young adults and were
    now established in this country.  In any event she stated that even  if
    the appellants did not come within the Rules  then  their  freestanding
    Article 8 rights would   have  to  be  considered  under  the  relevant
    structured approach.  She emphasised  that  the  principal  appellant's
    first child was buried in Britain.

23.  In reply Ms Holmes referred to paragraph 20  of  the  determination  in
    which the judge had referred to the social worker report at pages 13 to
    36 of the bundle.  The judge had gone on in paragraph 20 to  note  that
    the social worker had felt that if the third appellant were removed  to
    India she would not be able to access similar education  or  provisions
    although a private  schools  would  offer  education  of  a  reasonable
    standard but "now charge a fortune which her parents would not be  able
    to afford".  The social worker  had  criticised  the  Indian  education
    system for allowing corporal punishment.  The social worker had gone on
    to say that Asians of Hindu religion were not allowed to  be  vegan  or
    expected to be vegetarians and the  children  spoke  English  as  their
    first English.  The social worker considered that removing the children
    to India was inconsistent with a duty to safeguard the welfare  of  the
    children.  Ms  Holmes  stated  that  there  was  no  evidence  for  the
    assertions made by the social worker,  that  therefore  the  judge  was
    entitled to deal with them as he had.  She then referred in some detail
    to the report.  She  stated  that  only  psychological  impact  of  the
    removal on the children would be a matter with which the parents  would
    be able to deal.  It is up to them to ensure the family life  continued
    and the children had stability.  She referred to the  letter  from  the
    headmistress and said hat the headmistress had been wrong to  say  that
    it was not in the best interests for them to be removed as she did  not
    have the full details of what life the children would  live  in  India.
    Moreover, with regard to paragraph 276ADE of the Rules the letter  from
    the Secretary of State dealt properly with that issue pointing out that
    the appellants could not qualify under the Rules.   Paragraph  276  did
    not give a freestanding right merely  because  a  child  had  lived  in
    Britain for seven years.

24.  She stated the judge had properly dealt with the issue of  family  ties
    with India in the determination.  Having emphasised that the appellants
    never had leave to remain she asked me to find that the removal of  the
    appellants would be entirely proportionate.

25.  In reply Miss Ofei-Kwatia  again  referred  to  the  third  appellant's
    school, emphasised the family had not accepted public benefits here and
    stated that the children should not be made to bear the brunt   of  the
    bad decisions made by their parents.

26.  I find that there is no material error of law in the  determination  of
    the Judge in the First-tier Tribunal.


Discussion.
27. Miss Ofei-Kwatia referrd to the judgment in Tinizaray.  I note that  in
    her   judgment in AA (Iran) [2013] EWCA Civ  1523  Lady  Justice  Sharp
    stated at paragraph 16:


        "There is another aspect of the case to which I should  make  brief
        reference.  The original grounds of appeal and skeleton argument on
        behalf of the appellant (to which Mr Drabble was not  party)  would
        have  required  us  to  consider  whether  consideration   of   the
        appellants'  Article  8  case  by  the  FTT  -  in  particular  the
        consideration of Section 55 and the best interests of a child as  a
        primary consideration - was flawed because of the  failure  of  the
        FTT to consider his best interests  by  express  reference  to  the
        checklist set out in Section 1 of the Children Act.  The basis  for
        such a submission was said to reside in R (Tinizaray) v SSHD [2011]
        EWHC 1850 and the approach there taken  to  ZH  (Tanzania)  v  SSHD
        [2011] 2 AC 166 SC.  In the event, Mr Drabble did  not  press  that
        grounds of appeal.  He is right not to do so.  In  SS  (Nigeria)  v
        SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 550, Laws  LJ  said  (at  paragraph  55)  that
        Tinizaray should not be regarded as "establishing anything  in  the
        nature of a general principle (about  Section  1  of  the  Children
        Act)".   I  respectively  agree.   Mr   Sheldon   tells   us   that
        notwithstanding what Laws LJ said, some Tribunals continue to adopt
        the Tinizaray  approach.   In  my  view  they  should  not  do  so.
        Tinizaray should receive its quietus".

         I therefore reject any argument put forward that  the  approach  in
    Tinizaray is the appropriate  way in which to deal with  the  issue  of
    the rights of children and that the  Judge made any  error in not doing
    so. Moreover, the judge did consider oral evidence before him including
    the correspondence from the school and the social  worker  report.   He
    did not accept as credible the appellants' claim that they  would  have
    nothing to return to in India and that they were  somehow  "outcastes".
    He pointed to the fact  that  the  first  appellant  had  worked,  when
    married, in the family business in India  and  he  considered  that  he
    would be able to return to the family  business  there  -  that  was  a
    conclusion which was fully open to him on the evidence.

28.  Moreover he was correct to place little weight on the  social  worker's
    report.  The assertions of the social worker do not bear scrutiny.

29.  The report has  many  assertions  none  of  which  are  reasoned.   For
    example the social worker asserts that the removal of the appellants to
    India would make it difficult for the children to adjust to the  Indian
    system of education "which  is  so  different  from  the  UK  education
    system.  Their educational needs may not met,  consequently  may  leave
    school without qualifications and lead them  poor  employment  chances"
    (sic).

30.  The social worker gives no reasons for finding that the  children,  who
    appear to be intelligent and diligent  in  their  studies  would  leave
    school in India without qualification.  Moreover although he says  that
    private schools may offer a similar standard of education he goes on to
    say that the third appellant's parents would  not  be  able  to  afford
    private education.  Again he gives no reasons for that assertion -  the
    first appellant was working in his father's  business  before  he  left
    India, both parents have been able to work in Britain and there appears
    nothing to indicate that they would not be able to work  in  India  and
    afford private education.  The assertion  of  the  social  worker  that
    "Nishtha's vision of becoming a doctor will not be realised if  she  is
    removed to India" is simply baseless.

31.  He goes on to state that the Indian education  system  allows  corporal
    punishment and that this would be detrimental for the children.   There
    is no reason given as to why the third  and  fourth  appellants  should
    suffer corporal punishment.  The assertion that they are "likely to  be
    exposed to a risk  of  significant  harm  due  to  the  application  of
    corporal punishment at schools" is again without foundation.

32.  Having noted that the family have a  close  relationship  together  the
    social worker goes on to state that the family now  eat  English  food.
    However, both of the  first  appellant's  parents  followed  the  Hindu
    religion and he and his wife were vegetarians on arrival.  There is  no
    indication that any harm would be done  to  the  children  should  they
    follow a vegetarian diet in India.

33.  It is claimed the children could not read or  write  Gujarati  and  yet
    the reality is  that  the  first  language  of  the  first  and  second
    appellants is Gujarati and there is no basis on which the social worker
    had reached the conclusion that the children could not learn  to  speak
    Gujarati fluently when they are exposed to that language in India.

34.  It is of note that the  social  worker  stated  that  their  children's
    parents take them  regularly  to  the  local  temple  where  they  pray
    together as a family and then visit relatives.   Clearly  the  children
    are being bought up in the Hindu culture as well as  that  of  Britain.
    The assertion of the social worker that the world in which the children
    have developed would be taken away if they all moved to India is simply
    wrong.  They would be removed as a family and  the  social  environment
    for children is largely that of the family.

35.  The comments at the end of the  report  refer  to  the  importance  for
    relations with parents.  That is clearly correct and that  is  why  the
    removal of the children with their parents would not  be  a  breach  of
    their rights here.

36.  The social worker goes on to state that removing the  family  would  be
    viewed as a breakdown in a relationship between the  family  and  their
    wider family however he does not appear to consider the fact that  that
    the family have relations in India: that was clearly a finding made  by
    the judge.

37.  Again in his conclusions the  social  worker  states  that  the  family
    would be destitute in India.  Again there is nothing on which he  could
    base that decision.

38.  Finally he refers to the removal of the children as being  inconsistent
    with the need to safeguard and promote the welfare  of  children.   The
    reality is that the children's welfare is the responsibility  of  their
    parents and there is nothing to  show  that  their  parents  would  not
    provide stability and safety for them in India.

39.  I have considered the letters from the schools.   They  make  it  clear
    that the children are well adjusted  and  diligent  in  their  studies.
    There seems no reason why they would not be able to return to India and
    again study diligently there.

40.  The judge did properly consider the life that the family would lead  in
    India and took into account the  length  of  time  that  the  principal
    appellants had lived here  and that  after the expiry of their leave to
    remain as visitors they had lived here without authority. He considered
    the rights of the children and the  social  worker's  report.   He  was
    correct to place weight on  the  fact  that  the  appellants  would  be
    returning as a family unit.  He was correct to find that the appellants
    did not meet the requirements of the Rules and furthermore  that  their
    removal would be proportionate.  He gave  sufficient  reasons  for  his
    conclusions. He dealt properly with the claim that the  fact  that  the
    third appellant had lived in Britain for seven  years  meant  that  the
    family and that appellant were entitled to remain under the rules.   It
    was certainly nor unreasonable to  state  that  the  appellants  should
    return to India as a family unit - the  rule does not state that merely
    because a child has lived in Britain for 7 years  the family should  be
    entitled to remain. The range of factors which are set out in the  IDIs
    were considered be the Judge. His decision was fully open to him and he
    was correct to find that the decision was a proportionate internee with
    the rights of the appellants under Article 8 of the ECHR.

41.  I therefore find that  there  is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination and conclude that the decision of the  Judge  that  these
    appeals are dismissed shall stand.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

