
[pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41139/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th June 2015                    |On 30th July 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD


                                   Between

                          mr Muhammad Faraz naseem
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnson - Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND ERROR OF LAW

 1. This is an appeal by Muhammad Faraz Naseem, a citizen of Pakistan, born
    15th October 1988.  He appeals against the decision of  the  Respondent
    made on 19th September 2013 to refuse leave to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom on the basis of his relationship  with  his  spouse  who  is  a
    British citizen.  The Appellant appealed against that refusal  and  his
    appeal was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Harris and the  reasons
    for that decision set out in a determination issued on 27th  May  2014.
    The Secretary of State, having been refused permission to appeal by the
    First-tier Tribunal, was granted permission by the  Upper  Tribunal  on
    24th November 2014 and on 16th April 2015 having  heard  submissions  I
    found that there was a material error of law in  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Harris and I set that decision aside with  no
    preserved findings of fact.  I concluded that  there  was  very  little
    evidence to support his finding that there are insurmountable obstacles
    to the Appellant's wife going with him to Pakistan.

 2. Notice of the hearing on 18th June 2015 was, according to the papers  I
    have before me, sent to the Appellant at what he has since confirmed is
    his home address,  by first class post on 29th May 2015.  It was listed
    for 2pm on 18th June.   The day before the hearing I became aware  that
    the appeal which had been  listed  for  10am  on  18th  June  had  been
    adjourned.  My clerk phoned Mr Naseem to say to him that  it  would  be
    possible for the appeal to be heard at 10am if that would suit him.  Mr
    Naseem at that point said he was unable to speak  with  the  clerk  and
    that he should telephone him later in the  day.   My  clerk  did  this.
    When he telephoned again Mr Naseem said that he had not been  aware  of
    the hearing because the letter had been opened by  his  wife  who  then
    kept it from him. He said he did not intend to come to court.  He   was
    encouraged to attend but  was adamant that he would not  be  making  an
    appearance.  He did not appear. He made no request for  an  adjournment
    or for another date. Nothing further has been heard from him.

 3. I now proceed to deal with the case on the papers.

 4. No additional documentation has been received so I am dealing with this
    on the basis of the evidence that was before Judge Harris.

 5. The view of the Secretary of State as set out in the refusal letter  is
    that the requirements of Paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM are not met. She
    concluded that although relocating together in Pakistan might  cause  a
    degree of hardship for the Appellant's partner she  was  not  satisfied
    that there are insurmountable obstacles preventing her from doing so.

 6. I have a statement from the Appellant which was prepared in March 2014.
     He states that he met Jodie Wheeler, his wife,  in  October  2011  and
    moved in with her in December 2011.  They married  in  July  2012.   He
    explains how he sought advice from the Visa and Appeal  Service  UK  on
    the application to remain in the UK and was never  told  at  any  point
    that he would have to show that his  wife  could  not  go  to  live  in
    Pakistan.  Pakistani society is  not  accepting  of  non-Muslims.   She
    would not enjoy any quality of life there and would  have  no  support.
    He has no close family there as they all  live  in  Sweden.   His  wife
    suffers from mental  illness  and  had  recently  been  diagnosed  with
    recurring depressive illness for which she takes medication.   She  was
    at that time awaiting a course of cognitive behavioural therapy.

 7. I have a statement from his  wife  prepared  on  5th  March  2014.  She
    confirms her husband's account of their relationship and marriage.  She
    says that she suffers from agoraphobia and panic attacks which make  it
    difficult for her to complete even basic day-to-day activities such  as
    shopping or taking the dog for a walk alone.  She has asthma and  takes
    medication for that.  She was unaware that she had to explain  why  she
    would not be able to move to Pakistan.  She does not speak  Urdu.   She
    has never visited Pakistan and her only tie to that country is the fact
    that she is married to a Pakistani man.  She says  the  idea  that  she
    could move to Pakistan is "laughable" as it is a Muslim  country  where
    she would have no freedom to live a normal life as a  white  Christian.
    She could fall foul of the anti-blasphemy laws.  The travel advice from
    the Foreign and Commonwealth Office is that there is a high  threat  of
    terrorism, kidnap and sectarian violence.  She  does  not  believe  she
    would get the treatment she needs for her mental illness.

 8.  I have a letter from a Consultant Psychiatrist of  Greater  Manchester
    West NHS sent to Miss Wheeler's GP on 6th January 2014. The  Consultant
    says that she had been assessed and any psychotic symptoms  ruled  out.
    He relates that she had mentioned that  she  has  been  suffering  from
    depression since she was 13 and has suffered anxiety and panic  attacks
    for years which have become worse over the past couple of  years.   She
    could not however identify any particular  stressor  or  triggers  that
    could have aggravated her panic attacks.  She had mentioned that  there
    had been stressors in her family.  Her  grandfather  had  stolen  money
    from a disabled woman and this caused her to lose trust in people.   He
    says that she suffers from a recurrent depressive  illness  along  with
    agoraphobia with panic attacks.  She has a  long  history  of  cannabis
    abuse but is currently motivated to  reduce  this  and  has  agreed  to
    engage with an organisation to help her come off it.   She  denied  any
    thoughts, plans or intent to harm herself  or  others.   She  would  be
    referred to Primary Care Psychological Therapy Services.   She does not
    get on very well with her mother.  Her mood had  been  low  for  years.
    She does not go out on her own.  She waits for her husband to come  and
    take her out.  She enjoys watching TV and comedy  programmes  with  her
    husband.  She had been diagnosed with depression when she was 13 to  14
    when she took an overdose.

 9. Whilst I have set aside the determination of Judge Harris I think it is
    fair to consider the evidence that the Appellant and his wife  gave  at
    the hearing before him since I was not able to hear from them and no up-
    to-date information had  been  provided.   There  was  mention  at  the
    hearing before Judge Harris of the Appellant's wife's poor relationship
    with her mother.  The Appellant said that his wife  had  worked  for  a
    charity but had not worked for over twelve months.  When he  was  asked
    why he had married knowing that it would be a requirement that  he  had
    to return to Pakistan he responded that he had fallen in love and  just
    did not think about it.  It was submitted on behalf of the Appellant by
    a litigation friend who had provided a small  bundle  for  the  hearing
    that it would not be reasonable  to  expect  the  Appellant's  wife  to
    follow him to Pakistan.  The difficulty is that Judge Harris said  that
    he found the Appellant's testimony to be  "utterly  unconvincing".   He
    noted that the Appellant had entered the UK for the purpose of taking a
    business management course but failed to complete it.  He described the
    reasons given for failing to  do  so  as  "most  unimpressive".   Judge
    Harris did not question or doubt the  credibility  of  the  Appellant's
    wife.

10. It is unfortunate that the Appellant chose not to attend the hearing to
    present his case and to attempt to  allay  the  concerns  expressed  by
    Judge Harris about his credibility.  It concerns me that his  wife  may
    have withheld the notice of hearing from him  and  that  despite  being
    made aware of the hearing the day before he chose not to come to  court
    to state his case and made no request  for  an  adjournment  or  for  a
    different date.  This leads me to  question  whether  the  marriage  is
    subsisting. It seems reasonable to suppose that both he  and  his  wife
    would want the appeal to be determined. I accept that it would  not  be
    easy for the Sponsor to relocate to Pakistan but she was aware when she
    married the Appellant that he was here as a student and would  have  to
    apply for further leave to remain. It seems there was no discussion  at
    all about their future, but just an assumption that he would be allowed
    to remain here. I accept that she is British  and  has  never  been  to
    Pakistan but I have no satisfactory evidence at  all  relative  to  the
    Appellant's family circumstances in Pakistan and  the  availability  of
    support there.  The claim that all his family  are  in  Sweden  is  not
    supported by evidence.  Much of what is contained in the medical report
    is simply what the Sponsor told the Consultant. For example he says  in
    his conclusion that she is suffering from agoraphobia but there  is  no
    reasoning for this diagnosis and no detail at all  given.  Clearly  the
    Sponsor has some problems with  depressive  illness  but  there  is  no
    indication of serious illness. I have no up to date medical report  and
     no idea what treatment the Sponsor is currently getting.  There is  no
    evidence that the medication or treatment which she requires would  not
    be available in Pakistan.

11. The Appellant has  failed  to  pursue  his  appeal.  The  threshold  to
    establish insurmountable obstacles is a high one. It is not  sufficient
    that the Sponsor does not want to go to live in Pakistan, that  she  is
    unaccustomed to the culture, that she would not  feel  safe  there  and
    that her family are all in the UK.  The evidence  before  me  does  not
    establish that  there  are  in  all  the  circumstances  insurmountable
    obstacles to the Sponsor going with the Appellant to Pakistan and there
    are in my view  no  compelling  circumstances  that  would  render  the
    Appellant's removal from the United  Kingdom  disproportionate  to  the
    need for effective immigration control in the UK in terms of Article  8
    ECHR. .

12. The Respondent considered that it would be reasonable for the Appellant
    to return to Pakistan to make an application  for  entry  clearance  in
    accordance with the Immigration Rules.   Presumably the Appellant  does
    not want to do this  because  he  and  his  wife  could  not  meet  the
    financial requirements of Appendix FM.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal having been set  aside  is  replaced
with this decision.

The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration  Rules  and  on  human  rights
grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 25th July 2015

N A Baird
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Baird
