
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41248/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 October 2014                           |On 6 November 2014            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     A A
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Harrington instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither  party  invited
    me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).



Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone who  was  born  on  10  June
    1967.  He entered the United  Kingdom  on  14  September  2002  with  a
    student visa valid from 15 August 2002 until 31 October 2013.   He  was
    subsequently granted further leave as a student up until 30 March 2006.
     On those occasions, his wife and  daughter  ("J")  were  also  granted
    leave in line with the appellant's leave, having joined him in the UK.

 3. At some point, the appellant's wife returned to  Sierra  Leone  leaving
    the appellant in the UK, where he was studying  and  working,  to  look
    after J.   On 22 March 2005, J was taken into foster care by the  local
    authority.  She has, so far as I am aware, remained in care thereafter.



 4. On 21 March 2006, the appellant made an application for  leave  outside
    the Rules which was granted until 30 September 2006.   Thereafter,  his
    leave expired.

 5. On 12 November 2008, the appellant made a further application for leave
    outside the Rules based upon  a  court  order  granting  the  appellant
    supervised contact with J.  As a consequence, leave was granted outside
    the Rules until J's 16th birthday from 25  August  2010  until  6  July
    2011.  A further application was made on 1 July 2011 and  discretionary
    leave was granted outside the Rules until J's 18th birthday on  6  July
    2013.

 6. On 5 July 2013, the appellant's legal representatives  made  a  further
    application for discretionary leave to remain outside the Rules.  On 20
    September 2013, the Secretary of State refused to grant  further  leave
    to the appellant and made a decision to remove him by way of directions
    under s.47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

The Appeal

 7. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    promulgated on 12 June  2014,  Judge  Page  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal under the Immigration Rules (para 276ADE) and Art 8 of the ECHR.



 8. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on  a
    number of grounds.  On 2  July  2014  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    McWilliam) granted the appellant permission to  appeal  on  the  ground
    that the judge had arguably  erred  in  law  in  failing  to  make  any
    findings on "three witnesses who gave oral evidence".

 9. Subsequently,  the  appellant's  legal  representatives,  Duncan  Lewis
    Solicitors, renewed the appellant's application to the  Upper  Tribunal
    presumably on the basis that the judge has only granted leave on  some,
    but not all, of the grounds.  Further, in a letter dated 12  July  2014
    addressed to the Upper Tribunal, pointed out that Judge  McWilliam  may
    have misunderstood the original grounds as,  although  three  witnesses
    had attended the hearing, none in fact had given oral evidence.

10. On 28 July 2014, the Upper Tribunal (UTJ Grubb) granted  the  appellant
    permission to appeal on all grounds.

11. Thus, the appeal came before me.

The Issues

12. On behalf of the appellant, Ms Harrington raised three points.

13. First, she submitted that the Secretary of State's decision was not  in
    accordance with the law because the appellant was entitled to have  his
    application  for  further   leave   determined   under   the   previous
    "discretionary leave" policy as he had been granted  leave  under  that
    policy prior to 9 July 2012.  The judge had erred in law by failing  to
    conclude that the Secretary of State's decision was not  in  accordance
    with the law.

14. Secondly,  in  applying  para  276ADE  of  the  Rules,  the  judge  had
    approached the issue of whether the appellant had established  that  he
    had "no ties" with Sierra Leone under para 276ADE(vi) on a wrong basis.
     She relied upon the Upper Tribunal's decision in Ogundimu (Article 8 -
    new rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 00060 (IAC).

15. Thirdly, Ms Harrington submitted that the judge  had  reached  a  wrong
    conclusion  in  law  in  finding  that  there   were   no   "compelling
    circumstances" justifying the grant of leave outside  the  Rules  under
    Art 8.  In particular, she submitted that he  had  failed  properly  to
    take into account a complaint made against the appellant's former legal
    representatives which had resulted in the appellant not  being  granted
    discretionary  leave  earlier  which,  if  he  had,  would   have   led
    subsequently to a grant of indefinite leave to remain.

16. Ms Harrington also submitted that the Art 8 consideration was flawed by
    the judge's view that the appellant had "no ties" with Sierra Leone and
    had failed to take into account his private life and positive impact on
    the community in the United Kingdom.

Discussion

     1. The 'discretionary leave' policy

17. I deal first with the issue of the "discretionary leave" policy.

18. Ms Harrington told me,  on  instructions,  that  Judge  Page  had  been
    provided with a copy of this policy.  Unfortunately,  no  copy  of  the
    policy is contained in the file and neither representative was able  to
    provide me with a "hard" copy of the policy although I was shown it  on
    Ms Harrington's iPad.  Fortunately, the contents of the policy was  not
    a matter of dispute between the representatives.

19.  Mr  Richards  accepted  that  the  transitional  arrangements  in  the
    discretionary leave policy  applied  to  an  individual,  such  as  the
    appellant, who had been granted discretionary leave under  that  policy
    prior to 9 July 2012.  In such a case, an application after  that  date
    for further leave on a discretionary basis would  be  considered  under
    the policy.  However, Mr Richards relied on the  terms  of  the  policy
    which made clear that a further period of discretionary leave of  three
    years would only be granted if the  "circumstances  prevailing  at  the
    time of the original grant of leave continue at the date of  decision".
    The policy did not require the grant of that further period of leave if
    there were "significant changes" in the individual's  circumstances  or
    that individual did not meet the criminality threshold.  Ms  Harrington
    agreed those were the terms of the policy.  There  is,  of  course,  no
    question that the appellant has  any  antecedent  criminal  convictions
    which would disapply the policy.

20. Mr Richards submitted that the Secretary of State  had  considered  the
    discretionary leave policy in her refusal  letter  dated  20  September
    2013.  In doing so, Mr Richards submitted that the Secretary  of  State
    had acted lawfully in that she had applied the policy and had  come  to
    the conclusion that the circumstances had changed.  Mr Richards pointed
    out that the previous grant of discretionary leave was in order for the
    appellant to enjoy supervised contact with J, initially up to her  16th
    birthday and  subsequently  up  to  her  18th  birthday.   Mr  Richards
    submitted that the judge had made clear factual findings that J, now an
    adult, no longer had regular contact with the appellant.

21. There is no doubt that a failure to apply an applicable policy  results
    in a decision being unlawful and not in accordance with  the  law  (see
    Lumba (WL) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 12).

22. It is clear to  me  that  the  Secretary  of  State  did  consider  her
    "discretionary leave" policy in her refusal letter of 20 September 2013
    and concluded that it did not apply.

23. At the outset of the letter the Secretary of State states:

         "On 05 July 2013 Ty Arian solicitors applied  on  your  behalf  for
         further discretionary leave to remain in the United  Kingdom.   You
         have failed to show that your circumstances remain the  same  since
         your last grant of  leave.   Therefore,  you  are  refused  further
         discretionary leave to remain and the reasons are outlined below."

24. The letter then sets out the appellant's immigration history  including
    the grants of discretionary leave to  the  appellant  up  to  J's  16th
    birthday initially and then her 18th birthday.

25. The decision letter then goes on to state:

         "You were granted discretionary leave to remain  on  the  basis  of
         contact with your child.  We acknowledge that  your  child  is  now
         aged 18 and is still residing with  her  foster  carers.   You  are
         being refused discretionary leave to remain as  you  have  not  had
         contact with your child for the past 6 months."

26. That, in my judgment, is a  clear  application  of  the  "discretionary
    leave" policy and a decision that it does not apply so  as  to  require
    the grant of a  further  period  of  discretionary  leave  because  the
    circumstances upon which leave was previously granted have now changed.
     That is because the appellant is no longer exercising contact with J.

27. I so not accept Ms Harrington's submission that Judge  Page  failed  to
    consider this very point: he  did.   Having  considered  the  evidence,
    Judge Page rejected the appellant's claim that he had contact with J at
    her  place  of  work  the  previous  month  (see   para   18   of   the
    determination).  The last recorded supervised contact between J and the
    appellant was  during  the  Christmas  holiday  (see  para  17  of  the
    determination).  The appeal was heard on 4 June 2014.  At para 14 Judge
    Page noted that the evidence:  "gave the clear impression  that  he  no
    longer had regular contact with her now she is an adult", and  at  para
    14 he concluded:  "I am not satisfied that the appellant  has  a  close
    relationship with [J] and I am not satisfied that he is seeing her on a
    regular basis."  At para 24 he noted that contact between the appellant
    and J "has become infrequent".

28. Then, at para 32 Judge Page set out the circumstances  leading  to  the
    grant of discretionary  leave  to  the  appellant  up  until  J's  18th
    birthday.  Directly addressing the Secretary of State's decision, Judge
    Page said:

         "The respondent in refusing noted that [J] was now  aged  18  years
         and still residing with  her  foster  carers.   The  appellant  was
         refused discretionary leave to remain as he  had  not  had  contact
         with [J] for the past six  months.   There  has  been  no  evidence
         provided to show that the appellant did have contact with  [J]  for
         those six months."

29. At para 34, Judge Page continued:

         "The evidence before me suggests that [J] has now moved on  in  her
         life and does not need the appellant in the United Kingdom .... The
         respondent has considered applying a policy of discretionary  leave
         in refusing the appellant's application."

30. In my judgment, the Secretary of State did consider her  "discretionary
    leave" policy  and  found  consistently  with  the  evidence,  and  the
    subsequent findings of Judge Page, that the policy did not apply as the
    circumstances leading to the previous grant of discretionary leave  had
    changed, namely that the appellant was no  longer  maintaining  contact
    with J.

31. For these reasons, the judge did not err  in  law.   The  Secretary  of
    State considered and applied her  'discretionary  leave'  policy.   Her
    decision was, therefore, in accordance with law.

    2. Paragraph 276ADE

32. I turn now to Ms Harrington's second submission that  was,  in  effect,
    that the judge had misapplied para 276ADE(vi) of the Rules.

33. Ms Harrington accepted that by virtue of para A277C of the  Rules  that
    the Secretary  of  State  was  entitled  to  apply  the  new  Rules  in
    particular para 276ADE if he could not succeed under the 'discretionary
    leave' policy.

34. The appellant has, of course, only been  in  the  UK  since  2002  and,
    therefore, cannot take advantage of para 276ADE(iii) on  the  basis  of
    twenty years' continuous residence in the UK.

35. The relevant provision is, therefore, para 276ADE(vi) which provides as
    follows:

         "The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain  on
         the grounds of private life in the UK  are  that  at  the  date  of
         application, the applicant:

         .....

         (vi) is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously  in  the  UK
             for  less  than  twenty  years  (discounting  any  period   of
             imprisonment) but has no ties (including social,  cultural  or
             family) with the country to which  he  would  have  to  go  if
             required to leave the UK."

36. Judge Page dealt with the issue of para 276ADE(vi) at  paras  25-27  of
    his determination as follows:

         "25. I now turn to the appellant's case  that  he  is  entitled  to
             remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  under  paragraph  276ADE(vi)
             because he has no ties in Sierra Leone after having been  here
             for twelve years.  As I said above I am not persuaded  by  the
             appellant's evidence that he has no ties in Sierra Leone after
             twelve years in the United Kingdom.  The appellant came to the
             United Kingdom when he was aged 35 years.  At paragraph 15  of
             his witness statement he has given  evidence  that  he  had  a
             'good job' in Sierra Leone that he left in 2002.  There he was
             a lecturer at the University of Sierra Leone and  worked  also
             as a social development officer  in  the  Ministry  of  Social
             Welfare, Gender and Children's Affairs, Freetown.  I  find  it
             unlikely that the appellant has severed all contact  with  his
             family and friends there, the country where  he  grew  up  and
             spent his formative  years.   In  Sierra  Leone  he  was  very
             successful - and no doubt well respected.  There would  be  no
             reason for him to lose all contact  with  friends  and  family
             there.

         26.  Further, the appellant said in his witness statement  that  he
             would have returned to his career  in  Sierra  Leone  had  his
             adoptive daughter [J] not been taken  away.   In  his  witness
             statement he claimed to have been reluctant to remain  in  the
             UK, remaining only for the sake of [J].  He said (paragraph 17
             of his witness statement) that so long as [J] remained in  the
             UK, and remained in care, he feels he cannot leave the UK,  so
             he must remain in the United Kingdom until she is  old  enough
             to decide whether to accompany him to Sierra  Leone.   If  the
             appellant has been planning for this eventuality while in  the
             UK it is irreconcilable to his claim that he has  no  ties  to
             Sierra Leone after twelve years here.

         27.  For the above  reasons  I  find  that  the  appellant  is  not
             entitled to remain under paragraph 276ADE(vi)  on  the  ground
             that he had no ties to Sierra Leone."

37. Ms Harrington placed reliance upon the Tribunal's decision in  Ogundimu
    where at [123]-[125], the Upper Tribunal set out the proper approach to
    the issue of "ties" as follows:

         "123.    The natural  and  ordinary  meaning  of  the  word  'ties'
             imports, we think, a concept  involving  something  more  than
             merely remote and abstract links to the  country  of  proposed
             deportation or removal.  It involves there being  a  continued
             connection to life in that  country;  something  that  ties  a
             claimant to his or her country of origin.  If  this  were  not
             the case then it would appear that a person's  nationality  of
             the country of proposed deportation could of itself lead to  a
             failure to meet the requirements  of  the  rule.   This  would
             render the application of the rule, given the  context  within
             which it operates, entirely meaningless.

         124. We recognise that the text under the rules is an exacting one.
              Consideration of whether a  person  has  'no  ties'  to  such
             country must involve a rounded assessment of all the  relevant
             circumstances and is not to be limited  to  'social,  cultural
             and family' circumstances.   Nevertheless,  we  are  satisfied
             that the appellant has no ties with Nigeria.  He is a stranger
             to the country, the people, and the way of life.   His  father
             may have ties but they are not ties of the  appellant  or  any
             ties that could result in support  to  the  appellant  in  the
             event of his return there.  Unsurprisingly, given  the  length
             of the appellant's residence here, all of his  ties  are  with
             the United Kingdom.  Consequently the appellant has so  little
             connection with Nigeria so as to mean  that  the  consequences
             for him in establishing private life there at the age  of  28,
             after 22 years residence  in  the  United  Kingdom,  would  be
             'unjustifiably harsh'.

         125. Whilst  each  case  turns  on  its  own  facts,  circumstances
             relevant to the assessment of whether a person has ties to the
             country to which they would have to go if they  were  required
             to leave the United Kingdom must include, but are not  limited
             to:  the length of time a person has spent in the  country  to
             which he would have to go if he were  required  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom, the age that the person left that country, the
             exposure that person has had to the  cultural  norms  of  that
             country, whether  that  person  speaks  the  language  of  the
             country, the extent of the family and friends that person  has
             in the country to which he is being deported  or  removed  and
             the quality of the relationships that person  has  with  those
             friends and family members."

38. Ms Harrington relied upon the appellant's witness statement (at pages 1-
    4 of the appellant's bundle) dated 21 May  2014  at  paras  11  et  seq
    where, in effect, he stated that he had left his job as a  lecturer  in
    the University of Sierra Leone in 2002 and had  remained  in  order  to
    care for his daughter.  Ms Harrington submitted that the appellant  had
    not been cross-examined on his evidence and the judge had gone too  far
    in speculating on whether he retained any ties in Sierra Leone.

39. I do not accept Ms Harrington's submission.  The appellant clearly  had
    an opportunity to give such evidence as he wished concerning  his  lack
    of continued  connection  with  Sierra  Leone  and,  to  paraphrase  Mr
    Richards' submission, his ability to reintegrate there if he  returned.
    Judge Page had well in mind that the appellant had been in the  UK  for
    some twelve years.  He also had in mind that the appellant was 35  when
    he came to the UK and had given up his job in 2002 in order to study in
    the UK but, given the nature of a student visa, that  could  only  have
    been on the basis of eventually returning to Sierra Leone.  Indeed, the
    appellant's own evidence was that he intended to return to Sierra Leone
    but only remained in order to look after J and, as he said in  para  17
    of his witness statement:

         "So long as my daughter remains in the UK, and remains in  care,  I
         do not feel I can leave this country.  I cannot abandon her.  I see
         no other way out but to remain until she is old  enough  to  decide
         whether to accompany me to Sierra Leone once more."

40. The appellant's own evidence was, therefore, that he would remain until
    she was old enough to return to Sierra Leone with him.   That  evidence
    does not raise the inference that he hadno continuing  connection  with
    Sierra Leone to which he intends to return when J is old enough  to  do
    so with him.

41. In my judgment, Judge Page was entitled to conclude that the  appellant
    had not established, looking at all the evidence, that he had lost  all
    ties with Sierra Leone despite his absence for twelve  years.   Nothing
    in the appellant's own evidence suggests that  he  had  lost  all  ties
    given his intention of returning.  The Judge did not misdirect  himself
    as to the requirement  in  para  276ADE(v)  and  his  finding  was  not
    irrational on the evidence.  The Judge did not err in  law  in  finding
    that the appellant could not meet the requirements of para 276ADE(vi).

    3. Article 8

42. Turning to Ms Harrington's third submission, this concerned the judge's
    finding that there were no  "compelling  circumstances"  sufficient  to
    justify the grant of leave outside the Rules.

43. I did not understand Ms Harrington to submit that  Judge  Page  adopted
    the wrong approach to considering Art 8 outside the Rules.  It is clear
    to me that he correctly, in the light of the fact  that  the  appellant
    could not meet any requirements of the  Rules,  directed  himself  that
    only if there were "compelling circumstances" would a breach of  Art  8
    be established.  That follows from the case law including MF  (Nigeria)
    v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 and  R  (Nagre)  v  SSHD  [2013]  EWHC  720
    (Admin) and, the decision of the Upper Tribunal, to  which  Judge  Page
    referred, in Shahzad (Article 8:  legitimate  aim)  [2014]  UKUT  00085
    (IAC).

44. Instead, Ms Harrington submitted that the judge had fallen  into  error
    in assessing whether there were "compelling circumstances".

45. First, Ms Harrington submitted that the judge had failed to  take  into
    account that but for the conduct of his previous legal  representative,
    the appellant would have had discretionary  leave  from  2006  to  2013
    continuously.  She submitted that the break between September 2006  and
    August 2010 was due to  failures  by  the  appellant's  previous  legal
    representatives ("DMS").  They had failed to remain in contact with the
    appellant and as a result an application for  discretionary  leave  was
    not made which would have been granted and would have resulted  in  the
    appellant after six years being granted indefinite leave to remain.

46. Judge Page dealt with this issue at paras 29-31 of his determination as
    follows:

         "29. Ms Delgado, the appellant's solicitor, asked  that  weight  be
             given to her argument that had it not been for alleged neglect
             by the appellant's solicitors [DMS], the appellant could  have
             sought and obtained indefinite leave to remain in  2012.   All
             of these factors she argued should lead to the appellant being
             allowed to remain in the United Kingdom outside of the  Rules.
             She complained that the respondent should  have  been  granted
             discretionary leave to remain for the first time  prior  to  9
             July 2012 and had his application been  considered  under  the
             Home Office policy instruction on discretionary leave he would
             have succeeded.

         30.  I have considered the appellant's complaint against his former
             solicitors DMS and the findings.  Even if I could be satisfied
             that the appellant lost an opportunity to apply for indefinite
             leave to remain, the claimed  consequences  of  that  are  too
             remote to be arguable as a compelling circumstance  for  leave
             to remain to be granted outside the Rules.  It is not  certain
             that any missed application would have been granted.  But I am
             not satisfied that the appellant's complaint against  DMS  has
             any real substance.

         31.  The appellant complained to the Legal Complaints Service about
             the conduct of DMS after his file had been passed to  them  by
             [RWT] Solicitors when they advised the appellant they were  no
             longer doing  publicly  funded  work.   The  response  to  the
             appellant's complaint by the Legal Complaints Service dated 19
             March 2008 at page 69 of the appellant's bundle found that the
             appellant's complaint against DMS was unfounded.  Its  finding
             included that the appellant had not given instructions to  DMS
             and not made contact with them once he learned that  his  file
             had been passed to them by [RWT] Solicitors.  DMS wrote to the
             appellant in April 2006 asking him to arrange to attend  their
             office but he never did.  I am not satisfied that  DMS  failed
             the appellant, losing him an opportunity to obtain  indefinite
             leave to remain in the United Kingdom to pursue  contact  with
             [J]."

47. Ms Harrington submitted that, although the complaint  against  DMS  was
    not upheld, nevertheless the firm had been criticised for not informing
    the appellant when they received  the  Home  Office  decision  and  the
    appellant's passport soon after the file  was  passed  to  them  by  an
    earlier  firm  representing  the  appellant.   Ms  Harrington  drew  my
    attention to the letter from the "Legal Complaints  Service"  dated  19
    March 2008 at page 69 of the bundle and in particular at page 71.

48. It seems to me that this is a weak point.  The criticism of DMS is that
    when the file was transferred to them in  July  2006  followed  shortly
    thereafter by the Home Office's decision to  grant  the  appellant  six
    months' leave until 30 September 2006 together with the return  of  the
    appellant's passport, DMS failed to pass on to the appellant  the  Home
    Office decision and passport, which  would  have  been  "prudent",  and
    thereby prejudiced the appellant as he did not seek discretionary leave
    earlier such that there would be no break  in  the  continuity  of  his
    leave between 30 September 2006 and 25 August 2010.  There are,  in  my
    judgment, a number of flaws in that argument.   First,  as  Judge  Page
    pointed out in para 31 the appellant was himself at fault in failing to
    respond to invitations by DMS to attend their  offices.   Secondly,  it
    would appear that DMS advised the appellant and returned  his  passport
    on 28 November 2006 (see page 71 of  the  bundle).   Nevertheless,  the
    appellant did not make an application for  further  leave  outside  the
    Rules on a discretionary basis until 12 November 2008, some  two  years
    later.  It is impossible to see how any delay by DMS  in  advising  the
    appellant or returning his  passport  had  any  significant  effect  or
    prejudice upon the appellant seeking (and on Ms Harrington's submission
    being granted) discretionary leave at an  earlier  date.   I  therefore
    reject Ms Harrington's submission that  Judge  Page  erred  in  law  by
    failing to take this matter fully into account.

49. Secondly, in relation to Art 8, Ms Harrington submitted that Judge Page
    had failed to take into account the strength of the appellant's private
    life and his positive impact on the community.   Ms  Harrington  relied
    upon the unchallenged witness statements at pages 5-20  of  the  appeal
    bundle.

50. Those statements, together with that of  the  appellant,  set  out  his
    employment and refer to his engagement in church activities  and  other
    community contributions.  Dr Hintjens, for  example,  states  that  the
    appellant:  "Has strong networks in  UK  through  church,  through  his
    volunteering work, and through the personal ties he has with people  of
    all walks of life in Swansea".

51. I accept that Judge Page  did  not  make  specific  reference  to  this
    evidence although he refers to the bundle of documents and  a  petition
    signed by 24 people  handed  up  at  the  hearing  at  para  3  of  his
    determination.

52. In UE (Nigeria) v SSHD  [2010]  EWCA  Civ  975,  the  Court  of  Appeal
    accepted  that  "contribution  to  the  community"   although   not   a
    freestanding or stand-alone factor relevant under Art 8 was relevant in
    assessing the "public interest" in  maintaining  effective  immigration
    control or in establishing a "private life" claim in the UK.

53. In UE, Sir David Keene commented at [35] that:

         "The loss of such public benefit (namely a positive contribution to
         the community) is capable of being a  relevant  consideration  when
         assessing the public interest side of proportionality under Article
         8 ..."

54. However, at [36], Sir David Keene went on to emphasise  the  limits  of
    such a factor:

         ".... while this factor of public value can be relevant in the  way
         which I have described, I would expect it to make a  difference  to
         the outcome of immigration cases only in a relatively few instances
         where the positive contribution to this country is very significant
         ...."

55. The  evidence  here  was  not,  in  my  judgment,  particularly  strong
    concerning contributions to the community above and beyond  that  which
    might normally be expected of an individual living a life  in  the  UK.
    In my judgment, the appellant's "contribution" was  not  a  significant
    factor relevant to his private life claim under Art 8.

56. In my judgment, the judge had well in mind the  appellant's  basis  for
    being in the UK since 2002 as a student (see  para  35).   His  private
    life claim was primarily based upon his desire to maintain contact with
    his, now adult, daughter, J.  That, however, as Judge Page  found,  was
    no longer the situation.  Once that  fell  away,  the  essence  of  the
    appellant's claim was that he had been in the UK since 2002 having come
    to the UK on a temporary basis, namely as a student, and had  no  basis
    under the Rules or legitimate expectation to remain  any  longer.   The
    strength of his private life claim was not  significantly  enhanced  by
    the evidence of his work and community involvement whilst living in the
    UK.  Judge Page's finding that there were no "compelling circumstances"
    so as to outweigh the public  interest  reflected  in  the  appellant's
    inability to demonstrate any lawful basis for being in the UK  was  not
    only open to the judge but was, in my judgment, inevitable.  I  see  no
    proper basis for interfering  with  the  judge's  conclusion  that  the
    appellant could not succeed in establishing that  he  was  entitled  to
    leave outside the Rules under Art 8 of the ECHR.

Decision

57. For all these reasons, the  decision  of  Judge  Page  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal on all grounds did not  involve  the  making  of  an
    error of law.  That decision stands.


Signed

A Grubb
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
14 October 2014


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed

A Grubb
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
14 October 2014

