
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41304/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |      Decision & Reasons         |
|                                             |Promulgated                      |
|On 26th October 2015                         |      On 04th January 2016       |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MR. KHAJA SHOAIB AHMED
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss K Pal: Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Iqbal of Counsel instructed by Immigration
                    Chambers

                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. This is an appeal  against  a  decision  and  reasons  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Grice promulgated  on  13th  May  2015  in  which  she
       allowed the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  made  by  the
       Secretary of State on 29th October 2014 to refuse the appellant leave
       to enter the UK.


    2. The appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home Department  and
       the respondent to this appeal is Mr. Khaja  Shoaib  Ahmed.   However
       for ease of reference, in the course of this decision I shall  adopt
       the parties' status as it was before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   I
       shall in this decision, refer to  Mr.  Khaja  Shoaib  Ahmed  as  the
       appellant and the Secretary of State as the respondent.


 Background


    3. The appellant is an Indian national.  The material chronology is  set
       out at paragraphs [2] to  [7]  of  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal.  The appellant first entered the UK on 8th August 2009 with
       a visa to study for a  degree  in  Business  Management  at  E-Thames
       College. On 15th February 2011  he  submitted  a  request  to  change
       sponsoring institution to Cromwell College of IT and  Management,  to
       study a Level 5 Diploma. This was granted on 17th  June  2011.    The
       appellant submitted a further application, and was granted  leave  to
       remain as a Tier 4 General Student Migrant on 3rd  March  2013  until
       20th October 2014.


    4. On 23rd June 2014, the appellant submitted a further Tier  4  General
       Student application to study Health Care Management, Level 7, at Opal
       College. This was granted from 26th June 2014  to  27th  March  2016,
       together with a biometric residence permit.


    5. When the appellant arrived in the UK on  18th  August  2014,  he  was
       interviewed by a Border  Force  Officer.   The  respondent's  records
       indicated that the  appellant  had  previously  used  a  fraudulently
       obtained English language certificate in support of a previous  leave
       application.   The  Officer  suspended  the  appellant's  leave,  and
       required him to submit to a further examination.  The  appellant  was
       granted temporary admission into the UK until 29th October 2014.


    6. The appellant was interviewed  on  29th  October  2014  at  Heathrow.
       Following  that  interview,  the  appellant's  leave  to  remain  was
       cancelled under paragraph 321A of the Immigration Rules  (the  Rules)
       on the basis that his test  result  with  ETS  was  obtained  through
       deception. A decision was taken to remove him from the UK.


    7. The Notice of Refusal of Leave to Enter  served  upon  the  appellant
       states:


         "Prior to your current grant of leave, you held leave to remain  as
         a T4 General student issued on  03/03/2013  until  20/10/2014.  The
         Home Office have now identified that you made false representations
         in that application for the purpose of obtaining that leave.


         In  your  application,  you  submitted  a  TOEIC  certificate  from
         Educational Testing Service (ETS). ETS has record of your  speaking
         test. Using voice verification software, ETS is able to detect when
         a single person is undertaking  multiple  tests.  ETS  undertook  a
         check of your test and confirmed to  the  SSHD  that  there  was  a
         significant  evidence  to  conclude  that  your   certificate   was
         fraudulently obtained. Therefore your scores from the test taken on
         12/12/2012 at Queen way College have now been cancelled by the ETS.




         On the basis of the information provided to it  by  ETS,  the  Home
         Office is satisfied that there is substantial evidence to  conclude
         that your certificate was fraudulently obtained. In light  of  this
         information I am accordingly satisfied  that  you  have  previously
         utilised deception to gain leave to remain in the UK. Had the  Home
         Office been aware of these facts when considering your  application
         on 03/03/2013 you would not have been granted leave to remain as  a
         T4 General student as you would have fallen to be refused under the
         general grounds for refusal, specifically paragraph 320(7B), of the
         Immigration Rules HC395 (as amended).


         This amounts to a significant change in your  circumstances  and  I
         therefore cancel your leave to remain under  paragraph  321A(1)  of
         the Immigration Rules HC395 (as amended)..."


The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Grice


    8. Both parties were represented at the hearing  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal.  The Judge records the appellant's case at paragraphs  [11]
       to [16] of her decision, and the respondent's case at paragraphs [16]
       to [27] of her decision.  Suffice it to say for the purposes of  this
       decision that the Judge had before her, the evidence of the appellant
       that he sat the TOIEC test in person on 12th and 17th December  2012,
       with evidence of how each  of  the  separate  components,  listening,
       reading, writing and speaking had been assessed.  The Judge also  had
       before her the evidence relied upon by the respondent,  including  an
       ETS printout showing that the appellant's test is  invalid,  together
       with the evidence set out in witness statements of Mark Harold, Peter
       Millington and Rebecca Collings.  It is uncontroversial that save for
       the ETS printout showing the appellant's  test  to  be  invalid,  the
       remaining evidence relied upon by the respondent was generic  in  the
       sense that it was not specific to the  appellant,  but  set  out  the
       background to  decision  making  in  such  cases,  and  how  ETS  had
       identified and confirmed the identity of those  language  certificate
       holders who had sought to obtain an English language test certificate
       by deception.


    9. As to the burden and standard of proof, the Judge states at paragraph
       [10] of her decision:


         "The burden of proof is on  the  Respondent  to  satisfy  me  on  a
         standard of probabilities that the Appellant was knowingly involved
         in deception when taking his test. An allegation of deception is  a
         serious one and  the  evidence  provided  to  satisfy  me  to  this
         standard must be cogent."


   10. The findings of fact and credibility are set out at  paragraphs  [34]
       to [43] of the decision:


         "34. I remind myself of the burden and standard of proof as set out
         in paragraph 10 above and in  particular  the  seriousness  of  the
         allegation levelled at the Appellant.


         35.  I have been assisted in my analysis of this matter by the  two
         First Tier Tribunal decisions referred to in  paragraph  34  above,
         and I thank Mr Chohan for bringing these to my attention.


         36.  I note that the alleged deception is in relation to an earlier
         leave application and not  the  granting  of  leave  was  given  on
         26/6/14.


         37.  The statements of Ms Collings, Mr Millington and Mr Harold are
         generic  and  do  not  specifically  relate  to   this   individual
         Appellant. In summary, the process which they describe in order  to
         detect deception is presented as a foolproof one,  with  little  if
         any room for mistake.


         38.  I have been shown a spreadsheet which details the  Appellant's
         name, date of birth, nationality and the test centre. The  test  is
         marked as invalid. There is no evidence before  the  Tribunal  from
         ETS to say how and why it might have come  to  that  conclusion  in
         respect of this Appellant. The document itself is  the  product  of
         other evidence which is not before the Tribunal.


         39.  At the outset I should  say  that  I  am  satisfied  that  the
         Appellant has come to the UK  to  genuinely  pursue  a  variety  of
         studies in order to further his  development  and  career.  He  has
         undergone several English language tests in order to be able to  do
         this. I am told, and having heard him I have no  reason  to  doubt,
         that he has passed every other such test required of him at a level
         commensurate with the level of study he has  chosen  to  undertake,
         including one subsequent to the test which is the subject matter of
         this appeal. He had already  done  three  years  of  study  in  the
         English language prior to taking this particular test.


         40.  The Appellant's first language  is  not  English,  but  having
         heard him give evidence, I am satisfied that his  understanding  of
         English is highly proficient. He was comfortable and  competent  in
         understanding questions and expressing himself. He had no need  for
         an interpreter. I did not find his language proficiency  surprising
         given his educational and cultural background.


         41.  Against this factual matrix I find that this Appellant had  no
         motivation to use a proxy tester in  December  2012.  I  found  his
         description of the circumstances surrounding taking the test to  be
         detailed and convincing. I find him credible on this point.


         42.  Looking at the Home Office evidence in the round as  presented
         against this Appellant, I conclude that it is too generic in nature
         to allow  the  Tribunal  to  properly  conclude  to  the  requisite
         standard that the Appellant was one of those engaged in deception.


         43.  I do not therefore accept the  Respondent's  claims  that  the
         Appellant used a proxy tester or indeed any deception or dishonesty
         has been used by him in relation  to  an  earlier  application  for
         leave."


The Grounds of Appeal


   11. The respondent appeals on  the  ground  that  the  Judge  has  failed
       entirely to provide adequate reasons for  her  finding  at  paragraph
       [42].   The respondent refers to  the  witness  statements  of  Peter
       Millington and Rebecca Collings in particular, and she  submits  that
       the evidence establishes that in order to be categorised as "invalid"
       on the spreadsheet provided to the Home Office, the case has to  have
       gone through a computer programme  analysing  speech,  and  then  two
       independent voice analysts. If all three  are  in  agreement  that  a
       proxy has been used, then the test would be categorised as  invalid".
       A printout of  the  relevant  section  of  the  ETS  spreadsheet  was
       attached at Annex E of the  explanatory  statement.  The  spreadsheet
       identifies the appellant by name and records that the test  taken  on
       12th December 2012, was invalid.  The respondent contends that  where
       ETS invalidates the test result, as in this  case,  that  is  because
       there is evidence of proxy test-taking or impersonation.


   12. The respondent refers to the Judge's finding that  the  appellant  is
       proficient  in  paragraph  [40]  of  the  decision.   The  respondent
       contends that there may be reasons why a person who is able to  speak
       English to the required level would nonetheless  cause  or  permit  a
       proxy candidate  to  undertake  an  ETS  test  on  their  behalf,  or
       otherwise seek to cheat.  The  respondent  contends  that  the  Judge
       erred in failing to give adequate reasons for holding that  a  person
       who clearly speaks English, would therefore have no reason to  secure
       a test certificate by deception.


   13. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pirotta
       on 31st July 2015.


 The hearing before me


   14. At the outset of the hearing before me  on  26th  October  2015,  Mr.
       Iqbal on behalf of the appellant stated that  he  had  not  seen  the
       spreadsheet that is referred to in  paragraph  [19]  of  the  Judge's
       decision.  I showed him the copy held on the Tribunal file so that he
       could satisfy himself that the spreadsheet does in fact refer to  the
       appellant.


   15. On behalf of the respondent, Miss Pal adopted the grounds of  appeal.
       She submitted that it is plain from the decision that the  Judge  had
       before her, evidence relied upon by the respondent  in  the  form  of
       witness statements  and  the  spreadsheet  confirming  that  ETS  had
       invalidated the appellant's ETS test.  She submitted that  the  Judge
       has failed to have proper regard to that  evidence  in  reaching  her
       conclusion at paragraph [42] that the respondent's  evidence  is  too
       generic in nature, to allow the Tribunal to properly conclude to  the
       requisite standard that the appellant was one  of  those  engaged  in
       deception. She submits that beyond  the  reference  to  the  evidence
       being "too generic", the Judge has failed to  give  adequate  reasons
       for rejecting the evidence relied upon the by the  respondent,  which
       whilst generic, properly set out the evidential basis upon which  the
       decision was reached.


   16. Miss Pal submitted that the Judge has substituted her own view as  to
       whether or not the appellant is proficient in the English-language in
       a way that was not open to her. She submits that there  can  be  many
       reasons why the appellant may have got someone to sit a test  on  his
       behalf, at the time of his application in 2012.


   17. The appellant has filed a rule 24 response.   The  appellant  submits
       that the witness statements relied upon by the  respondent  taken  at
       their  highest,  establish  that  the   TOEIC   examinations   system
       administered by ETS is highly abused not only because rogue  colleges
       were at the forefront of administering those tests, but also  in  the
       way  these  tests  are  conducted,  monitored  and  executed.     The
       appellant submits that this arises because  of  a  systemic  failure,
       first on the part of the respondent and second, on the part  of  ETS.
       The appellant submits that in  order  to  attract  mandatory  refusal
       under Part 9 of  the  Immigration  Rules,  the  applicant  must  have
       deliberately practised 'deception', requiring dishonesty on the  part
       of the applicant.  It is submitted that the evidential  threshold  is
       particularly high when  deception  is  alleged,  and  must  establish
       dishonesty on the part of the applicant.  The appellant submits  that
       the evidence only tips the claim in favour of the UKBA to the  extent
       that it presents a  case  for  the  appellant  to  answer.  It  is  a
       "rebuttable charge and presumption" and  "the  moment  the  appellant
       shows that there were no reasonable incentive for him to commit  such
       a deception or fraud, he would discharge the burden of proof laid  on
       him".


   18. The appellant refers to the decision of the Court  of  Appeal  in  AA
       (Nigeria) [2010] EWCA Civ 773  and  submits  that  for  deception  to
       arise, the false representations must have been made knowingly.   The
       appellant also submits that insofar as a failure to give reasons in a
       decision is concerned, Shizad (sufficiency  of  reasons:  set  aside)
       [2013] UKUT 00085 IAC establishes that there does not have to  be  an
       elaborate reasoning.   As  long  as  the  underlying  reasons  for  a
       decision are discernible from the given reasons, that should suffice.


   19. Finally, the appellant seeks to rely upon some  unreported  decisions
       which dealt with the TOEIC issue, and which  the  appellant  submits,
       show the developing trend  in  the  judicial  interpretation  of  the
       evidence presented by the SSHD.


   20. Before me, on behalf of the appellant Mr Iqbal submits that the grant
       of permission to appeal in this case  is  remarkable.   He  submitted
       that there was no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal of how  the
       respondent had come to be in possession of the spreadsheet  that  was
       attached to a witness statement relied upon  by  the  respondent.  He
       submits that the spreadsheet is an unreliable one  and  is  one  that
       could be  created  by  anyone.   He  submits  that  the  respondent's
       witnesses did not attend the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal
       to submit to cross-examination, and that the evidence relied upon  by
       the respondent is wholly generic and does not make specific reference
       to this appellant.  Mr Iqbal submits that the allegation of deception
       is a very serious allegation to make, and the Judge was  entitled  to
       reach the conclusions that she did, for the reasons set  out  in  the
       decision.


   21. In reply, Miss Pal submits that whilst the witness statements  relied
       upon by the  respondent  are  generic,  they  describe  the  analysis
       undertaken before a decision is reached as to whether an ETS test  is
       considered  to  be  invalid.   She  submitted  it  would  be   wholly
       impractical for an individual statement to be prepared in each one of
       the appeals that is now before the First-tier Tribunal,  where  there
       is a challenge to the decision made by  ETS  to  treat  the  test  as
       invalid. She submits that the standard  of  proof  is  a  balance  of
       probabilities and that  the  procedures  identified  in  the  witness
       statements  establish  that  the  test  was  more  likely  than  not,
       completed by a proxy. She submits that the respondent is entitled  to
       rely upon the prima facie evidence of  ETS,  to  treat  the  test  as
       invalid.  If the certificate is withdrawn by ETS, ETS  is  no  longer
       able to stand by the test result.










 Error of Law


   22. I am satisfied that in allowing the appeal for the reasons given, the
       Judge made an error of law such that I should set aside the  decision
       and remake the decision. In my judgement, there is some force in  the
       submission made on behalf of the respondent that the Judge has failed
       entirely to provide adequate reasons for  her  finding  at  paragraph
       [42].


   23. The Judge considered the  respondent's  evidence  in  the  round  and
       concluded that it is too generic in nature to allow the  Tribunal  to
       properly conclude to the requisite standard that  the  appellant  was
       one of those engaged in deception.  However, at  paragraph  [37]  the
       Judge also notes that the statements of Ms  Collings,  Mr  Millington
       and Mr Harold  describe  the  process  adopted  in  order  to  detect
       deception.  The Judge states that in summary, the  process  described
       by the  respondent's  witnesses  in  order  to  detect  deception  is
       presented as a foolproof one, with little if any  room  for  mistake.
       She noted at paragraph [38] that she had  been  shown  a  spreadsheet
       which details the appellant's name, date of  birth,  nationality  and
       the test centre. The test is marked  as  invalid.   In  my  judgement
       there  was  plainly  an  adequate  foundation  for  the  respondent's
       decision that required a fuller evaluation by the First-tier Tribunal
       of the evidence relied upon by the respondent.


   24. The appellant has throughout been aware  of  the  case  against  him.
       That is, the respondent asserts that the appellant is not the  person
       that sat the test.


   25. I do not in this decision recite all of the evidence relied  upon  by
       the respondent before the First-tier Tribunal.  Broadly put,  in  his
       witness  statement  Peter  Millington  refers  to  the  BBC  Panorama
       broadcast in February 2014, which revealed widespread abuse within UK
       test centres that administered TOEIC including the use of proxies  to
       undertake speaking and listening tests or behalf of  candidates,  and
       the provision of correct answers for  those  sitting  written  tests.
       The Home Office  requested  that  ETS  investigate  the  validity  of
       results across UK testing centres, as  a  consequence  of  which  ETS
       provided a list of candidates whose test results  showed  substantial
       evidence of invalidity.


   26. The process adopted by ETS is set out in the witness statement.   ETS
       employs  voice  biometric  technology  to  analyse  test  data  which
       extracts biometric features from an individual's speech to generate a
       voice print which is run against samples  to  establish  whether  the
       sample is likely to be  a  recording  of  the  same  person  who  had
       generated the voice print, or a different person. The technology  was
       used to flag comparisons where the result was suspicious but, because
       it was acknowledged that  the  technology  used  was  imperfect,  and
       samples could be incorrectly shown as false positives,  each  flagged
       match was subjected to a  further  human  verification  process.  Two
       analysts working entirely separately would listen to the samples, and
       confirm whether in their opinion it  was  the  same  or  a  different
       person speaking. Only where  both  analysts  independently  concluded
       that samples were of the same person, would that case be treated as a
       match. It was ensured that at  least  one  analyst  was  experienced.
       Over 33,000 possible matches by the system, 80% were confirmed  after
       human verification. This process mitigated significantly against  the
       risk of a false positive.


   27. Peter Millington's evidence is  that  where  a  match  had  not  been
       identified and verified, an individual's test result might  still  be
       invalidated  on  the  basis  of  test  administration   irregularity,
       including the fact that their test was taken at a UK  testing  centre
       where numerous other results had been invalidated on the basis  of  a
       match. In those cases, the individual would  usually  be  invited  to
       take a free retest. Those cases were clearly distinguished by ETS  in
       its spreadsheets provided to the Home Office, from tests where  there
       was substantial evidence of invalidity.


   28. The evidence of  Rebecca  Collings  details  the  background  to  the
       decisions taken, where an invalid  result  had  been  identified,  in
       relation to removals.


   29.  Whilst it is right that the evidence relied upon by  the  respondent
       is generic as the Judge noted, the  statements  relied  upon  by  the
       respondent describe the process adopted in order to detect deception.
        The Judge states that the evidence describing the process adopted in
       order to detect deception is  presented  as  a  foolproof  one,  with
       little if any room for mistake.  In  reaching  her  decision,  beyond
       noting that the evidence relied upon by the  respondent  is  generic,
       the Judge fails to provide any reasons whatsoever for  rejecting  the
       evidence relied upon by the respondent.  The Judge fails to give  any
       reasons as to why she rejects the evidence of the process adopted  in
       order to detect deception, and why, prima facie deception having been
       detected,  she  should  reject  that  evidence  on   a   balance   of
       probabilities.


   30. In my judgment, the Judge has materially  erred  in  her  failure  to
       evaluate or carry out any assessment of the competing evidence.   The
       Judge had before her, the  evidence  in  the  form  of  ETS  printout
       showing  that  the  appellant's  test  is  invalid.   I  reject   the
       submission of Mr Iqbal that there was no evidence before  the  First-
       tier Tribunal of how the respondent had come to be in  possession  of
       the spreadsheet, and that the spreadsheet is an unreliable one and is
       one that could be created by anyone.


   31. In his statement, Mathew Harold identifies the appellant  as  one  of
       the individuals against whom action is being taken by the  respondent
       following invalidations of an English language  test  certificate  by
       ETS.  The appellant's case has never been that ETS has  not  in  fact
       invalidated his test.  If that is his case, it would have  been  open
       to him to obtain evidence from ETS confirming his test has  not  been
       invalidated and that the spreadsheet relied upon by  the  respondent,
       is some sort of elaborate attempt by the respondent to seek to  treat
       his test as having been invalidated, when in fact, it has  not  been.
       It has never been suggested that the spreadsheet relied upon  by  the
       respondent has emanated from anyone other than ETS.


   32. In my judgment, the Judge also erred in the reliance that she  placed
       upon her assessment of the appellant's  proficiency  in  the  English
       language,   to   determine   whether   the   appellant   made   false
       representations in a previous application that resulted in the  grant
       of leave to remain between 3rd March 2013 and 20th October 2014.  The
       Judge's assessment of the appellant's understanding  of  the  English
       language is based upon his presentation at the hearing over two years
       after the impugned test.  Her assessment is  based  upon  her  having
       heard him give evidence without the need for an  interpreter.  Whilst
       the appellant might be proficient in listening, and speaking,  it  is
       of course possible that an  applicant  might  not  be  proficient  in
       reading and writing to the required standard such  that  the  use  of
       proxy is tempting.  I accept the submission of  the  respondent  that
       there can be many reasons why the appellant may have got  someone  to
       sit a test on his behalf, at the time of his application in 2012  and
       the Judge failed to consider the possibility in her decision.


   33. The Judge states at paragraph [35] that she has been assisted in  her
       analysis of this matter by the  two  First  Tier  Tribunal  decisions
       referred to in paragraph [33].  The extent to  which  the  Judge  has
       been assisted in her analysis and the  principles  that  she  derives
       from those decisions  is  neither  set  out  nor  apparent  from  her
       decision. The  Practice  Direction  of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum
       Chambers of the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal provides:


   1.     A determination of the Tribunal which has not  been  reported  may
      not be cited in proceedings before the Tribunal unless:


                       (a) the person who is or was the appellant before the
                  First-tier Tribunal, or a member of that person's  family,
                  was a party to  the  proceedings  in  which  the  previous
                  determination was issued; or


                  (b) the Tribunal gives permission.


             ....


             11.3  Permission under paragraph 11.1 will be given only where
             the Tribunal considers that it would be materially assisted by
             citation of the determination, as distinct from  the  adoption
             in argument of the reasoning to be found in the determination.
             Such instances are likely to be rare; in  particular,  in  the
             case of determinations which were unreportable  (see  Practice
             Statement 11 (reporting  of  determinations)).  It  should  be
             emphasised that the Tribunal will not exclude  good  arguments
             from consideration but it will be rare for such an argument to
             be capable of being made only by reference  to  an  unreported
             determination.


   34. The appellant relies  upon  the  same  decisions  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal before me  to  demonstrate  what  is  submitted  to  be  the
       developing trend in  the  judicial  interpretation  of  the  evidence
       presented by the respondent. No application appears to have been made
       to the First-tier Tribunal  for  permission  to  rely  upon  the  two
       decisions that the appellant relies upon.  No  application  has  been
       made to  the  Upper  Tribunal  for  permission  to  rely  upon  those
       decisions before me.  In my judgment, I cannot be materially assisted
       by the citation of the decisions, and I  place  no  weight  upon  the
       decisions reached.  I reach my decision as  to  whether  or  not  the
       decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Grice  discloses  a  material
       error of law, by considering  her  decision  and  the  reasons  given
       alone.


   35. In my judgment, the Judge erred in law and the decision of First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Grice is set aside.


 Remaking the Decision


   36. Directions were issued to the  parties  in  advance  of  the  hearing
       before me requiring the parties to prepare for  the  hearing  on  the
       basis  that,  if  the  Upper  Tribunal  decides  to  set  aside   the
       determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  any  further  evidence,
       including supplementary oral evidence, that the  Upper  Tribunal  may
       need to consider if it decides to re-make the  decision,  can  be  so
       considered at that hearing. No further evidence was  relied  upon  by
       the appellant and there was no  application  made  pursuant  to  rule
       15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


   37. At the hearing before me, both parties confirmed that  they  did  not
       intend to rely upon any evidence beyond that  which  was  before  the
       First-tier Tribunal.  I have remade the decision on the basis of  the
       evidence before First-tier Tribunal Judge Grice and the submissions I
       have heard.


   38.  The  appellant  has  maintained  throughout  that  he  rejects   the
       allegation of deception that is made against  him.   His  account  of
       events is set out at paragraph [15] of  the  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Grice:


             "The Appellant sat the TOIEC test  in  person  on  12  and  17
             December 2012. He had been advised by Cromwell college  to  do
             the TOEIC test. They arranged for it to be done online and  he
             had paid �175.00. He had gone to Walthamstow Business  Centre,
             on the second floor of a block near the station. The exam  was
             completed over two days. His listening ability was assessed by
             listening to an audio cassette and he did  a  multiple  choice
             questionnaire. His reading was assessed by reading  a  passage
             of information and completing multiple choice  questions.  His
             writing was assessed by completing essays of between 1500  and
             2000 words.  His speaking was assessed by an  examiner.  There
             were about 15 people in the room as well  as  an  invigilator.
             They had not used computers."


   39. If, as  the  appellant  claims,  his  speaking  was  assessed  by  an
       examiner, the appellant has not sought to adduce  any  evidence  from
       ETS or the test centre that  he  attended,  confirming  that  he  had
       himself attended the test centre, and been assessed in the  way  that
       he describes.  It would have been open to the appellant,  challenging
       the allegation made against him,  to  obtain  evidence  that  he  had
       genuinely taken the test as he claims.


   40. I reject the submission made by Mr Iqbal that the spreadsheet  relied
       upon by the appellant is one that could have been produced by anyone.
        The submission that there is some form of collusion between ETS  and
       the respondent to allege deception where there has been no  deception
       is without any foundation at all.


   41. Whilst most of that which is set out on the witness statements of the
       respondent is  generic,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  respondent  has
       discharged the burden of proof upon her to show, on  the  balance  of
       probabilities, with cogent evidence, that the  appellant  made  false
       representations for the purposes of obtaining the leave to remain  as
       a Tier 4 general student that was issued to  him  between  3rd  March
       2013 and 20th October 2014.  It is uncontroversial that in support of
       that application, the appellant submitted a  TOEIC  certificate  from
       Educational Testing Service.


   42. The respondent is entitled to rely upon the evidence provided to  her
       by  ETS  showing  the  appellant's  ETS  certificate  to  have   been
       invalidated by ETS.  Details of how that evidence has  been  obtained
       are in witness statements relied upon by the respondent. The evidence
       of Peter Millington establishes that the decision is reached with not
       only  voice  biometric  technology  being  deployed,  but   also   an
       independent check by  two  analysts,  one  of  whom  is  experienced,
       working separately. The respondent is  not  obliged  to  provide  the
       names of the centres concerned, the details of  the  equipment  used,
       nor the qualifications of the analysts concerned.   The  standard  of
       proof is a simple  balance  of  probabilities  and  requires  neither
       absolute certainty nor infallibility.


   43. There is evidence from  ETS  that  the  appellant  himself  has  been
       individually identified as having an invalid test  result.  The  fact
       that he was not offered the chance of a re-test, indicates  that  the
       conclusion reached was on the  basis  of  an  analysis  of  his  test
       rather, than the fact that he took a test at a centre where there was
       large scale abuse.


   44. The respondent has  set  up  a  system  for  recognition  of  English
       language testing and she is entitled  to  place  reliance  upon  that
       system when she makes decisions and when she looks to the  system  in
       place for evidence of compliance by applicant's.  In this  case,  ETS
       has itself invalidated, following a thorough analysis, the appellants
       ETS test certificate.  If the certificate is withdrawn or invalidated
       by ETS there  is  simply  no  basis  for  the  respondent  to  simply
       disregard that withdrawal or invalidation.


   45. Upon the appellant's arrival in the UK on 18th August 2014, there had
       been a change in circumstances.  I am  satisfied  that  the  evidence
       relied upon by the respondent, including the spreadsheet, establishes
       that the appellant had not himself  completed  the  English  language
       tests in 2012 as claimed.


   46. I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing the appeal.


Notice of Decision


   47. The making of the decision in the First-tier Tribunal did involve  an
       error of law and I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


   48. I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.

Signed                                  Date



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia



FEE AWARD


As I have dismissed the appeal, no fee award is appropriate.

Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

