
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                Appeal
Number: IA/41579/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 4th May 2016                           | On 6th June 2016                |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      Upper Tribunal Judge John FREEMAN

                                   Between

                                tahira yasmin

                                                                   appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Paul Turner (counsel, by direct access)
For the respondent:    Mr K Norton

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision of Judge Pathma Lingam,  sitting
    at Taylor House on 7  September  2015,  dismissing  an  appeal  against
    refusal of entrepreneur leave. On 7 November 2014 the appeal  had  been
    acknowledged by the Tribunal, and it was noted that an oral hearing was
    required.  There were some difficulties  about  payment  of  fees;  but
    eventually on 2 February 2015 notice of hearing was given for 6 July.

2    On 6 July  the  judge's  note  records  a  failure  to  appear  by  the
    appellant; but nothing about  the  reasons.   The  appellant  says  the
    appeal had been adjourned, on production by her of a GP's letter, to  a
    date to be fixed.  It seems to have been put back before  Judge  Lingam
    for 7 September.  Given the e-mail which she  sent,  complaining  about
    having the wrong papers in the file,  to  that  London  branch  of  the
    Tribunal on 29 July, her intention  may  have  been  to  determine  the
    appeal on the evidence  before  her,  following  the  appellant's  non-
    appearance on 6 July. However there is  no  material  on  the  file  to
    support that possibility, nor to contradict  what  the  appellant  says
    about the appeal having been  adjourned  at  her  request  for  another
    hearing.

3.   The judge's record is headed "Heard at  Taylor  House  on  7  September
    2015": she relates that there was no appearance  on  behalf  of  either
    party, and says at paragraph 8

         There was no show by the appellant at the hearing.   There  was  no
         explanation of her absence or any reason given for the  appeal  not
         to proceed in the absence of the appellant.  I  am  satisfied  that
         the  appellant  was  informed  of  the  hearing  and  as  there  is
         sufficient  evidence  before  me  to  determine  the  appeal  I  am
         satisfied that I can proceed with the appeal under rule 28  of  the
         First-tier Rules.

4.   If the judge had made it  clear  that  she  was  making  that  decision
    following the non-appearance on 6 July, then it might have been another
    matter; but as things stand there is nothing to gainsay the appellant's
    account of events and the only possible outcome is that the  appeal  is
    allowed, with a direction for a fresh hearing before another first-tier
    judge.


                                                                       [pic]
                                             (a judge of the Upper Tribunal)
                                                                 13 May 2016

