
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/41375/2014
     IA/41380/2014
     IA/41383/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 16th September 2016                    |On 18th October 2016             |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Olaide [S]
                                    [J S]
                                    [P S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Not Made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr N Aborisade of OA Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondents to this appeal are mother and two children.  The  First
    Respondent was born on 22nd October 1965 and her two children  [J]  and
    [P] were born on 4th June 2003 and 11th October 2010 respectively.  The
    background to  this  matter  was  that  on  3rd  June  2005  the  First
    Respondent arrived in the United Kingdom with  the  older  of  the  two
    boys, having obtained entry clearance  as  visitors  valid  until  25th
    October 2006.  They overstayed and in 2007 [J]'s  father  came  to  the
    United Kingdom and this was followed on  11th  October  2010  with  the
    birth of the Third Respondent.  It is a significant part of  this  case
    that [P] suffers from sickle cell anaemia.  I say it is significant but
    it was a factor which the judge in coming to his view overall "put into
    the mix".

 2. On 22nd August 2012 the Respondents and each of them  made  application
    for leave to remain in the United Kingdom on  Article  8  grounds.   On
    12th September 2013 decisions were made  to  refuse  the  applications.
    Following judicial review proceedings there was reconsideration  giving
    rise to a right of appeal such that the matter first came before  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Oliver on 20th April 2015.  That led  to  an
    application for permission to appeal and the matter was remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal, eventually to come before Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Hodgkinson sitting at Hatton Cross on 11th February  2016  and
    it is his decision with which I am concerned.  Judge Hodgkinson allowed
    the appeals of each of the Respondents with the appeals  of  the  First
    and Second Respondents being allowed under the Rules and that of [P] by
    having regard to the wider application of Article 8.

 3. Not content with that decision by Notice dated 26th February  2016  the
    Secretary of State made application for permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  The grounds were based on the judge having  materially
    misdirected himself on the law.  Although the grounds ran to some seven
    subparagraphs Mr Whitwell crystallised the grounds by  submitting  that
    what the judge had done was to focus on  the  issue  of  reasonableness
    through the prism of  the  Second  Respondent  and  taking  that  as  a
    starting point.  The grounds made reference to EV (Philippines)  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 874 and also to the Supreme Court decision in  Zoumbas  [2013]
    UKSC 74.  A further aspect of the grounds not pursued  before  me  made
    reference to the Court of Appeal decision in GS (India) [2015] EWCA Civ
    40.

 4. On 8th August 2016 Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Colyer  granted
    permission and said at paragraph 2:

         "2.  The Respondent asserts that the judge made a material error of
             law  by  focusing  on  the  Appellant's   children   continued
             education in the UK rather than any continuing right  to  that
             education when deciding if it is reasonable for  the  children
             to leave the United  Kingdom.   As  none  of  the  Appellant's
             children are British citizens, it is argued that  that  should
             have been the starting point for the consideration of  whether
             it is reasonable for the Appellant's  children  to  return  to
             Nigeria with her as she has no right to remain in  the  United
             Kingdom.  The Respondent submits that the judge failed  to  do
             this  and  the  findings  on  reasonableness  of  removal  for
             children is not in line with the  findings  of  the  Court  of
             Appeal or the Supreme Court decisions in EV  (Philippines)  or
             Zoumbas."

 5. Mr Whitwell took me to the various authorities beginning with the  case
    of E-A (Article 8 - best interests of child) Nigeria  [2011]  UKUT  315
    being a decision of Blake J, then President of the Upper Tribunal.   At
    paragraph 29 Senior Immigration Judge  Jarvis  writing  for  the  panel
    said:

         "We are satisfied that there was a material misdirection, and  that
         analysis of the best interests of the children entirely through the
         prism of the right to education was too narrow  an  approach.   The
         error might well be a material one  and  we  will  accordingly  set
         aside the decision and remake it  in  the  light  of  the  evidence
         before the judge and the submissions made to us."

    With that Mr Whitwell took me to paragraph 39 of the decision of  Judge
    Hodgkinson in which the judge said:

         "[J] has throughout been educated in the United  Kingdom.   He  has
         undertaken the entirety of his primary  school  education  in  this
         country and he will have commenced his secondary education in  this
         country and he will have commenced his secondary education when  he
         was 11 years old, and he will be 13 years old in early June of this
         year.  At page 48 of the Appellant's bundle is a photocopied letter
         of Thameside Primary  School,  dated  12th  September  2013,  which
         confirms that [J] attended that school between September  2006  and
         the end of August 2010.  That  letter  confirms  that  that  school
         holds the Appellant's details as his mother and that she would have
         attended parents' evenings at  the  school.   At  page  65  of  the
         Appellant's bundle is a letter of West Thurrock Academy,  in  Greys
         in Essex, which confirms that [J] is a pupil at that establishment,
         that he commenced there on 6th September 2010, that his  attendance
         is  very  good  and  that  his  punctuality  is   excellent.    His
         achievement at school appears to have been at  a  reasonable  level
         academically, based upon  the  limited  available  documents.   The
         letter from West Thurrock Academy confirms that  the  Appellant  is
         registered with the academy as [J]'s mother and that she  regularly
         meets with the class teacher, head teacher and deputy head."

    Mr Whitwell's submission was to the effect that the  judge  was  giving
    weight to the education which the Second Respondent  was  enjoying  but
    there was no right to that education and that was something  which  the
    judge should have had regard to when making an overall  assessment.   I
    was invited further to have regard to  paragraph  37  of  the  decision
    which in turn made reference to the IDI which  was  placed  before  me.
    That reads at 11.2.4 under the heading "Would  it  be  unreasonable  to
    expect a non-British citizen child to leave the UK?":

         "The requirement that a non-British child has lived in the UK for a
         continuous period of at least the seven years immediately preceding
         the date of application, recognises that over time  children  start
         to put down roots and integrate into life in the UK, to the  extent
         that being required to leave  the  UK  may  be  unreasonable.   The
         longer the child has resided in the UK, the more the  balance  will
         begin to swing in terms of it  being  unreasonable  to  expect  the
         child to leave the UK, and strong reasons will be required in order
         to refuse a case with continuous UK residence of  more  than  seven
         years."

 6. That passage, Mr Whitwell reminded me, is not to be read  in  isolation
    of the relevant considerations which appear under  that  heading.   The
    relevant considerations are clearly not exhaustive because it says that
    they are likely to include that.  What is  set  out  there  is  whether
    there would be significant risk to  the  child's  health;  whether  the
    child would be leaving the UK with their  parent(s)  [a  factor  relied
    upon by Mr Whitwell in this case in his submissions that there  was  no
    reason why the First Respondent ought not to have been considered as  a
    person able to leave the United Kingdom] and the extent of wider family
    ties in the UK.  The IDI goes on to consider those factors whether  the
    child is likely to be  able  to  (re)integrate  readily  into  life  in
    another country, setting out relevant factors for that and any country-
    specific information included as  contained  in  the  relevant  country
    guidance.  One then is invited to look to specific factors relating  to
    the particular child.

 7. I was then taken to the guidance in EV (Philippines)  -v-  SSHD  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 874 and in particular to paragraphs 36 and 37  thereof.   They
    read:

         "36. In a sense the Tribunal is  concerned  with  how  emphatic  an
             answer falls to be given to the question: is it  in  the  best
             interests of the child to remain?  The longer  the  child  has
             been here, the more advanced (or critical) the  stage  of  his
             education, the looser his ties with the country  in  question,
             and the more deleterious the consequences of his  return,  the
             greater the weight that falls into one side of the scales.  If
             it is overwhelmingly in the child's  best  interests  that  he
             should not return, the need to  maintain  immigration  control
             may well not tip the balance.  By contrast if  it  is  in  the
             child's best interests to remain, but only  on  balance  (with
             some factors pointing the other way), the result  may  be  the
             opposite.

         37.  In the balance on the other side there falls to be taken  into
             account the strong weight to be given to the need to  maintain
             immigration control in pursuit of the  economic  wellbeing  of
             the country and the fact that, ex  hypothesi,  the  applicants
             have no entitlement to remain.  The immigration history of the
             parents may also be relevant e.g. if they are overstayers,  or
             have acted deceitfully."

 8. On that point on the guidance of EV (Philippines) it was Mr  Whitwell's
    submission that there had been no proper consideration  of  the  public
    interest in this appeal and that particular regard should be  given  to
    the fact that the First Respondent was an overstayer.

 9. Finally in the line of authorities to which I was  taken,  Mr  Whitwell
    referred  to  the  guidance  in  MA  (Pakistan)  -v-   Upper   Tribunal
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) & Anor [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705  and  in
    particular to paragraphs 29 and 45.   At  paragraph  29  the  Court  of
    Appeal recorded:

         "Ms Giovannetti submits that essentially the same  approach  should
         be adopted when applying the reasonableness test; in essence it  is
         the usual proportionality test save that the fact  that  the  child
         has resided in the UK for seven years will be a significant  factor
         weighing  in  favour  of  the  conclusion  that  it  would  not  be
         reasonable to require the child to leave."

10. All of this was in the context of the consideration of Section  117B(6)
    of the 2002 Act.

11. At paragraph 45 the court,  having  considered  the  interplay  between
    Section 117C(5); 117B(6) and 117C(2) said:

         "Accordingly, in line with the approach in that case [MM (Uganda)],
         I will analyse the appeals on  the  basis  that  the  Secretary  of
         State's submission on this point  is  correct  and  that  the  only
         significance of Section 117B(6) is that where the seven  year  Rule
         is satisfied, it is a factor of some weight leaning  in  favour  of
         leave to remain being granted."

12. Mr Whitwell did not take me to paragraph 46 of the same case but it  is
    of some assistance.  It reads as follows:

         "Even on the approach of the Secretary of State, the  fact  that  a
         child has been here for  seven  years  must  be  given  significant
         weight when carrying out the proportionality exercise.  Indeed, the
         Secretary of State published guidance in August 2015 in the form of
         Immigration Directorate Instructions entitled  'Family  Life  ...'"
         [being the guidance to which I have referred above]

    The Court of Appeal reminded itself of the strong reasons which  needed
    to be demonstrated for refusing leave.

13. The guidance to which I was not taken, but to which I took the parties,
    and a case in which Mr Whitwell had a passing interest was the case  of
    PD and Others (Article 8 - conjoined family claims)  Sri  Lanka  [2016]
    UKUT 00108 heard before, it has to be said,  MA  (Pakistan)  but  by  a
    Presidential panel in the Upper Tribunal. The guidance was that,  "When
    considering the conjoined Article 8  ECHR  claims  of  multiple  family
    members decision makers should first apply  the  Immigration  Rules  to
    each individual applicant and, if appropriate, then consider Article  8
    outside  the  Rules.   This  exercise  would   typically   entail   the
    consideration and determination of all claims jointly, so as to  ensure
    that all material facts and considerations are taken  into  account  in
    each case."  There is nothing inconsistent, I find, in the guidance  as
    given in PD with the guidance to which Mr Whitwell referred in MA.

14. It is important to note in this case that  the  First  and  the  Second
    Respondents succeeded under the Immigration  Rules.  It  is  recognised
    that the Immigration Rules themselves  take  into  account  the  public
    interest.  Although Judge Hodgkinson did not make mention of  the  case
    of PD he has, I find, in fact done exactly what was  suggested  by  the
    President in the approach taken to this particular case.

15. Dealing with Mr Whitwell's specific submissions, I note the  fact  that
    the judge makes reference  to  the  education  history  of  the  Second
    Respondent but that is done not so much by way of looking to the  right
    of Second Respondent to continue in that  education  but  more  in  the
    context of looking to the canvas of the  private  life  of  the  Second
    Respondent as a whole; that becomes clear when one looks at the  second
    paragraph of the decision in which the judge goes on to say:

         "I have taken account of [J]'s statement  of  evidence  wherein  he
         clearly indicates that he wishes to remain in  the  United  Kingdom
         and there is unchallenged evidence before me which  would  indicate
         that he is an excellent footballer and his aspiration  is  at  some
         stage to play football for England.  He will  doubtless  have  made
         friends in the United Kingdom and be fully integrated into the  way
         of life in the United Kingdom."

    The judge went on to say at paragraph 41 that that evidence, to which I
    have referred was sufficient alone for him  to  be  satisfied  that  it
    would not be reasonable to expect [J] to leave the United  Kingdom.   I
    take on board entirely the point taken by Mr Whitwell that the issue of
    reasonableness has to be seen in the context of the  Rules  but  it  is
    also clear that the  judge  reminded  himself  of  the  correct  Rules,
    considering as he did EX.1 and 276ADE(iv) set out at paragraphs 31  and
    32 of the Decision.  It was perfectly reasonable in my judgment for the
    judge to start by an examination of  [J]'s  position.  The  judge  then
    looked to the youngest child, recognising that there was an  additional
    factor i.e. the illness of the younger  child,  which  feeds  into  the
    question as to the overall reasonableness of the First Respondent being
    required to leave the United Kingdom even though she succeeded  on  the
    basis of EX.1 on the basis that it would not be  reasonable  to  expect
    [J] to leave the United Kingdom.

16. Standing back and taking an holistic view of the evidence  which  faced
    the judge, there were multiple factors which weighed in the balance  in
    favour of the family being allowed to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    which taken together were capable of outweighing  the  public  interest
    when having regard also to section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002.  The judge listed those factors  and  in  my  view
    even if one had  come  to  this  case  by  an  analysis  of  the  wider
    application of Article 8 ECHR on the basis of the evidence as  a  whole
    one was entitled to have arrived at the  same  view,  namely  that  the
    findings of the judge were open to her. There was nothing  perverse  or
    irrational in the approach taken by the judge.  The  findings  of  fact
    were all open to her and the decision is not only  adequately  reasoned
    but  more  than  that.   In  the  circumstances,   notwithstanding   Mr
    Whitwell's submissions to me, I find no material error of  law  in  the
    decision and therefore the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    affirmed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 18th October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker
