
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41620/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 July 2015                      |On 7 October 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         Chandrakeerthi Amarasinghe
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Kumudusena, Liyon Legal Ltd


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. We see no need for, and do not make, an order  restraining  publication
    about this case.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Majid,  who,  in  a
    Decision promulgated on 23 December 2014, allowed  the  appeal  of  the
    respondent, hereinafter "the claimant", against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State refusing him leave to remain on the  basis  of  long
    lawful residence.

 3. The claimant is a citizen of Sri Lanka.  He has lived substantially  in
    the United Kingdom for a period of about thirteen  years  although  the
    phrases "substantially" and "about" are  crucial  because  there  is  a
    dispute over his ability to satisfy the requirements of the Rules  that
    would enable him to remain on the basis of ten years' lawful residence.
     The Secretary of State is clearly of  the  view  that  he  is  not  so
    entitled.

 4. The grounds of appeal before the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  include  a
    ground using the phrase  "in  accordance  with  the  law"  and  can  be
    construed, we find, as the claimant relying  on  the  ground  that  the
    decision was not in accordance with the law.

 5. It was certainly the claimant's case that the decision of the Secretary
    of State was wrong and that he was entitled to remain  but  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's Decision is a remarkable but  unsatisfactory  document.
    It contains a lengthy tribute to the undoubted abilities  of  a  former
    President of this Tribunal  and  comments  on  the  attitudes  of  some
    politicians towards human rights legislation but it  does  not  contain
    very much about the actual issues of contention in the case.

 6. We understand the Secretary of State's reasons for pursuing this appeal
    and  we  are  very  grateful  to  Mr  Kumudusena,  for  the   claimant,
    recognising that the Decision is unsustainable.  It was straightforward
    and helpful on his part, but thoroughly professional and in  accordance
    with the facts, for him to concede  that  the  decision  could  not  be
    justified.  We therefore set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 7. We then have to decide what to do  next.   We  were  encouraged  by  Mr
    Kumudusena to allow the appeal  to  the  extent  that  it  was  not  in
    accordance with the law. His argument in support of this was  that  the
    Secretary of State had not considered  whether  the  appeal  should  be
    allowed under Article 8 grounds  outside  the  Rules.   There  are  two
    problems with that argument.  Firstly, it is directly contrary to  what
    she claimed to have done  in  the  refusal  letter  and,  secondly,  Mr
    Kumudusena was not able to point out to us succinctly what  the  strong
    points were that could properly have led to the  appeal  being  allowed
    for that reason. Presently we see no merit in that point.  This  ruling
    does not prevent the point being argued in the next hearing when  there
    might be findings of fact that assist it.

 8. There is something else going here that needs to be recorded.   Further
    matters have come to light on which the  claimant  wishes  to  rely  in
    pursuance of his claim for permission to remain in the United  Kingdom.
    He has been quite open about these in discussions with  the  Presenting
    Officer and has indicated that  whatever  we  do  today  the  claimant,
    through his  solicitors,  will  make  further  representations  to  the
    Secretary of State.  Mr Avery was helpful enough to say that  there  is
    no reason whatsoever to delay considering those representations because
    of the continuance of this appeal and we hope that will be noted by the
    Secretary of State, who may be able to give quick attention  to  points
    when they are raised.  We put it no higher than that.  No  doubt  there
    are many other things that will be competing for her attention  but  we
    have said what we have said.

 9. The consideration by the First-tier Tribunal was so  poor  it  is  only
    fair to the claimant that he has a full rehearing in a  Tribunal  well-
    suited to making findings of fact and we are allowing the Secretary  of
    State's appeal to the extent that we set  aside  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and rule that the case  be  decided  again  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal for the reasons given.

10. This is not a case where the interests of justice would be served by  a
    particularly quick listing.  The case will take its course but it  must
    not be heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid.

    Notice of Decision

    The Secretary of State's appeal is  allowed  to  the  extent  indicated
    above.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 5 October 2015                 |

