
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)              Appeal Number: AA/41722/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                      |Determination Promulgated  |
|On: 7th July 2014                         |On 8 July 2014             |
|                                          |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                               Yuet King Leung
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Dr Mynott, Latitude Law
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant is a British National (Overseas) born on the  12th
       May 1977. She has permission to appeal against the  decision  of
       the Respondent to refuse to vary her  leave  to  remain  and  to
       remove her from the  United  Kingdom  pursuant  to  s47  of  the
       Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

Background and Grounds of Appeal

    2. The Appellant's immigration history is not altogether clear  but
       it would appear that she first entered  the  UK  in  2001  as  a
       visitor. She was  thereafter  granted  various  extensions.  She
       married a Mr Wu Wei Han, a Chinese national in the UK as a  work
       permit holder, and in December 2003 she  was  granted  leave  in
       line with him, until the 8th August 2007.    In  June  2010  the
       Respondent received  an  application  for  settlement  from  the
       Appellant. This stated that she was living with her husband  and
       included a copy of  her  marriage  certificate  and  both  their
       passports.   The Respondent granted  Discretionary  Leave  until
       the 1st September 2013. In August 2013 she made  an  application
       for settlement, submitting that she had been in the  UK  for  12
       years  and  she  was  settled  here.    The  Respondent   sought
       clarification about the status of the Appellant's  marriage  and
       were told by reply that in fact the marriage had broken down  in
       July 2012 when he had  left  her  following  a  long  period  of
       trouble related to his gambling  and  violence.   A  letter  was
       supplied from a neighbour who claimed to  know  the  couple  who
       confirmed the account given.

    3. The Respondent refused the application. The  Appellant  did  not
       meet the requirements of Appendix FM  or  paragraph  276ADE  and
       there were no exceptional circumstances. The grounds  of  appeal
       repeated the account  of  marriage  to  Wu  Wei  Han,  violence,
       gambling and desertion.

    4. When the matter came before Judge Brunnen the  entire  basis  of
       the Appellant's case had changed. It was now  admitted  that  in
       fact she was in a relationship with Chinese national  Yong  Chen
       and that they had two children together, born in 2008 and  2010.
       It was submitted that she should be given leave to remain on the
       basis of this family life in the UK. The new evidence  was  that
       she had been living with this  man  since  2005.  The  Appellant
       denied having lied to the Home Office  in  earlier  applications
       and said that it had been her then representatives who  had  put
       forward the case that she was still in a subsisting relationship
       with Wu Wei Han.  She submitted that she and her  family  cannot
       return to her native Hong Kong, since her partner  and  children
       have no right to enter Hong Kong.  Various matters  relating  to
       the family's private life in the UK were set out.

    5. Judge Brunnen found that the Appellant  had  knowingly  deceived
       the Respondent when in 2010 she  had  made  an  application  for
       further leave to remain on  the  basis  that  her  marriage  was
       subsisting.  She had attempted to perpetrate the same  deception
       in 2013. Judge Brunnen notes that at approximately the same time
       the Appellant's partner Yong Chen had made an application to the
       Respondent, using different  solicitors,  and  he  had  made  no
       mention of her or the children.   He found that both  had  known
       full well that their  applications  were  being  advanced  on  a
       wholly false basis. It was not just the applications forms  that
       were untrue but  the  couple  had  procured  false  evidence  to
       support the applications, namely the letter from the  neighbour.
        Judge Brunnen concluded that this behaviour "utterly destroyed"
       their credibility as witnesses.

    6. The Appellant could not succeed  under  the  Immigration  Rules.
       It was submitted that the decision of the Respondent was "not in
       accordance  with  the  law"  because  the  Respondent  had   not
       considered the family life now relied upon. Judge Brunnen  found
       there to be nothing in this line of  argument:  "the  Respondent
       could not consider what the Appellant had concealed".    Further
       the Appellant could not show that the decision was flawed for  a
       failure to consider the  policy  on  Discretionary  Leave:  that
       policy did not avail her since it related to cases  where  there
       had been no change in circumstances since the last grant of  DL.
       Plainly there had been a significant change in circumstances  in
       this case.  The principal submission was  that  the  Appellant's
       removal would be an interference with her family life:

         "[Dr Mynott] submitted that as no decision has  yet  been  made  to
         remove Yong Chen or the children, the decisions in respect  of  the
         Appellant will therefore result in the separation of the family.  I
         do not accept this. Neither Yong Chen nor  the  children  have  any
         right to be in the UK. None of them has any outstanding appeal. The
         removal of the Appellant would not, contrary to the submissions  of
         Dr Mynott, amount to separating the Appellant from her partner  and
         children. There is no suggestion that the Respondent  would  remove
         her without also removing Yong Chen and the children. There  is  no
         reason why they cannot all go together"

    7. The determination goes on to address the 'best interests' of the
       children.  It was found that their best interests lay  in  being
       with their mother and father  and  that  removal  of  the  whole
       family would not  be  to  their  significant  detriment.   Judge
       Brunnen noted the evidence that the Appellant had  made  efforts
       to establish whether her family could join her in Hong Kong  and
       had discovered that they could not  do  so.  He  rejected  that:
       documentary evidence to that effect was lacking and he  was  not
       prepared to take her word for it.  Even if she  had  established
       such a practical difficulty there was no reason why  the  family
       could not relocate to mainland China.  The decision is found  to
       be proportionate in all the circumstances.


Error of Law

    8. Permission to appeal was sought on the ground  that  the  First-
       tier Tribunal erred in concluding that there was "no suggestion"
       that removal would not be with the children and Yong Chen.   The
       grounds set out the procedural hurdles that  would  need  to  be
       crossed if and  when  the  Respondent  took  enforcement  action
       against Yong Chen  and  the  children.  There  were  no  removal
       decisions  at  present  and  before  they  could  be  made   the
       Respondent would have to comply with  her  own  guidance.   This
       would all take some time and it could not therefore be said that
       the removal of the other family members could be affected  in  a
       reasonable time period. There would therefore be an interference
       with the family life if the Appellant were to be removed  before
       that. The Respondent had  not  given  any  assurances  that  the
       family would be removed together.

    9. Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge JM Lewis  on
       the  "issue  of  principle  of  the  removal  of  an   Appellant
       exercising family life with family members who are not removable
       within a reasonable timescale or at all".

   10. The Respondent opposed the appeal. It is pointed  out  that  the
       Respondent cannot be criticised for failing to take any of  this
       into account since it was never put before her. The Tribunal was
       entitled to take  the  view  it  did.  Before  me  Ms  Johnstone
       clarified that there was no  question  of  the  Appellant  being
       removed without the position of her children  being  considered;
       she submitted that the entire appeal was misconceived.


My Findings

   11. In his submissions  Dr  Mynott  explained  that  Yong  Chen  had
       outstanding representations under  the  'Legacy'  programme  and
       that he would wish to pursue  these.   This  would  involve  the
       Respondent reaching a decision,  taking  into  account  all  the
       relevant factors pertaining to that policy as well as Chapter 53
       and the best interests of the  children.  The  remaining  family
       members could not lawfully be forcibly removed  until  that  was
       done.

   12. It may well be the case that Yong Chen  has  a  case  under  the
       'Legacy' policy.   If he wishes to pursue that he can judicially
       review the Respondent's failure to  make  a  decision,  or  even
       write a letter chasing them up.  That is all,  as  I  understand
       it, uncontentious.    It  is  not  however  the  case  that  the
       decision to remove this  Appellant  will  necessarily  interfere
       with her family life. The children  and  her  partner  presently
       have no leave to remain in this country.   Judge Brunnen did not
       accept that there were any practical impediments to them joining
       her in Hong Kong, nor in mainland China; nor did he consider  it
       contrary to the children's  best  interests  to  go  with  their
       parents to China or Hong Kong. It is therefore open to  them  to
       make a voluntary departure.   With respect to  Dr  Mynott,   the
       question of whether the Respondent has taken removal  directions
       against them is  not  in  these  circumstances  relevant.   With
       respect to Judge Lewis, nor was any analysis about whether  they
       were "removable...at all".

   13. I am  not  satisfied  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in
       proceeding on the basis that  the  family  would  leave  the  UK
       together. Any fears that the  Appellant  may  have  about  being
       removed without her children have hopefully been put to rest  by
       Ms Johnstone's assurances before me that  the  Respondent  would
       not remove her without her children, or at least without  having
       regard to their welfare.



Decisions

   14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error of law
       and it is upheld.




                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                               7th July 2014
