
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/41707/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 7 October 2015                    |On 10 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      MRS OLUBUNMI  ELIZABETH AKINSANYA
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr I Ikchukwu, Almond Legals


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1) Judge of the First-tier Tribunal O'Garro allowed this appeal under  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.   The  Secretary
    of State now appeals against  this  decision.  Mrs  Olubunmi  Elizabeth
    Akinsanya, who was the appellant before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  is
    hereinafter referred to as "the applicant".

 2) The appeal was brought against a decision of  the  Secretary  of  State
    refusing to issue a residence card to the applicant as the spouse of  a
    French national.  The Secretary of State was  not  satisfied  that  the
    marriage between the applicant and her spouse was valid  in  law.   The
    couple had entered into a Nigerian customary marriage by proxy.  Before
    the First-tier Tribunal the applicant  was  unable  to  show  that  her
    marriage would be recognised under French law.  She would therefore not
    be regarded as her partner's spouse for the purpose of applying the EEA
    Regulations.  The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal went on to consider,
    as had the Secretary of State, whether the applicant was in  a  durable
    relationship with her partner.  The judge found the applicant  and  her
    partner to be credible witnesses.  Although at the time of the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal in May 2015 they had not been cohabiting
    for as long as  two  years,  they  had  provided  documentary  evidence
    showing they had been living at the same address  since  January  2014.
    This evidence  included  bank  statements  from  a  joint  account,  an
    electoral registration document, a joint insurance document and utility
    bills.  Evidence was also produced showing that the applicant  and  her
    partner were receiving infertility treatment.

 3) In the application for permission to  appeal  the  Secretary  of  State
    submitted that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  allowing
    the appeal outright.  The judge had found the  applicant  to  be  in  a
    durable relationship with a  partner  and  therefore  qualified  as  an
    extended or other family member.  However, in terms of regulation 17(4)
    of the EEA Regulations, the Secretary of State had a discretion  as  to
    whether to issue a  residence  card.   This  discretion  had  not  been
    exercised in relation to this applicant.  The appeal  should  therefore
    have been allowed to the limited extent that the Secretary  of  State's
    decision was not in  accordance  with  the  law  and  remitted  to  the
    Secretary of State for the discretion to be exercised.   Authority  for
    this was to be found in the case of Ihemedu (OFMs  -  meaning)  Nigeria
    [2011] UKUT 00341.  Permission was granted on this basis.

 4) Prior to the hearing before the Upper Tribunal a letter dated 27 August
    2015 was sent by the applicant's representatives acknowledging that the
    Secretary of State  had  a  discretion  under  regulation  17(4).   The
    Tribunal might therefore consider it appropriate to remit the matter to
    the Secretary of State for this discretion to be exercised on the basis
    of the finding by the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal that the parties
    were in a durable relationship.

 5) At the hearing before me both  parties  were  agreed  that  the  appeal
    should be allowed to this limited extent.  I will therefore  set  aside
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, while preserving the  findings
    of fact,  and  substitute  a  decision  remitting  the  matter  to  the
    Secretary of State for her discretion to be exercised under  regulation
    17(4) in relation to the issuing of a residence  card  to  an  extended
    family member.

 6) I note that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal was clearly  aware  of
    the case of YB (EEA reg 17(4) - proper  approach)  Ivory  Coast  [2008]
    UKAIT 00062.  One of the points arising  from  this  decision  is  that
    appeals of this nature should not be allowed  outright.   In  fact,  at
    paragraph 40 of the decision, the judge  said  no  more  by  way  of  a
    conclusion than that the applicant and her partner were  in  a  durable
    relationship that met the requirements of Regulation 8(5)  of  the  EEA
    Regulations.  It would seem  that  the  judge  thought  this  would  be
    sufficient to make it clear that the discretion  of  the  Secretary  of
    State was  still  to  be  exercised.   Notwithstanding  this,  however,
    permission to appeal was granted and, for the avoidance  of  doubt  and
    with the consent of the parties, I consider that the proper  course  is
    to substitute a decision allowing the appeal to the limited extent  set
    out above for the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

 7) In addition, I note that the decision by the  Secretary  of  State  was
    taken on 6 October 2014,  prior  to  the  2015  amendment  to  the  EEA
    Regulations  restricting  the  grounds  of  appeal.   Accordingly   the
    amendment has no application to this appeal.

Conclusions

 8) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

 9) I set aside the decision while preserving the findings made.

10) I re-make the decision in the appeal by  allowing  it  to  the  limited
    extent of recognising that the applicant is in a  durable  relationship
    with her partner and  therefore  falls  within  the  definition  of  an
    extended or other family member in terms of Regulation 8(5); the matter
    is remitted to  the  Secretary  of  State  for  her  discretion  to  be
    exercised as to whether to issue  a  residence  card  under  Regulation
    17(4).

Anonymity

11) The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for  anonymity.   I  have
    not been asked to make such an order and I see no reason  of  substance
    for doing so.

Fee Award   Note: This is not part of the determination

12) The First-tier Tribunal made a fee award in favour  of  the  applicant.
    As the decision of the Upper Tribunal allows  the  appeal,  albeit  not
    outright, the fee  award  will  not  fall  automatically.   I  was  not
    addressed by the parties on whether the fee award should be altered and
    accordingly I see no reason to make any change to the fee award made by
    the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed      Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans
