
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/41199/2014
                                                               IA/41200/2014
                                                               IA/41201/2014
                                                               IA/41202/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 November 2015                   |On 21 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                LORD TURNBULL
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                                     MB
                                     SB
                                     ZB
                                     SHB
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Naft (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Emozie (Dylan Conrad Kreolle Solicitors)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State against  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeals of the Appellants, who are
    a family comprising mother, father and two daughters, all  citizens  of
    Algeria, against the decisions to  remove  them  as  overstayers  under
    section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 of 30 December  2014,
    their applications for leave to remain on human rights  grounds  having
    been refused.

 2. The application leading to this appeal was made on 31 October 2012  and
    emphasised the  elder  daughter's  length  of  residence,  particularly
    noting the fact that she did not speak French or  the  form  of  Arabic
    spoken in schools, which would set  her  back  in  her  education.  The
    application was refused because the Secretary of State did  not  accept
    that the adult family members and youngest daughter would face  serious
    obstacles to  integration  in  Algeria,  and  it  would  not  in  those
    circumstances be unreasonable for  the  elder  daughter  to  join  them
    there. The immigration history provided with the Secretary  of  State's
    appeal bundle before the First-tier Tribunal  recorded  an  application
    being made on 22 October 2008 which was refused on 14  September  2009,
    then reconsidered and the refusal decision  maintained  on  1  February
    2010. The application of October 2012 had been refused  in  a  decision
    that did not carry the right of appeal on 25 April 2013.  On  7  August
    2013 each family member was issued with form IS151A (the form notifying
    its subject that they are liable to removal).

 3. The witness statements of the parents set out that the  father  entered
    the country on 1 October 1999 on a visa to play judo: given  the  level
    of violence in Algeria at the time, he  decided  to  remain  here.  His
    future wife joined him here on 11 September 2004 having  entered  as  a
    visitor, and they married on 6 September 2007. The elder  daughter  was
    born here on 30 July 2005, and  the  younger  on  10  April  2012.  The
    children were well established here and as time went on he  had  become
    to feel increasingly protective of their daughters;  he  strongly  felt
    that they all belonged in the United Kingdom, having  made  their  home
    here. It was noted  that  the  elder  daughter  would  be  eligible  to
    register as a British citizen from July 2015. The  family  often  spoke
    Arabic at home, but did so in a dialect inconsistent with that  broadly
    spoken in the education system in Algeria.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal noted that the facts underlying the appeal were
    undisputed, and that the parents had lived in the  United  Kingdom  for
    fifteen, and ten and a half years, respectively,  and  that  the  elder
    daughter had lived here for almost a decade.  Her  acting  deputy  head
    teacher  had  written  that  she  fully  participated  in  school  life
    including after-school clubs and activities; she had made many positive
    friendships  and  had  been  given  the  responsibility  of   being   a
    "playground buddy" in Keystage 1. The First-tier Tribunal noted that it
    had undertaken its own research into the Algerian  dialects  referenced
    by the parents in their witness statements via the public domain source
    Wikimedia, which had confirmed that Algerian Arabic was different  from
    the more classical Arabic used for official purposes,  and  that  those
    who were proficient  in  the  former  might  well  struggle  to  access
    knowledge and  information  sought  to  be  imparted  via  the  latter.
    According to her parents, she would be put into reception classes  with
    much younger children because she  lacked  the  language  skills  which
    would be extremely  distressing  for  her,  seriously  prejudicing  her
    educational development. Applying the guidance in EV  (Philippines)  it
    was in her best interests to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  without
    having her education disrupted.

 5. As to the parents' situation, they were overstayers in this country who
    had sought to regularise their immigration status since 2008,  but  the
    Home  Office  had  delayed  in   resolving   the   matter.   In   these
    circumstances,  there   was   nothing   to   displace   the   statutory
    identification of  the  public  interest  in  section  117B(6)  of  the
    Nationality Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  as  not  requiring  the
    departure of a parent with responsibility for a qualifying child  (i.e.
    in this case, one whose departure from  the  United  Kingdom  would  be
    unreasonable given that they had resided here for seven years).

 6. The Secretary of State challenged the decision, on the grounds that

      a) as shown by EG Nigeria [2008] UKAIT 00015 it was unwise and wrong
         to conduct post-hearing research online without giving the parties
         the opportunity to comment upon it: and this undermined the
         conclusion regarding language difficulties in Algeria;

      b) the First-tier Tribunal had treated the child's best interests as
         incapable of displacement by other factors;

      c) Insufficient reasoning was given for the relevance of the delay in
         the Secretary of State's decision making.

 7. Judge Zucker granted permission to appeal on behalf of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 2 September 2015, finding each of those grounds arguable.

  Findings and reasons

 8. The Immigration Rules provide, materially, that:

         "Requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain on the
         grounds of private life

         276ADE.  The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
         remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the
         date of application, the applicant: ...

             (iii)     has lived continuously in the UK for at least 20
             years (discounting any period of imprisonment); or

             (iv)      is under the age of 18 years and has lived
             continuously in the UK for at least 7 years (discounting any
             period of imprisonment) and it would not be reasonable to
             expect the applicant to leave the UK; or ....

             (vi) is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously in the
             UK for less than 20 years (discounting any period of
             imprisonment) but there would be very significant obstacles to
             the applicant's integration into the country to which he would
             have to go if required to leave the UK."

 9. Given the finding by the First-tier Tribunal that the elder  daughter's
    departure from the United Kingdom would be unreasonable, she  satisfies
    Rule 276ADE(iv): but that did not resolve the status of the rest of the
    family, whose prospects, absent cogent  evidence  of  an  inability  to
    integrate back in Algeria, rest on a consideration of the case  outside
    the Rules, an  exercise  which  must  give  central  attention  to  the
    statutory  considerations  identified  in  117B  of   the   Nationality
    Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  addressing  the  public   interest
    considerations applicable in all such cases, which sets out:

         "(6)     In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
         the public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child (has lived in the  United
             Kingdom for a continuous period of seven years or more), and

             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom."

10. The First-tier Tribunal's  conclusion,  in  the  light  of  this  clear
    statement of the balance to be struck where removal of  a  minor  would
    contravene their best interests and thus not be  reasonable,  was  that
    the family as a whole should remain here.

11. Christopher Clarke LJ stated in EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874:

         "34.     In determining whether or not,  in  a  case  such  as  the
         present, the  need  for  immigration  control  outweighs  the  best
         interests of  the  children,  it  is  necessary  to  determine  the
         relative strength of the  factors  which  make  it  in  their  best
         interests to remain here; and also to take account of  any  factors
         that point the other way.

         35.      A decision as to what is in the best interests of children
         will depend on a number of factors such as (a) their age;  (b)  the
         length of time that they have been here; (c)  how  long  they  have
         been in education; (c) what stage their education has reached;  (d)
         to what extent they have become distanced from the country to which
         it is proposed that they return; (e) how renewable their connection
         with it may be; (f) to  what  extent  they  will  have  linguistic,
         medical or other difficulties in adapting to life in that  country;
         and (g) the extent to which the course proposed will interfere with
         their family life or their rights (if they  have  any)  as  British
         citizens.

         36.      In a sense the tribunal is concerned with how emphatic  an
         answer falls to be given  to  the  question:  is  it  in  the  best
         interests of the child to remain? The longer  the  child  has  been
         here, the more advanced (or critical) the stage of  his  education,
         the looser his ties with the country  in  question,  and  the  more
         deleterious the consequences of his return, the greater the  weight
         that falls into one side of the scales. If it is overwhelmingly  in
         the child's best interests that he should not return, the  need  to
         maintain immigration control may  well  not  tip  the  balance.  By
         contrast if it is in the child's best interests to remain, but only
         on balance (with some factors pointing the other way),  the  result
         may be the opposite.

         37.      In the balance on the other side there falls to  be  taken
         into account the strong weight to be given to the need to  maintain
         immigration control in pursuit of the economic  well-being  of  the
         country and the fact that, ex hypothesi,  the  applicants  have  no
         entitlement to remain. The immigration history of the  parents  may
         also be relevant e.g.  if  they  are  overstayers,  or  have  acted
         deceitfully."

12. In this appeal the First-tier  Tribunal  gave  clear  reasons  for  its
    conclusions,  wholly  consistent  with  the  guidance   given   in   EV
    (Philippines) in relation to age, length of  residence,  the  stage  of
    education reached and any linguistic difficulties that might  be  faced
    abroad, and consonant too with the statutory steer in section  117B(6).
    Those reasons were that the elder daughter's best interests lay  firmly
    in  favour  of  her  continued  residence  here  given   the   language
    disadvantage that she would face if she had to continue  her  education
    in Algeria, and bearing in mind that her length of residence  was  such
    that she was almost at the stage where  she  could  apply  for  British
    citizenship in her own right. The Tribunal properly had regard  to  the
    parents' status as overstayers, whilst noting that they had  sought  to
    regularise  their  status  repeatedly  since  2008.  There  is  nothing
    unlawful in that striking of the proportionality balance.

13. We do not consider that the post hearing research had  any  prejudicial
    bearing on the appeal. As is stated in the headnote to EG (post-hearing
    internet research) Nigeria [2008] UKAIT 00015, "[i]t is most unwise for
    a judge to conduct post-hearing research, on the internet or otherwise,
    into the factual issues which have to be decided in a case.  To  derive
    evidence from  post-hearing  research  on  the  internet  and  to  base
    conclusions on that evidence without giving the parties the opportunity
    to comment on it is wrong". We  would  not  encourage  such  enquiries,
    which are likely to leave the losing party feeling aggrieved, at  least
    absent an opportunity being given to comment on any ensuing research by
    the invitation of written submissions.

14. Here we appreciate  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  placed  in  a
    difficult position by the Secretary  of  State's  decision  not  to  be
    represented before it, in a case where the educational difficulties the
    elder daughter would face if relocating to Algeria had been  relied  on
    in her various applications. At the hearing before us no positive  case
    has been put on behalf of the Secretary of State (whose  case  on  this
    point did not extend to checking the content of the website in question
    or providing evidence in rebuttal)  to  suggest  that  the  information
    revealed by the Judge's enquiries was inaccurate or susceptible to some
    contrary  inference  as  to  the  elder  daughter's  ability  to  fully
    participate in the education system than that afforded it. Besides,  it
    seems to us that those  enquiries  did  no  more  than  provide  useful
    support for the oral evidence to precisely the  same  effect  regarding
    the difference between the dialect of Algerian spoken  by  this  family
    and that commonly taught in schools.

15. Nor do we consider that the issue of  delay  was  legally  flawed.  The
    history of applications made by the family since 2008 is set out in the
    chronology provided in the Secretary  of  State's  own  appeal  bundle,
    which  indicates  that  one  refusal  by  the  Home   Office   required
    reconsideration,  and  another  denied  the  right  of   appeal   until
    subsequent judicial review proceedings were settled  on  the  basis  of
    access to the Tribunal being agreed. In  the  light  of  that  history,
    representing a period in which both children but particularly the elder
    daughter had increasingly set down roots in this  country,  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's observation that the family, whilst being  overstayers,
    had nevertheless sought to regularise their status over  a  significant
    length of time, was a perfectly proper one, and did not require further
    reasoning.

16. We find no error of law in the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    which accordingly stands.

  Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error
    of law.

    The appeal is dismissed.

    We note that an anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal and
    for consistency, and  having  regard  to  the  best  interests  of  the
    children and the interests of justice, we do likewise, now pursuant  to
    Rule 14(1)(b) of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


[pic]
Signed:     Date: 3 November 2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes

