
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41584/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 21 July 2014                                 |On 05 August 2014          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON


                                   Between

                              mr manish gulati
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Q S Anisuddin
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a national of India who was born on 27 February  1984.
    He applied on 1 May 2013 for a residence  card  as  confirmation  of  a
    right to reside  in  the  United  Kingdom,  but  that  application  was
    refused.  He appealed the decision and the appeal was  heard  before  a
    First-tier Tribunal Judge who dismissed it.  The judge  found  that  he
    was satisfied that the acknowledged marriage between the appellant  and
    his wife is a marriage of convenience.

 2. The appellant sought permission to appeal that decision and  permission
    was granted.  The judge doing so found that the First-tier Judge made a
    clear finding as to the credibility of the appellant's wife but did not
    do so in relation to the  appellant  himself.   In  the  absence  of  a
    sufficient and balanced analysis  of  the  factors  to  be  weighed  in
    reaching a conclusion as to the appellant's  credibility,  an  arguable
    error of law was disclosed in  relation  to  the  conclusion  that  the
    marriage was one of convenience.

 3. In a Rule 24 response the respondent submitted that the grounds seeking
    permission to appeal were nothing more than  a  disagreement  with  the
    findings of the judge.

The Hearing before me.

 4. Before me Mr Anisuddin on behalf  of  the  appellant  argued  that  the
    appeal ought to have been allowed given that the  judge  accepted  that
    there were very few discrepancies between the appellant and his wife at
    interview and the judge's finding that such discrepancies were  in  any
    event not material.  The judge found that the appellant  and  his  wife
    are married and that they "stay together".  He also found the  wife  to
    be a credible witness but made no finding of credibility in respect  of
    the appellant himself other than to say that he had grave  concerns  in
    respect of him.

 5. Mr Anisuddin further  argued  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  that  the
    authority of Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage of  convenience)  Greece
    [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC) showed that cohabitation as  man  and  wife  is
    inconsistent with a marriage of convenience.   Having  found  that  the
    couple are living together the judge erred in law to find the  marriage
    was one of convenience.

My Deliberations

 6. The guidance of the European Communities Commission is appended to  the
    decision of Papajorgji and contains  a  definition  of  a  marriage  of
    convenience. Such is said to be, for the purposes of the  Directive,  a
    marriage contracted for the sole purpose of enjoying the right of  free
    movement and residence under the Directive that someone would not  have
    otherwise.  Papajorgji makes clear that  there  is  no  burden  at  the
    outset of an application on a claimant to demonstrate that  a  marriage
    to an EEA national is not one of convenience. The case of IS (marriages
    of convenience) Serbia [2008] UKAIT 31 establishes only that  there  is
    an evidential burden on the claimant  to  address  evidence  justifying
    reasonable  suspicion  that  the  marriage  is  entered  into  for  the
    predominant purpose of securing residence rights.

 7. Paragraph 14 of Papajorgji sets out that there is no  definition  given
    of marriage of convenience, but that phrase has been construed  in  the
    context of the Immigration Rules as a marriage entered into without the
    intention of matrimony or cohabitation and for the primary  purpose  of
    securing admission to the country.

 8. At paragraph 20 of Papajorgji in concurring with the  AIT's  conclusion
    in IS the Tribunal set out that there is no burden on an  applicant  in
    an EU case to prove that a marriage is not one of convenience until the
    respondent raises the issue by evidence.  If there was such evidence it
    is  then  for  the  applicant  to  produce  evidence  to  address   the
    suspicions.  Such an approach can be described as one of an  evidential
    burden in the first  place  on  the  respondent  which  shifts  to  the
    claimant in the light of the relevant information, rather than a formal
    legal burden.

My Conclusions

 9. The judge had the benefit of hearing evidence from  the  appellant  and
    his spouse.  The judge found that the appellant arrived in  the  United
    Kingdom as a family visitor.  His leave was due to expire  in  November
    2012.  Although the determination refers to him  having  arrived  on  7
    July 2012 he did so probably a month earlier, because in the very  next
    paragraph it is said that after he  arrived  he  was  due  to  marry  a
    Portuguese lady in July, according to the interview record.

10. The judge noted therefore that this meant that within the  first  month
    of being in the UK the appellant intended to marry another woman which,
    according to the appellant, would have been a love marriage.   He  then
    met his current wife in mid September of the same year, proposed to her
    within a  few  weeks,  and  they  began  living  together.   They  were
    interviewed almost immediately after that.

11. The judge found that although there  were  some  discrepancies  between
    their answers at interview they were not material.  The judge  referred
    also to a text message in the interview about needing to  get  married.
    The judge had not been provided  with  a  copy  of  that  text  or  the
    interview with the appellant where it was discussed.  He said  that  he
    gave no weight to the text message as he could not assess its  context,
    who it was from and who it was actually sent  to  etc.   He  did  note,
    however, that the appellant and his wife gave  conflicting  information
    as to how their engagement was celebrated  and  when,  but  there  were
    other  matters  about  which  they  were  in  agreement.    The   judge
    acknowledged that this was a difficult case to decide and he found that
    the appellant and his wife "stay together".  He found  the  appellant's
    spouse to be clear in her evidence, that she was  a  credible  witness,
    and he accepted that evidence.

12. The judge then went on to write that although he found the  appellant's
    spouse to be genuine, he had grave concerns in respect of the appellant
    himself.  In context, and from  what  he  set  out  afterwards,  it  is
    abundantly clear that the judge did not find  the  appellant  to  be  a
    credible witness. Paragraph 48 sets out those  reasons.   He  concluded
    that the matters set out there all point to a marriage  of  convenience
    entered into by the appellant solely to remain in the  United  Kingdom.
    He did not believe that that was his wife's intention and beliefs,  but
    found that she has been deceived by her husband.

13. The judge was correct to ask himself whether he was satisfied  that  it
    is more probable than not that this is a marriage of convenience in the
    light of the totality of the  information  before  him,  including  the
    assessment of the appellant's answers  and  any  information  provided.
    For the reasons given he found that this was a marriage of convenience,
    albeit that it was only the appellant who  entered  into  the  marriage
    with that motive.  The fact that the couple stay together, in  context,
    is saying no more than that they are living under the  same  roof.  The
    decision is not perverse or one that the judge was not entitled to come
    to on the facts as found by him.

Decision

14. For the above reasons the decision of the  First-tier  Judge  does  not
    disclose a material error of law or other good reason for the  decision
    to be overturned.  The decision to dismiss the appeal of the  appellant
    therefore stands.

15. No anonymity direction has been made previously and  none  was  sought.
    The circumstances do not warrant such a direction being made now.




Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton


