
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/41796/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 4th August 2016                        |On 6th September 2016             |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD

                                   Between

                       mrs ONOHILI AGNES ALIU OLUSEGUN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Okoro, Legal representative
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a  national  of  Nigeria  who.  appealed  against  the
    Respondent's decision of 26th October 2014 to refuse  to  issue  her  a
    permanent residence card.  That appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Fletcher-Hill and dismissed in  a  decision  promulgated  on  4th
    December 2015.

 2. Grounds of application were submitted, noting in  particular  that  the
    judge had said there was still little evidence  for  the  period  2009,
    2010 relating to the fact that her spouse was working.  The evidence of
    the Appellant's spouse was that he was in salaried employment in the UK
    at all relevant times and there was no finding by the judge that he was
    not a credible witness.  As such it was said that the judge  had  erred
    in law.

 3. Permission to appeal was initially refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Pooler but granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Allen on the basis  that  it
    was arguable that the evidence taken as a whole was  such  as  to  show
    that the Sponsor had been  working  continuously  during  the  relevant
    period.  Thus the matter came before me on the above date.

 4. Before me Mr Okoro relied on his grounds and said that  the  judge  had
    not rejected any of the evidence  which  showed  that  the  Appellant's
    spouse had been exercising treaty rights and accordingly  the  decision
    should be set aside and the appeal allowed outright.

 5. For the Home Office Mr Tarlow relied on the Rule 24 notice  which  said
    that the judge had found the evidence provided did not  show  that  the
    Sponsor had been working in the UK for  a  continuous  period  of  five
    years.

 6. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

 7. The judge noted that at the hearing evidence  was  given  by  both  the
    Appellant and the Sponsor who adopted their statements at pages 9 to 11
    and 12 to 15 of the Appellant's  bundle.   The  Appellant  adopted  her
    statement and there was no  cross-examination.   The  judge  noted  the
    evidence given by the Sponsor in some detail.

 8. The judge commences his consideration of the evidence and  findings  of
    fact at paragraph 37 and says in paragraph 38 that  the  Appellant  has
    not demonstrated her spouse is here in accordance with the Rules.   The
    judge says there was "insufficient  evidence"  that  the  EEA  national
    spouse had been exercising treaty rights continuously.  The  difficulty
    with this conclusion and the decision is that  at  no  point  does  the
    judge reject the evidence given by the Appellant and Sponsor or  indeed
    indicate that there is any problem with any of the  documents  produced
    on the Appellant's behalf.  There are no findings of fact at paragraphs
    37 to 42 inclusive.  When the judge refers to  "insufficient  evidence"
    this is a conclusion drawn from a complete lack of any actual  findings
    or reasoning. Devoid of proper reasoning the decision cannot stand  and
    it is necessary to set it aside in its entirety.

 9. I agree with the submissions made by Mr Okoro.  There seems to me to be
    no useful purpose in sending the case back to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for factual findings to be made - the judge did not reject any of  the
    evidence given by the Appellant or her spouse, merely finding  that  it
    was insufficient.  In the circumstances I see no  good  reason  not  to
    accept the evidence of the Appellant and the Sponsor as true.  On  that
    finding, as the grounds point out, their evidence is clear enough  that
    the EEA national spouse had been exercising treaty rights  continuously
    for five years as a qualified person.  That being so  it  follows  that
    this appeal must be allowed.



Notice of Decision

10. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

11. I set aside the decision.

12. I remake the decision in the appeal by allowing it.

13. There is no need for an anonymity direction.


Signed                              Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald

