

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
IA/41736/2014

                                               IA/41734/2014

                                               IA/41731/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                    |  Decision and Reasons           |
|On: 19 February 2016                     |Promulgated                      |
|                                         |On: 30 March 2016                |
|                                         |                                 |
|                                         |                                 |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between

                              MR hira pun purja
                                  hira Pun
                               sion pun purja
                       (No anonymity directions made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                THE SECETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:          Mr M Puar of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellants who are a family and nationals of Nepal, appeal to  the
   First-tier Tribunal was against the decisions of the respondent  dated  3
   October  2014  to  refuse  the  first  appellant's  and  his   dependents
   applications for leave to remain as a Tier  2  (General)  Migrant,  under
   paragraph 245 HD of the Immigration Rules.



2. First-tier Tribunal Miles dismissed all  the  appellants'  appeals  in  a
   decision dated 14 May 2015. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  Coyler  refused
   permission to appeal but subsequently Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Archer
   in a decision dated 12 October 2015 granted the appellant  permission  to
   appeal to the Upper Tribunal, it being found  to  be  arguable  that  the
   First-tier Tribunal Judge erred when he found that there is no breach  of
   Article 8 in relation to the  appellant's  family  lives  but  failed  to
   consider the private lives of the appellants, as it  was  raised  in  the
   grounds of appeal.




3.  Thus the appeal came before me.



       First-tier Tribunal's Findings


   4. The First-tier Tribunal made the following findings which I summarise.
      The appellants are citizens of Nepal  and  as  the  second  and  third
      appellant's appeals are dependent on  that  of  the  first  appellant,
      therefore the first appellant's appeal will be considered and he  will
      be referred to as, the appellant.






   5. The appellant has not provided  a  valid  certificate  of  sponsorship
      reference number and there was no record to  show  that  he  had  been
      assigned such a certificate at the time of his  application.  On  that
      basis, no points could be awarded under Appendix A of the  Immigration
      Rules although it was accepted  that  the  application  satisfied  the
      requirements of appendix B and appendix C. Accordingly therefore,  the
      application was refused  on  the  grounds  specified,  from  which  it
      followed that the applications of his wife  and  son  also  could  not
      succeed.




   6. There is no interference with family life which they  currently  enjoy
      together in the United Kingdom. The effect of the decision will be  to
      enable  them  to  enjoy  their  family  life  in  their   country   of
      nationality. Accordingly, the decision is not in breach of the  rights
      of the appellant and his wife and son under Article 8 of the  European
      Convention on Human Rights and it  follows  from  all  these  findings
      therefore that the appeals fail on all grounds.





       The grounds of appeal



7. The appellant in his grounds of  appeal  states  the  following  which  I
   summarise. He was given the false assurance by his employer that he  will
   be issued with a new sponsorship licence as soon as they  were  allocated
   by the respondent. The respondent by not  providing  it,  is  beyond  his
   control. He tried his utmost to find a new sponsor to regularise his stay
   in the United Kingdom but unfortunately his sponsor  failed  to  consider
   his situation and was unable to provide him with this licence on the  due
   date. Further to that, he is  currently  experiencing  a  very  uncertain
   situation in terms of his family  and  day-to-day  life.  Therefore,  the
   circumstances under which he has been going through our compelling enough
   to use the discretion by the Tribunal in his favour.




8. In relation to Article 8 the First-tier Tribunal failed to  consider  his
   private life and family life which  he  has  established  in  the  United
   Kingdom for the last six  years.  There  are  number  of  factors  to  be
   considered in his favour. Since his  arrival  he  is  very  much  closely
   associated with his Society and has made many friends who are  very  much
   involved in his day-to-day activities and also with the social life.  The
   First-tier Tribunal failed to consider his family life as he has  a  wife
   and their three-year-old baby who accompanied him to the United  Kingdom.
   Furthermore, he is of good character, has resided lawfully in the  United
   Kingdom and has supported himself financially. He will contribute to  the
   United Kingdom  economy.  There  are  various  compelling  factors  which
   already exist in his favour such as completion of his degree, close  ties
   with the Society and his family who lives in the United Kingdom.

          Rule 24 Response


9. The Rule 24  response  by  the  respondent  states  that  the  First-tier
   Tribunal made no error  of  law  because  he  dealt  with  Article  8  in
   paragraph 13 and found that the appellant has been in the United  Kingdom
   for a limited time and that the appellant would leave the United  Kingdom
   as a family unit.




       The hearing




10.  I heard submissions from both parties as to whether there is an error
   of law in the determination of the First-tier Tribunal, the full notes of
   which are in my Record of Proceedings.




       Decision on the error of law




11. There is no dispute that the appellant does not  meet  the  requirements
   of the Immigration Rules. I accept that the Judge  in  the  determination
   did not specifically consider the appellant's private life. In respect of
   family life, the Judge found that the  appellant  would  be  returned  to
   Nepal with his wife and  child  to  continue  his  family  life  in  that
   country. The appellant complains that the Judge did not take into account
   his private life in the United Kingdom and  the  permission  Judge  found
   that as the appellant raised private life in his grounds of appeal,  this
   should have been considered.




12. It was made clear in Gulshan [2013] UKUT00640 (IAC) that the  Article  8
   assessment  shall  only  be  carried  out  where  there  are   compelling
   circumstances not recognised by the Immigration Rules. The Judge  in  his
   determination considered that the  appellant's  circumstances  fully.  At
   paragraph 8 he sets out that the appellant entered the United Kingdom  in
   October 2009 valid leave as a student until 18 April 2011. He was granted
   further leave in that capacity until 30 August 2012 and then as a Tier  1
   Post Study Migrant until 10 September 2014. On 9 September 2014  he  made
   an application and identified  his  wife  and  minor  child,  a  son,  as
   dependents. It is implicit that these facts alerted the Judge to the fact
   that the appellant's immigration status in the United Kingdom has  always
   been precarious and any private life established will carry  very  little
   weight.




13. The Judge having made his findings that the appellant has not  meet  the
   requirements of the Immigration Rules, was entitled not to  consider  the
   appellant's case under Article 8, in respect  of  his  and  his  family's
   private life.




14. From the determination, there seem to be no factors put forward  by  the
   appellant as to why his private life, in the six years that he  has  been
   in the United  Kingdom,  should  be  respected.  The  appellant  has  not
   identified in his grounds of appeal as to why his  circumstances  are  so
   unusual that they amount to compelling and exceptional  circumstances  to
   be considered granting him and his family leave  to  remain  outside  the
   Immigration Rules and in respect of their private lives in this country.




15. The appellant has said that his private life consists  of  his  friends,
   Society and his social activities in the United Kingdom. He also says  he
   has some family  in  this  country.  None  of  these  amount  factors  to
   exceptional or compelling circumstances that he should be  granted  leave
   to remain pursuant to Article 8 when he cannot meet the  requirements  of
   the Immigration Rules which are Article 8 compliant. There is no gap that
   requires consideration, between  where  the  Immigration  Rules  end  and
   Article 8 begins.



16. In the case of PD and Others (Article 8 - conjoined family  claims)  Sri
   Lanka [2016] UKUT 00108 (IAC) it was stated that "the  general  principle
   in Article 8 ECHR cases it is appropriate for the decision maker and,  on
   appeal, the  Tribunal  to  consider  first  whether  the  person's  claim
   satisfies the relevant requirements of the Rules: The  Bossade  principle
   refers and see also paragraph 1.1 of the IDI  (supra).   We  are  further
   satisfied that the approach which we favour finds support in the decision
   in EV (Philippines) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2014]
   EWCA Civ 874. We refer particularly to the  connection  between  children
   and parents which Christopher Clarke LJ  made  in  [33].   The  Court  of
   Appeal found that the overall conclusion of the tribunal judge which was,
   in substance, that  it  was  reasonable  to  expect  the  three  children
   concerned to continue to live with their  parents  and  that  all  should
   return together to their country of origin, with the public  interest  in
   the maintenance of firm immigration control prevailing,  was  sustainable
   in law.  In the language of Lewison LJ, to remain with their parents  was
   "obviously" in their best interest: [60].




17. Having considered the determination as  a  whole  I  conclude  that  the
   Judge has not erred in law in his evaluation of  the  appellant's  appeal
   pursuant to Article 8. The appellant does not meet  the  requirements  of
   the Immigration Rules which are Article 8 compliant  and  no  differently
   constituted Tribunal would come to a different conclusion on the facts in
   this case.




18. I therefore uphold the decision of the first-tier  Tribunal  as  I  find
   there is no material error of law.


      DECISION

        Appeals dismissed for all the appellants.


Signed by

Mrs S Chana
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                      28th day of March 2016








