
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
IA/41115/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On August 31, 2017                     |    On September 11,2017            |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                               mr imitaz nawaz
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Uppal, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr Armstrong, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I do not make an anonymity direction in this appeal.

 2. The appellant is a Pakistani national.  He  first  entered  the  United
    Kingdom in January 2010 and on March 31, 2011 he  made  an  application
    for leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student  but  the  respondent
    refused this on January 17, 2013.  The respondent had previously served
    the appellant with form IS151A on March 2005.

 3. On June 6, 2013 the appellant lodged his current application for an EEA
    residence card as the spouse  of  an  EEA  national  exercising  treaty
    rights.  In order to succeed under the Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006 the appellant had to satisfy  Regulation  7  and
    Regulation 17 of the 2006 Regulations.

 4. The respondent refused this application on March 15, 2014  as  she  was
    not satisfied  that  proxy  marriages  were  legal  or  possible  under
    Ghanaian law.

 5. The appellant lodged grounds  of  appeal  on  October  15,  2014  under
    Section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  and
    Regulation 26 of the 2006 Regulations.

 6. His appeal initially came before Judge of  the  First-tier  Telford  on
    June 15, 2016 and in a decision promulgated on August 5, 2016 the Judge
    refused the appeal under both the 2016 Regulations and Article 8  ECHR.
    The appellant appealed that  decision  but  permission  to  appeal  was
    refused by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Saffer on January 9,  2017.
    Grounds were renewed to the Upper Tribunal but these  too  met  with  a
    refusal on March 17, 2017 when Upper Tribunal Judge  Jackson  concluded
    there was no merit to the appeal.

 7. The appellant, through his solicitors, then sought  a  judicial  review
    and on May 23, 2017 the High Court found it was arguable that the Upper
    Tribunal's decision to refuse to give  permission  to  appeal  and  the
    original determination promulgated on August 15, 2016 were wrong in law
    firstly in light of the recent Court of Appeal decision in Awuku v SSHD
    [2017] EWCA Civ 178, secondly the First-tier Judge's  approach  to  the
    validity of the proxy marriage was wrong  in  law  and/or  based  on  a
    fundamental misunderstanding of  the  evidence  and  thirdly  that  the
    decision in Sala (EFMs: right of appeal) [2016] UKUT  00411  (IAC)  was
    wrongly decided.

 8. The matter then went  before  Vice  President  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
    Ockelton who granted permission to appeal in light of  the  High  Court
    decision.  The matter was listed before myself on the  above  date  and
    both parties were represented.

 9. In the intervening period the respondent had filed a Rule  24  response
    dated 25 July, albeit that response merely took  issue  with  the  fact
    that she had not received the appropriate documents.

    SUBMISSIONS

10. Mr Uppal relied on the grounds of appeal and submitted  that  documents
    contained in the respondent's bundle  showed  that  this  was  a  valid
    marriage  and  that  evidence  had  been  handed  in  at  the   hearing
    demonstrating proxy marriages were valid.  The reason the marriage  had
    taken place by proxy in Guinea was that the appellant's  wife's  family
    originated from Guinea and due to the fact that the parties were unable
    to travel to France to be married they underwent a  proxy  marriage  in
    Guinea instead.  At the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  the  appellant's
    wife had not attended due to illness and the appellant  was  not  asked
    any questions  by  the  Judge  after  his  statement  was  tendered  in
    evidence.  The respondent was unrepresented by at the hearing.

11. Mr Uppal submitted that  as  a  valid  marriage  certificate  had  been
    produced and a presidential decree confirmed that proxy  marriages  are
    valid it was now up to the respondent to demonstrate that the  marriage
    was not valid.  He submitted the Judge had mistakenly assumed that  the
    registrar was the same person as the proxy albeit he  referred  to  the
    wrong person in paragraph 13 of his decision. The Judge also mistakenly
    assumed the proxy and the registrar were the same person when  in  fact
    the proxy was the appellant's wife's maternal uncle.  Their  names  are
    similar but their surnames are spelt differently with  the  appellant's
    maternal uncle being  Moussa  Tarae  and  the  registrar  being  Moussa
    Tarore.

12. Alternatively, if the Tribunal found there was no error in  respect  of
    this first issue he invited me to adjourn the Sala point in view of the
    fact the President of the Tribunal had referred the  issue  of  whether
    national law precluded an appeal to a court  or  Tribunal  against  the
    decision of the executive refusing to  issue  a  residence  card  to  a
    person claiming to be an extended family  member  as  being  compatible
    with a directive to the CJEU.  Mr  Uppal  handed  up  the  decision  of
    Banger (Unmarried Partner of British National) [2017] UKUT 00125 (IAC).
     This case was heard by President the Honourable Mr  Justice  McCluskey
    and Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington and they made a reference  to
    the CJEU and stayed those proceedings.   Mr  Uppal  invited  me  to  do
    likewise.

13. Mr Armstrong opposed the grounds  of  appeal  and  submitted  that  the
    appellant's wife did not attend to give evidence and  although  it  was
    said she was unwell there was no medical evidence since January 2016 to
    support her absence.  The presidential decree  was  a  photocopy  of  a
    document on a desk  that  had  not  been  provided  to  the  respondent
    immediately prior to the date of hearing and its authenticity could not
    be confirmed.   Additionally,  even  if  the  presidential  decree  was
    correct and valid it makes it clear that in order for a proxy  marriage
    to be valid the proxy must be a close family member  of  both  parties.
    As the appellant's wife had not attended  and  there  was  no  evidence
    about who the proxy was, save what was being submitted, the  Judge  was
    entitled to find that the presidential decree was not met and therefore
    the Judge was entitled to find that the proxy marriage was not  lawful.
    The Judge's findings which were  contained  in  [13]  to  [15]  of  the
    decision were well reasoned and open to him.

14. With regard to whether there was a  right  of  appeal  as  an  extended
    family member he relied on the decision of Sala.  It was a  matter  for
    the Tribunal whether they felt that issue should  be  stayed  or  dealt
    with today.  If it was dealt with today he submitted there was no right
    of appeal.

15. Having heard the representations I reserved my decision.

    FINDINGS

16. Permission to appeal had been granted by Vice President  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal Ockelton who followed the decision of the High Court  who  had
    given permission on May 23, 2017.

17. Initially when I considered these papers it appeared that this  may  be
    one of those cases which had been dealt with under the decision  of  TA
    and Others (Kareem explained) Ghana [2014]  UKUT  00316  but  a  closer
    examination of the Judge's decision reveals that this was not something
    which was at the forefront of his mind.  This was an appeal which  came
    before him on June 15, 2016.  Although Article 8 was addressed  by  the
    Judge in the hearing it is no longer  an  issue  in  this  appeal.   At
    paragraph 2 the Judge stated:

         "The issues here were whether the couple had conformed to the  laws
         of Guinea in regard to  how  to  properly  exercise  the  right  to
         marriage by proxy which was thought by the respondent that the lack
         of evidence of either party having a family member as a  proxy  for
         each of them at the time  of  ceremony  was  fatal  to  their  case
         according to the requirements under the (extract from  presidential
         decree)" of April 7, 1996.

18. Between [13] and [15] of the decision the Judge considered the evidence
    that had been submitted.   Mr  Uppal  today  argues  that  as  a  valid
    marriage certificate had been issued the burden of proof shifted to the
    respondent.  Mr Armstrong submitted  that  the  burden  of  proof  only
    shifted if the respondent could demonstrate that the  marriage  entered
    into was valid as a proxy marriage.

19. In Cudjoe (proxy marriages: burden of proof) [2016] UKUT 180 (IAC)  the
    Tribunal decided it was for the appellant to  prove  that  their  proxy
    marriage was in accordance with the laws of the  country  in  which  it
    took place and that both parties were free to  marry.   The  burden  of
    proof may be discharged by production of a marriage certificate  issued
    by a competent authority of the country  in  which  the  marriage  took
    place and reliance upon the statutory presumption  validity  consequent
    to such production.   The  reliability  of  marriage  certificates  and
    issuance by a competent authority  are  matters  for  an  appellant  to
    prove.  The means of proving  that  a  proxy  marriage  was  contracted
    according to the laws of the country in which it  took  place  was  not
    limited to production of a marriage certificate.

20. In this case there was contained  within  the  respondent's  bundle  of
    documents at page C2 a marriage certificate.   The  registrar  on  that
    marriage certificate was a Mr Moussa Traore and he indicated  that  the
    appellant and his wife a French national were married in front of Ahmed
    Toure and Maurice Cape.   On page C6 of  the  respondent's  bundle  the
    appellant's wife appointed Mr Moussa Trare to  be  her  proxy.   It  is
    unclear from the paperwork in the respondent's  or  appellant's  bundle
    who the appellant's proxy was.

21. The presidential decree makes it clear that the proxy representing  the
    parties must be a close relative and  must  produce  the  relevant  and
    necessary papers and documents.   The  Judge  considered  the  evidence
    presented to him and concluded that the registrar may  well  have  been
    the proxy.  There was no evidence therefore that the proxy was properly
    assigned as a member  of  the  family  although  the  Judge  mistakenly
    identified this person as Mr Ahmed Toure instead of  Mr  Moussa  Trare.
    The Judge  went  on  to  say  that  there  was  no  evidence  from  the
    appellant's wife who the proxy was.  There was a  bundle  of  documents
    that been submitted by the appellant's solicitors and that contained  a
    witness statement from the appellant and also from his  wife.   Neither
    the appellant's or his wife's witness statement deal with who the proxy
    was.  Those statements concentrate on stating  that  because  they  had
    produced a full marriage certificate that was evidence  their  marriage
    had taken place and was valid.

22. Mr Uppal criticised the Judge for  not  raising  these  issues  at  the
    hearing but neither the appellant nor  his  wife  had  addressed  those
    issues and in any event the presidential decree appears  to  have  been
    photographed and produced at the hearing.

23. The Judge was  therefore  placed  in  an  invidious  situation  and  he
    concluded there was a lack of evidence  to  support  the  marriage  was
    valid as he was not prepared to accept the marriage was  in  accordance
    with the presidential decree.  Whilst the marriage certificate  can  be
    sufficient to prove a marriage was lawful the presidential decree makes
    it clear that the proxy must be a close relative and  goes  further  by
    saying they must be represented by their close relatives.

24. I am satisfied that the Judge who dealt with this case  in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal was entitled to find paperwork to be unsatisfactory.   If
    the witnesses had addressed the issue of who the proxy was and how they
    were related then the Judge may have had more evidence to go on.  As it
    happens the decree was presented at the beginning of the court  hearing
    and had not been served on the respondent  and  the  appellant's  wife,
    whose relation was said to be the proxy, did not address the  issue  in
    her statement and did not attend the hearing.

25. I therefore find the Judge was entitled on the evidence before  him  to
    find the marriage had not been validly undertaken and he  was  entitled
    to dismiss the appeal under Regulation 17 of the 2006 Regulations.

26. The second issue raised was whether these parties had a right of appeal
    as extended family members.   Mr  Uppal  accepted  that  under  current
    legislation and law extended family members do  not  have  a  right  of
    appeal.  He asked that I adjourn this aspect  of  the  case  pending  a
    decision from the European Court.  There is no  general  stay  on  such
    cases in the Upper Tribunal and whilst the Tribunal in Banger adjourned
    that case that does not mean every case should be adjourned in the same
    manner albeit I accept the principle arose is potentially the same.  It
    should be noted that the decision of Sala took place after the Tribunal
    in Banger had heard submissions and  therefore  postdated  the  hearing
    date.  At paragraph 14 of the order for reference  the  Tribunal  noted
    this and commented that if correctly decided the effect of  Sala  would
    appear to be that applicants would have no right to pursue an appeal.

27. In the circumstances, I decided not to adjourn this case, and following
    Sala there was no right of appeal as extended family members.


    NOTICE OF DECISION

28. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a  point  of  law.   I  uphold  the  original
    decision.

Signed                              Date 09/09/2017



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 09/09/2017






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

