
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                    Appeal
Number: IA/42855/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |   Decision & Reasons          |
|                                              |Promulgated                    |
|On 21st December 2015                         |   On 18th January 2016        |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          miss cynthia konadu anim
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Adams, instructed by AJ Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant in this appeal is the Secretary  of  State.   However,  I
    shall retain the naming convention as in the First-tier Tribunal  where
    the Appellant was Miss Anim.

 2. Miss Anim is a citizen of Ghana,  born  on  19th  November  1978.   The
    Appellant first entered the United Kingdom on 13th September 2003,  and
    was granted entry clearance as a student until 31st October 2007.   She
    was subsequently granted leave to remain as a work permit  holder  from
    October 2007 until 5th October 2010.  The Appellant  was  then  granted
    leave to remain as a Tier 2 Skilled Worker from July  2011  until  July
    2014.

 3. The Appellant applied to the Respondent on 2nd July 2014 for indefinite
    leave to remain on the basis of long residency.  The Respondent refused
    that application for reasons set out in  a  letter  dated  3rd  October
    2014.  The Respondent also issued  a  decision  of  3rd  October  2014,
    served on 13th October 2014 refusing to vary the Appellant's  leave  to
    enter or remain and deciding to remove her from the UK.

 4. The Respondent in the refusal letter noted that the  Appellant  claimed
    to have had leave to remain for  a  continuous  period  of  ten  years.
    However the Respondent noted that the  Appellant  remained  in  the  UK
    without valid leave from 6th October 2010 until 5th July 2011, a period
    of 272 days.  The Respondent was not  willing  to  exercise  discretion
    regarding  the  application  and  the  application  was  refused  under
    paragraph 276D with reference to  276B  of  HC395  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The Respondent also  considered  the  Appellant's  private  and
    family life and was not satisfied that the Appellant had lived  in  the
    UK continuously for twenty years.  The Respondent also was of the  view
    that the Appellant would have ties in Ghana, having lived there for the
    majority of her life.  It was not accepted therefore that  there  would
    be very significant obstacles to her return to Ghana.

 5. The Appellant appealed on the basis that although it  is  correct  that
    she  had  overstayed  the  Respondent  should   have   considered   the
    circumstances that led her to doing so and discretion should have  been
    exercised in her favour.  The Appellant is a qualified  pharmacist  and
    has been working in the UK.  She has also studied in the  UK.   It  was
    the Appellant's contention therefore that she had established  a  right
    to private life in the UK and any interference was in breach of Article
    8.

 6. The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on 6th May 2015.   In  a
    Decision and Reasons promulgated on 20th May 2015, First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Wyman dismissed  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules  but
    allowed the appeal under Article 8.

 7. The Secretary of State appealed to the Upper Tribunal.  In  a  decision
    granting permission dated 29th September 2015, it was  stated  that  it
    was arguable that the First-tier Tribunal failed to  direct  itself  to
    Section 117B of the 2002 Act and as  a  consequence  failed  to  attach
    little weight to the Appellant's private life in the UK, all  of  which
    was built up whilst her leave was precarious.

Ground 2

 8. It was Ms Savage's contention in Ground 2  that  the  judge  failed  to
    properly direct himself in relation to the consideration of Article  8.
    Although the Respondent noted that the judge may have been  aware  that
    the Appellant had only limited leave to remain in the UK throughout her
    period of stay, it was not clear that the judge had given little weight
    to the Appellant's private life as was required under  Section  117B(v)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 9. Weight was attached by the judge to the fact that the Appellant had  no
    criminal record and had not taken benefits.  In attaching  that  weight
    Ms Savage submitted that the judge  had  failed  to  follow  the  Upper
    Tribunal in the case of Nasim and Others (Article  8)  Pakistan  [2014]
    UKUT 25 (IAC) 17th January 2014, in  particular  paragraph  26.   Nasim
    confirms  that  a  person's  human  rights  are  not  enhanced  by  not
    committing criminal offences or not relying on public funds.  The  only
    significance of such matters is to preclude the Secretary of State from
    pointing to any public interest justifying removal over and  above  the
    basic  importance  of  maintaining  a  firm  and  coherent  system   of
    immigration control.  Ms Savage submitted that the judge had  erred  in
    attaching weight to the Appellant's lack of convictions.

10. Ms Savage also referred the Tribunal to the case of Forman  (ss.117A-C:
    considerations) [2015]  UKUT  00412,  in  particular  that  the  public
    interest  in  firm  immigration  control  is   not   diluted   by   the
    consideration that a person pursuing a claim under Article 8  ECHR  has
    at no time been a financial burden on the state or  is  self-sufficient
    or is likely to remain so  indefinitely.   The  significance  of  these
    factors is that where they are  not  present  the  public  interest  is
    fortified.  AM & Others (s.117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260  confirms  that
    an Appellant can obtain no positive right to a grant of leave to remain
    from either Section 117B(2) or (3) whatever the degree of  his  fluency
    in English or the strength of his financial resources.

11. At [62]  of  the  Decision  and  Reasons  the  judge  referred  to  the
    Appellant's  'very  good  immigration  history'  without  reference  to
    Section 117B(v) which  requires  that  little  weight  be  attached  to
    precarious immigration status.  Dube (ss.117A-117D) [2015]  UKUT  00090
    confirms that judges are required statutorily to take  into  account  a
    number of considerations and are duty bound to  have  regard  to  these
    specified considerations.

12. It was Mr Adams' submissions that the judge had  implicitly  considered
    Section 117B.  Mr Adams took me through the decision  in  some  detail.
    Whilst I note that the Upper Tribunal in Dube confirmed that it is  not
    an error of law to fail to  specifically  set  out  Sections  117A-117D
    considerations if the judge has applied the relevant  test,  i.e.  that
    what matters is substance not form, I am satisfied  that  in  substance
    the judge failed to have regard to the matters set out in Section 117B.



13. I am satisfied that the judge erred in attaching weight at [57] to  the
    Appellant's lack of convictions and  to  the  fact  that  she  had  not
    claimed any public funds and had paid her university fees.  Even  if  I
    am wrong in this, crucially the judge whilst accepting the  Appellant's
    reasons  for  her  period  of  unlawful  leave,  which  under   Section
    117B(iv)(a) should have little weight attached, failed to attach little
    weight to all of the Appellant's leave  which  must  be  considered  as
    precarious: AM & Others (s.117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260, applied.   The
    fact that the judge at paragraph 62 referred to the  Appellant's  "very
    good previous immigration history" indicates that rather than attaching
    little weight to the  Appellant's  leave,  the  judge  placed  positive
    weight on her immigration history.   I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge
    failed to correctly direct  himself  in  relation  to  the  Appellant's
    precarious leave.   I do not accept that it can  be  inferred  that  he
    gave little weight to the Appellant's private life, particularly as the
    judge  refers  to  the  Appellant's  "very  good  previous  immigration
    history".  The judge also at paragraph 65 noted that  the  Home  Office
    had granted further leave to the Appellant despite the  fact  that  she
    had overstayed her leave.  I am not satisfied that the  judge  properly
    directed himself.

14. Therefore I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal erred  materially
    in the consideration of Article 8.

Ground 1:

15. As I identified an error in respect of Ground 2 that is  sufficient  to
    set aside the decision.  In relation to Ground 1,  the  judge  at  [48]
    stated that there were arguably good  grounds  for  granting  leave  to
    remain outside  the  Immigration  Rules,  due  to  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant 'has lived legally in the United Kingdom for over ten  years,
    that she has family here and is a  qualified  pharmacist'.   The  judge
    also directed himself at [47] that 'only if there may be arguably  good
    grounds for granting leave to remain outside them is it  necessary  for
    Article 8 purposes to on  to  consider  whether  there  are  compelling
    circumstances not sufficiently recognised under them'.

16. The Court of Appeal in SS  (Congo)  and  Others  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387
    identified that the proper approach should always be  to  identify  the
    substantive content of the relevant Immigration  Rules.   Although  the
    judge was of the view that  there  were  compelling  circumstances  not
    sufficiently recognised under the Immigration Rules, I am not satisfied
    that he would inevitably reached that conclusion had he considered  the
    Respondent's  conclusion  that  the  Appellant   did   not   meet   the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

Error of law

17. I am satisfied therefore that the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  material
    errors of law and I set aside that decision in relation to  Article  8.
    The judge's findings in relation to paragraphs 276B and  276D  are  not
    disputed and can stand.  I gave my decision at the hearing.

Remaking

18. Both representatives  indicated  that  there  was  sufficient  material
    before the Tribunal to re-make the decision.  Although Miss Anim was in
    court Mr Adams indicated that he did not require further evidence  from
    her.  I confirm that I had before me the bundle of documents  including
    Miss Anim's statement dated 30th April 2015.  Miss Anim also  confirmed
    in court that nothing had changed substantively since that date.

19. In reaching my decision, it  is  accepted  that  the  Appellant  cannot
    qualify under the  Immigration  Rules.   I  have  considered  that  the
    Respondent considered that the Appellant did not meet the  requirements
    of paragraph 276ADE.

20. I have considered the substantive content of the  relevant  Immigration
    Rules.  The Appellant did not meet the requirements of  paragraph  276B
    as she did not have at least ten years'  lawful  residence.   This  was
    accepted by the Appellant.  The Respondent in the refusal  letter  also
    addresses 276ADE.

21. In terms of 276ADE the Respondent considered that the Appellant was  at
    the date of decision aged 34 years and 11 months and  had  entered  the
    United Kingdom as a student on 13th September 2013.  With that in  mind
    the Respondent considered that the Appellant has not lived continuously
    in the United Kingdom for at least twenty years and could not therefore
    meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(iii).

22. The Respondent also considered that the Appellant is not under the  age
    of 18 and therefore could not meet paragraph 276ADE(iv).   In  addition
    the Appellant was not under the age of 25 and had not  spent  at  least
    half of her life residing continuously in the UK (paragraph 276ADE(v)).

23. In relation to paragraph 276ADE(vi) the Respondent  noted  that  whilst
    the Appellant has not lived continuously in Ghana for eleven years  and
    one month, it was considered that the Appellant resided there  for  the
    majority of her life and it was  not  accepted  that  there  were  very
    significant obstacles to her return to Ghana

24. The Respondent therefore concluded that the Appellant had not  provided
    any evidence which might justify her allowing her to remain in  the  UK
    exceptionally and it was not considered that  there  were  sufficiently
    compelling or compassionate circumstances to justify  allowing  her  to
    remain outside the Immigration Rules.

25. In appealing against this decision the Appellant  concentrated  on  the
    issue of her period when she had no leave in the UK.  She  stated  that
    the  Respondent's  consideration  was  very  subjective  and  that  the
    circumstances of  her  overstaying  should  have  been  considered  and
    discretion  exercised.   The  Appellant  also   considered   that   the
    Respondent failed to take into account that she was living  in  the  UK
    for a considerably long time and also qualified as a pharmacist.

26.  It is clear that  the  Respondent  considered  all  the  circumstances
    including the circumstances which caused the Appellant to  overstay  in
    the UK.  However the Respondent was not satisfied  that  the  Appellant
    had produced any  evidence  which  might  demonstrate  that  she  could
    satisfy the requirements of paragraph 276ADE  in  relation  to  private
    life (it had  not  been  argued  that  the  Appellant  qualified  under
    Appendix FM and I do not consider such in this appeal).

27. The Appellant in her witness statement dated 30th April 2015  discusses
    her study in the UK and difficulties in her employment.  In  particular
    she details difficulties with Boots, her pre-registration employer as a
    pharmacist.  The Appellant then goes on to  state  how  she  found  her
    employment with her current employer.  The Appellant details  that  she
    was diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis during the second year  of  her
    pharmacy degree and discusses  how  this  affected  her  life  and  her
    requirement to attend appointments.  However despite this she confirmed
    that she was able to persevere with her education.

28. The Appellant confirms that through hard work  she  has  "settled  down
    pretty well in this country".  She refers to an established network  of
    very strong ties and that she now considers this country as  her  home.
    The Appellant also refers to "a lot  of  family  members  in  the  UK".
    However the Appellant does  not  adequately  address  the  Respondent's
    conclusion that  there  are  no  "very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    Appellant re-integrating in her home country of Ghana".

29. The Appellant is  clearly  very  well-educated,  having  obtained  post
    graduate qualifications in pharmacy.  She also  notes  at  D14  of  her
    application that she has cultural ties to Ghana.  I  am  not  satisfied
    given that the Appellant has spent the majority of her  life  in  Ghana
    that she has shown that there are very significant obstacles to her re-
    integration there.

30. I am satisfied that the Appellant has failed to  demonstrate  that  she
    meets the requirements of paragraph 276ADE.  For the  reasons  set  out
    above, I am not satisfied that there  is  a  reasonably  arguable  case
    under Article 8 which has not  already  been  sufficiently  dealt  with
    under the Rules. SS (Congo) (above) applied.

31. Further and in the alternative, if I am wrong in relation  to  this,  I
    have considered Article 8 outside of the Rules.  In  so  doing  I  have
    considered the five stage  test  in  Razgar  v  SSHD  [2004]  UKHL  27.
    Although the Appellant referred to family I am not satisfied  that  she
    has demonstrated that she has family life in the UK.

32. However it is not disputed that the Appellant has been in the UK for  a
    number of years.  I am therefore satisfied  that  she  has  established
    private life in the UK and that the Respondent's decision may interfere
    with that private life.  Given the low threshold I  am  satisfied  that
    that interference may reach the threshold of engaging  Article  8.   As
    the Appellant does not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules I
    am satisfied that the refusal is in accordance with the law and for the
    legitimate aim of the maintenance of effective immigration control.   I
    have therefore  gone  on  to  consider  whether  that  interference  is
    proportionate to that legitimate aim.

33. In considering the proportionality balance  I  have  considered,  as  I
    must, Section 117B of the 2002 Act.   Section  117A  of  the  2002  Act
    confirms that in considering the public interest question the court  or
    Tribunal  must  in  particular  have  regard  in  all  cases   to   the
    considerations listed in Section 117B.  Section 117A(iii) confirms that
    "the  public  interest  question"  means  a  question  of  whether   an
    interference with a person's right to respect for  private  and  family
    life is justified under Article 8(2).

34.  I  have  reminded  myself  that  Section  117B(i)  confirms  that  the
    maintenance  of  effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the   public
    interest.  It is also in the public interest that an individual seeking
    to remain in the UK can speak English.  I am satisfied that the  public
    interest is not infringed by the Appellant in  this  regard  as  it  is
    clear from her  qualifications  and  employment  that  she  does  speak
    English.  In relation to Section 117B(iii) it is  also  in  the  public
    interest that persons seeking to remain  are  financially  independent.
    Again it is not suggested that the public interest is infringed by  the
    Appellant in this regard given her employment.  I am not satisfied that
    it is.

35. I then consider Section 117B(iv) that little weight should be given  to
    a private life that is established at a time when a person is in the UK
    unlawfully.  It was not disputed that  the  Appellant  was  in  the  UK
    unlawfully for a relatively short period of time during her time in the
    UK.

36. Section 117B(v) requires me to attach little weight to a  private  life
    established by a person at a time when the person's immigration  status
    is precarious.  As noted above, AM & Others (s.117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT
    260 confirms that a person's  immigration  status  is  "precarious"  if
    their continued presence  in  the  UK  will  be  dependent  upon  their
    obtaining  a  further  grant  of  leave.   I  am  satisfied  that   the
    Appellant's status has been precarious for all of her time  in  the  UK
    (bar the time when it was unlawful).  I therefore  must  attach  little
    weight to her private life.

37. In considering the public interest I  have  also  considered  that  the
    Appellant cannot succeed under the Immigration Rules and that  she  has
    not shown  that  there  are  very  significant  obstacles  to  her  re-
    integrating into Ghana.  As noted above she has substantial benefits in
    terms of her education and employment in the UK which will assist  with
    that integration.

38. In the Appellant's favour I have considered all that is  before  me  in
    relation to the strength of her private life and  her  difficulties  in
    securing employment, notwithstanding that I must attach  little  weight
    to that private life.

39. I am satisfied that the  Appellant's  appeal  under  Article  8  cannot
    succeed.

Conclusion

40. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal erred in law and is set  aside.
    I re-make that decision dismissing the Appellant's appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds (Article 8).

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
