
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42725/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 June 2016                                |On 3 August, 2016             |
|Delivered orally                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        MISS OKWUCHI MARYCLAIR OKOFOR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Mgbeike, a Legal Representative of Messrs
Moorehouse Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the appellant (hereinafter  called  the  Secretary
    of State) against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Keith  who
    following a hearing at Hatton  Cross  on  20  October  2015  and  in  a
    decision promulgated on 2 November  2015  allowed  the  appeal  of  the
    respondent (hereinafter called the Claimant),  a  citizen  of  Nigeria,
    born on 19 December 1993 against the decision of the Secretary of State
    dated 13 October 2014 to refuse  to  issue  a  residence  card  to  the
    Claimant as  confirmation  of  a  right  of  residence  under  European
    Community Law as the spouse of an EEA national exercising Treaty rights
    in the United Kingdom.

2.   The brief immigration history of the Claimant is that she  was  granted
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom in 2011 but that  she  had  since
    submitted three applications for residence cards each of which had been
    refused.

3.   The Secretary of State's letter of refusal was clear that in  order  to
    qualify for a residence card the Claimant had to  provide  evidence  to
    show that she was related as claimed to her EEA family member who was a
    qualified  person  exercising  free  movement  rights  in  the  UK   in
    accordance with the 2006 EEA Regulations.  On  15  September  2014  the
    Claimant was encountered by  Immigration  Officers  when  a  visit  was
    undertaken at her home address in Redhill.   The  officers  noted  that
    there was no furniture or signs of habitation at the property  and  the
    bins were empty.  There was no evidence the Claimant or her EEA Sponsor
    resided at this address and the Claimant had not updated the  Secretary
    of State with the new address  which  would  be  expected  if  she  had
    resided there and left.  It was therefore  believed  the  Claimant  had
    given the Secretary of  State  a  false  address  thus  preventing  the
    Secretary  of  State  from  verifying  the  genuine   nature   of   her
    relationship.  It was therefore believed that she had  entered  into  a
    marriage of convenience.

4.   Suffice it to say for the purposes of my decision that the  Judge,  for
    reasons that were accepted on the evidence, decided  that  contrary  to
    the Secretary of State's understanding the parties were  in  a  genuine
    marriage, it was not one of convenience and on that basis he  proceeded
    to allow the appeal.

5.   However the Secretary of State, for reasons which will become  apparent
    and not surprisingly, challenged that decision on the following basis:

         "It is  respectfully  submitted  that  the  Immigration  Judge  has
         mistakenly found that there was no other issue raised in respect of
         the 2006 EEA regulations other that the appellant's marriage  being
         one of convenience.  At  paragraph  14  of  the  determination  the
         Immigration Judge states (emphasis added):


             'It was not disputed  that  the  appellant  and  sponsor  were
             married (as evidenced by a marriage certificate) or  that  the
             sponsor was exercising his treaty rights in working.  The sole
             issue in contention  was  whether  the  marriage  was  one  of
             convenience, based on  the  inspection  at  their  last  known
             address'.


         It is argued that these findings  are  incorrect  and  it  was  not
         accepted that the appellant's sponsor was exercising treaty  rights
         in the UK.  The following paragraphs of  the  reasons  for  refusal
         letter dated 28/10/2015 state the following (emphasis added),


             'You have also provided evidence  to  suggest  that  your  EEA
             sponsor exercises his treaty rights  through  employment  with
             Apex Recruitment Agency.


             This department  has  attempted  to  confirm  this  employment
             through internet searches and telephone calls however we  were
             unable  to  verify  that  your  employment  is   genuine   and
             subsisting.  The burden of proof lies with the  applicant  and
             therefore this department is unable to accept  that  your  EEA
             sponsor is a qualified person as required under  regulation  6
             of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.'


         It  is  submitted  that  this  mistake  of  fact  has  led  to  the
         Immigration Judge failing to make any findings in  respect  of  the
         qualified  status  of  the  appellant's  spouse.   As  such  it  is
         submitted that this mistake has  resulted  in  what  has  become  a
         material impact of the outcome of the appeal and as such amounts to
         a material error of law.


         It is respectfully submitted, similar to the above grounds that the
         Immigration Judge has failed to take into account and  resolve  the
         issue of the appellant's spouse being a qualified person.  As  this
         was clearly raised as an issue in the Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter
         and has been overlooked by the Immigration Judge,  the  failure  to
         resolve this issue amounts to a material error of law."

6.   Mr Mgbeike who represented the Claimant informed me that he now had  in
    his possession additional evidence  to  show  that  the  applicant  was
    exercising treaty rights either at the date of the hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  or  indeed  at  the  present  time,  but  he
    accepted that such  additional  evidence  could  form  no  part  of  my
    decision as to whether or not the Judge on the basis  of  his  decision
    materially erred in law for the reasons submitted by the  Secretary  of
    State.  He also realistically accepted that whilst the  Judge  formally
    found that the Sponsor was exercising treaty rights he gave no  reasons
    for so finding and he simply did not deal with the issue and Mr Mgbeike
    concluded that "it must follow that the Judge materially erred in law".

7.   It is self-evident from the above that the Judge indeed  so  materially
    erred in law and that for that reason his decision insofar as he failed
    to deal with that issue must be set aside.

8.     I note however the Judge's  positive  and  reasoned  finding  of  the
    evidence before him, that the Claimant and her EEA  spouse  were  in  a
    marriage that was not one of convenience.  That has not been challenged
    and that finding will therefore be preserved.

9.   In that there has been no finding as to whether or not at the  material
    time the Claimant's EEA Sponsor was exercising treaty  rights,  I  have
    considered as to how the decision should be re-made.  After  discussion
    with the parties and bearing in mind the fact that there is  apparently
    new evidence that has to be  the  subject  of  an  application  to  the
    Tribunal in order for it to be tendered  under  Rule  15(2)(a)  of  the
    Procedure Rules and given that I am  told  that  the  Sponsor  and  the
    Claimant would now wish to give evidence, that the  appropriate  course
    is to remit this case to be heard afresh on this issue  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal at the Taylor House Hearing Centre  before  a  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Keith.

  10.  It was further agreed that in all the  circumstances,  having  regard
    to the error of law found, there were highly compelling reasons falling
    within paragraph 7.2(b) of the Senior President's Practice Statement as
    to why the decision should not be remade by the Upper Tribunal.  It was
    clearly in the interests of justice that the appeal on  this  issue  be
    heard and considered in the First-tier Tribunal.

 11.  For the reasons I have above given and by agreement with the  parties,
    I have concluded therefore that the appeal  should  be  remitted  to  a
    First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Keith to
    the Taylor House Hearing Centre on the  first  available  date.   I  am
    informed that for this purpose no interpreter will be required.

12.  As I had earlier  stated,  the  positive  findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge in concluding that the Claimant's marriage was  not  one
    of convenience will however be preserved.

13.  I would add for the sake of completeness that Mr Duffy  most  helpfully
    indicated to the Claimant and to her representative, that if there  was
    further evidence that she now wished to tender to demonstrate that  the
    Sponsor is exercising treaty rights then it would be helpful,  if  such
    evidence could be  forwarded  to  him  at  first  instance  before  the
    remitted hearing date, so that he might consider whether such  evidence
    enabled him in the circumstances to recommend to the Secretary of State
    that a residence card is issued.  For that purpose I note that Mr Duffy
    has provided to the Claimant's representative his direct email address.



Decision

14.  The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  an
    error on a point of law such that the decision be set aside  save  that
    the positive findings of the Judge that the Claimant's marriage was not
    one of convenience be preserved.

15.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 3 June 2016


[pic]Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein
