
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42105/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 13 September 2016                 |On 15 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 SOHAIL [S]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Ahmed, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent to this appeal is a citizen of Pakistan.  The  appellant
    is the Secretary of State for the Home  Department,  who  has  appealed
    with the permission of the First-tier Tribunal against  a  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal, allowing the  respondent's  appeal  against  a
    decision of  the  appellant,  dated  2  October  2014,  to  refuse  his
    application to vary leave on human  rights  (article  8)  grounds.  The
    First-tier Tribunal found the respondent was entitled to  a  period  of
    further leave, applying MH (pending family proceedings -  discretionary
    leave) Morocco [2010] UKUT 439 (IAC).

 2. It is more convenient to refer to the parties as they were  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  I  shall  therefore  refer  to  Mr  [S]  as  "the
    appellant" and the Secretary of State as "the respondent".

 3. The First-tier Tribunal found as follows:

         "27. It is not disputed in this case that the  appellant  has  been
         successful in establishing indirect  contact  with  his  child.  It
         cannot be disputed that this contact has proved to  be  meaningful.
         The appellant has started an application for  direct  contact  with
         his child. From the information given to me there is, at the least,
         some  kind  of  reasonable  prospect  that  such  an  appeal  would
         succeed."

 4. Permission to appeal  was  granted  to  the  respondent  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal on a renewed application because it was  arguable  the  First-
    tier Tribunal did not factor into its assessment the fact the child was
    not a British citizen and was not settled in the UK.

 5. I was not asked and saw no reason to make an anonymity direction.

 6. I heard brief argument  on  the  question  of  whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision is vitiated by material error of law.

 7. I asked Mr  Tufan  whether  the  Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had been informed about the status of the mother and child. Mr
    Tufan  did  not  know  but  he  was  able  to  confirm  from  his   own
    investigation that the mother had been granted refugee status  and  the
    child had leave in line with her.

 8. Mr Ahmed rightly pointed out that this information showed there was  no
    material error of law in the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  and  Mr
    Tufan did not press his case any further.

 9. I find therefore that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal does  not
    contain  a  material  error  of  law  of  the  kind  contended  by  the
    respondent. Accordingly it shall stand and the respondent's  appeal  is
    dismissed.




    NOTICE OF DECISION

    The First-tier Tribunal did not make a material error on a point of law
    and its decision allowing the appeal  on  human  rights  grounds  shall
    stand.

    No anonymity direction has been made.




                               Signed   Date 14 September 2016


                               Judge Froom
                               Sitting as a Deputy Judge of the Upper
                               Tribunal
