
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/42078/2014
     IA/42111/2014
     IA/42096/2014
     IA/42102/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 25 February 2016                       |On 16 March 2016                 |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                          THE HONOURABLE LORD BURNS
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANUELL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 adeola [f]
                                 ayodeji [o]
                                    [DAO]
                                    [DO]
                       (anonymity direction NOT maDE)

                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss J Victor-Mazeli, Counsel, instructed by
Moorehouse Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the Secretary of State's appeal in four  linked  cases  against
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal which allowed  the  appellant's
    appeals against a decision of the Secretary of State refusing the first
    appellant's (the mother) application for leave to remain in the  United
    Kingdom and a decision made under Section 10  of  the  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 1999 to remove her and her family from the  United  Kingdom.
    We shall refer to the Secretary of State as the respondent.

2.   The first appellant is the mother, born on 10 August 1980.   She  is  a
    citizen of Nigeria.  Her husband,  the  second  appellant,  is  also  a
    Nigerian national born 1 August 1968.  They have two children both born
    in the United Kingdom, [DAO], born 1 December 2006 and [DO] born 4 July
    2010.  The elder child therefore has been in  the  United  Kingdom  for
    eight years.

3.   There was no dispute that both parents had been living  in  the  United
    Kingdom without leave for a number of years.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
    found that neither parent could  succeed  in  their  claims  under  the
    Immigration Rules.   There was no appeal by the appellants  in  respect
    of that matter to the Upper Tribunal.  The operative  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal  against  which  the  respondent  appealed  was  in
    respect of the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  that  the  elder  child
    [DAO] succeeded in her  appeal  under  Immigration  Rule  276ADE(1)(v).
    That was because, according to the First-tier Tribunal,  she  had  been
    living in the UK  for  at  least  seven  years  and  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect her to leave the United Kingdom.  Although  it  is
    not spelled out in the  determination,  the  implication  is  that  the
    appeals of the parents should also succeed on that basis.

4.   For this Tribunal Mr Wilding for the Secretary of State submitted  that
    while the First-tier Tribunal Judge had stated at paragraph 77 that the
    key issue was whether or not it would be reasonable to expect [DAO]  to
    leave the United Kingdom, the judge had in fact applied the wrong  test
    and considered whether there would be significant obstacles to  [DAO]'s
    integration into Nigeria. That was plain from the  terms  of  paragraph
    87.  There the First-tier Tribunal Judge states that while the  parents
    would not have problems reintegrating into  Nigerian  society,  it  was
    found that there would be significant obstacles for [DAO] as Nigeria is
    a strange country to her and one which she has not even visited.

5.   Mr Wilding submitted that the Tribunal's focus was  wholly  on  [DAO]'s
    circumstances in the United Kingdom and there was no proper  assessment
    of  the  reasonableness  of  her  leaving  the  United   Kingdom.    In
    particular, there was no consideration of the crucial factor  that  she
    would be leaving the  United  Kingdom  with  her  family.   There  were
    indications that in 2014 certain child  protection  issues  had  arisen
    because of an incident where the  mother  had  smacked  [DAO]  and  had
    admitted such an  incident  for  which  she  had  received  a  caution.
    Although at paragraph 46 it is recorded that it was [DO] who  had  been
    smacked, at paragraph 82 it is said that was [DAO] who was the  subject
    of this conduct.  In any event, since there was no  evidence  from  the
    Lewisham  Child  Protection  Services  beyond  a  copy  of  the  Review
    Conference and Minute for March and September 2014 the  Tribunal  Judge
    concluded that it was "unclear as to whether or  not  there  are  still
    ongoing child protection concerns".  Furthermore, while [DAO] had  some
    physical health problems no conclusion  could  be  arrived  as  to  any
    consequential effect on her removal on that account.

6.   Even if the First-tier Tribunal Judge had  applied  the  correct  test,
    there was no adequate reasoning as to why it was unreasonable for  this
    child to accompany her parents to Nigeria.

7.   Miss Victor-Mazeli for the appellant submitted  that  was  no  material
    error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's determination.  The reference
    to "integration" in paragraph 87 was simply a  typing  error.   It  was
    clear from paragraphs 76 and 77 that the judge had applied the  correct
    test of reasonableness.  At paragraph 84 the  basis  for  her  decision
    could be found and the length of residence in the United Kingdom can be
    seen to be the most important consideration which the judge  took  into
    account.  She had put down roots beyond that of the family group in the
    years she had lived in this country and, having regard to her interests
    as a primary consideration, it could not be said  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge erred in concluding that it would  be  unreasonable  for
    her  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.    Accordingly   the   Tribunal's
    assessment under  Rule  ADE(1)(iv)  was  one  which  the  Tribunal  was
    entitled to reach.

8.   In our view, paragraph 87 of the determination plainly  indicates  that
    the judge directed her mind to the question of whether there  would  be
    significant obstacles for [DAO] in integrating  into  Nigerian  society
    and, despite the statement at paragraph  77  that  the  key  issue  was
    whether it would be reasonable  to  expect  her  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom, there is an error in law in respect of the application of  the
    incorrect test.  However, even proceeding upon the basis that the judge
    inadvertently used the wrong language and  in  fact  was  applying  the
    correct reasonableness test, it seems to us  that  she  has  materially
    erred in considering solely that issue in  the  light  of  the  child's
    residence in this country.  That can plainly be seen from the terms  of
    paragraph 84. Issues of child protection and of  the  child's  physical
    health were neutral factors since no concluded view could be arrived at
    as to how those issues  would  affect  any  relocation  in  Nigeria  or
    continued life in the UK.

9.   The judge appears to us to  have  left  out  of  account  entirely  the
    material consideration that this child would be removed from the United
    Kingdom to her parents' country  of  origin  within  the  family  unit.
    Furthermore, there is no consideration within the determination of  the
    conditions which might be experienced in Nigeria for  this  family  and
    for [DAO] in particular.  In that situation we cannot conclude  that  a
    proper and balanced consideration of the reasonableness of her  removal
    from the United Kingdom has been carried out by the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge. We accordingly  consider  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    materially erred in law.

Notice of Decision

10.  We therefore allow the Secretary of State's appeal  and  we  remit  the
    linked appeals to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at  Hatton  Cross  for  a
    rehearing, before a differently constituted First-tier Tribunal.







Signed                                  Date


Lord Burns
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal

