
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42531/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9th September 2015                |On 23rd September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                               WAJAHAT ZAHEER
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Qureshi of Fawad Law Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Kempton promulgated on 16th February 2015.

 2. The Appellant is a male citizen of Pakistan born 13th December 1988 who
    applied on 6th August 2014 for a residence card as the spouse of an EEA
    national.

 3. The application was made on the basis that the Appellant married  Laura
    Gontyte, a Lithuanian national, on 29th July 2014.   It  was  contended
    that the Appellant's spouse, to whom I shall refer as the Sponsor,  was
    exercising treaty rights in this country.

 4. The application was refused on 10th October 2014.  The  Respondent  did
    not accept that the Sponsor was exercising treaty rights as  a  worker,
    and therefore did not accept that she was a qualified person as defined
    in regulation 6 of The Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations
    2006 (the 2006 Regulations).  The Respondent took this decision because
    it had not been possible to contact the company named by the Sponsor as
    her employer.  Efforts had been made to telephone the company,  without
    success.

 5. The Appellant appealed contending that the Sponsor had never claimed to
    be working for Premier Knitwear (UK)  Limited  which  was  the  company
    referred to in the Respondent's reasons for  refusal  letter.   It  was
    explained that the Sponsor's previous employment  ended  on  20th  June
    2014, and she subsequently received a job offer from  Premier  Knitwear
    (UK)  Limited,  but  on  5th  September  2014  the  Sponsor   commenced
    employment with D J & C Feeds Limited and a copy  of  her  contract  of
    employment had been submitted to the Respondent on 2nd October 2014.

 6. Therefore it was contended that the Sponsor was in employment, and  was
    a qualified person as defined in regulation 6 of the 2006 Regulations.

 7. Judge Kempton decided the appeal on the  papers  as  requested  by  the
    Appellant.  The judge found that the Sponsor had commenced work with  a
    new employer, which employer was not known to  the  Respondent  at  the
    time of application and therefore the correct course of action would be
    for the Appellant to make a fresh application  for  a  residence  card.
    The judge dismissed the appeal because at the date of application there
    was no evidence of employment and although the Sponsor did seem to have
    been employed by D J & C Foods Limited from 5th  September  2014,  this
    was after the date of application which was 6th  August  2014,  and  so
    this employment could not be taken into account for the purposes of the
    appeal.

 8. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    In summary, it was submitted that the judge had  erred  by  failing  to
    take into account evidence that was available at the date  of  hearing.
    The judge should not have restricted consideration  to  evidence  which
    was available at the date of application.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Simpson who found it arguable that the judge had erred  in  law  as  an
    appeal relating to a residence card should have  been  decided  on  the
    evidence available at the date of hearing.

10. Following the grant of permission, the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 accepting that the relevant date was the date of hearing, not  the
    date of application.  The judge had in fact accepted that  the  Sponsor
    was a qualified person under regulation 6 at the date of  hearing,  and
    therefore the Respondent accepted that there was a  material  error  of
    law, and did not oppose the application for permission to  appeal,  and
    invited the Upper Tribunal to allow the appeal.

11. Directions were issued that there should be a hearing before the  Upper
    Tribunal to ascertain whether the First-tier Tribunal had erred in  law
    such that the decision should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

12. Mr McVeety stated that he agreed with the rule  24  response.   It  was
    accepted that the judge  had  materially  erred  as  contended  in  the
    grounds, and it was  accepted  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal should be set aside.

13. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and indicated  that
    I intended to re-make the decision.  Mr McVeety stated that it was  now
    accepted  that  the  Sponsor  is  a  qualified  person  as  defined  by
    regulation 6, and therefore the appeal should  be  allowed.   In  those
    circumstances I did not need to hear from Mr Qureshi.

14. I indicated that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was set aside,
    and the appeal was allowed and I would issue a written decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

15. The judge erred in law as contended in the grounds contained within the
    application for permission to appeal.  The judge was wrong to  conclude
    that only evidence available at the date of application could be  taken
    into account.  The judge was obliged  to  take  into  account  evidence
    available at the date of hearing and should have  done  so.   For  that
    reason the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was set aside.

16. It is accepted that the Sponsor had provided evidence that she  was  in
    employment at  the  date  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing.   The
    Respondent has conceded this to be the case.  The only  issue  in  this
    appeal was whether or not the Sponsor was exercising treaty rights as a
    worker, and because evidence was submitted to prove that she  was,  the
    appeal was allowed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and  was
set aside.  I substitute a fresh decision.  The appeal  is  allowed  as  the
requirements of the 2006 Regulations are satisfied.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There has  been
no request for anonymity to the Upper Tribunal, and I see no  need  to  make
an anonymity order.

Signed   Date 15th September 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal has been allowed, I have considered  whether  to  make  a  fee
award.  I do not consider it appropriate as in my view the evidence  of  the
Sponsor's employment was not before the initial decision  maker.   There  is
no fee award.

Signed   Date 15th September 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

