
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42049/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 November 2015                   |On 6 November 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                              MR MOURAD TAALBI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Nicholson, Counsel, instructed by BMAP
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Algeria  who  appealed  against  the
    respondent's decision to refuse him a residence card as confirmation of
    a right of residence under the EEA Regulations. His appeal against that
    refusal was dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Colvin  ("the
    FTTJ") in a decision promulgated on 29 May 2015.

 2. No anonymity direction has been requested and none is required.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  P  J  M
    Hollingworth on 20 August 2015 on the grounds that it was arguable  the
    FTTJ had adopted the wrong approach "by not simply asking the  question
    whether reasonable suspicion was raised" as to whether the  Appellant's
    marriage was one of convenience.  He also considered that this  led  to
    doubt about the FTTJ's reference to being satisfied on the  balance  of
    probabilities that this was a marriage of convenience. Thus the  appeal
    has come before me.

Submissions

 4. Mr Nicholson, for the appellant, relied on his detailed written grounds
    and, in addition, made lengthy further submissions. The principal issue
    was that the evidence adduced by the respondent was not  sufficient  to
    discharge  the  burden  of  raising  a  suspicion  of  a  marriage   of
    convenience.  It  did  not  demonstrate  fraudulent  behaviour  by  the
    appellant and his wife. Furthermore, the FTTJ had  found  there  was  a
    marriage of convenience on the balance of probabilities (her  paragraph
    40). In Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage of convenience) Greece [2012]
    UKUT 00038 (IAC) the respondent had failed to issue a family permit; in
    this case she had not issued a residence card;  for  this  reason,  the
    burden  on  the  respondent  was  higher  in  the  present  case.   The
    requirements at paragraph 37 of Papajorgji had not  been  met  and  the
    FTTJ had not been obliged to go on to  consider  the  totality  of  the
    evidence. In addition, the FTTJ had drawn unreasonable inferences  from
    the evidence. She had noted inconsistencies but  failed  to  take  into
    account consistencies in the evidence.

 5. Mr Nicholson further submitted that there had not been a fair  hearing:
    it was inappropriate for the witnesses to be asked questions about  the
    sincerity of their relationship without warning  of  the  issues  which
    would be addressed through oral examination.  The  respondent  had  not
    invited the parties to interview first.

 6. Furthermore, Mr Nicholson noted the FTTJ had referred in  paragraph  25
    to the burden of proof resting on the appellant and that it was for him
    to show on a balance of probabilities that he met the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules [sic].

 7. For the respondent,  Mr  Kotas  submitted  that  the  appellant  merely
    disagreed with the FTTJ's findings. However they were open to  her.  He
    said it was likely that the witnesses' evidence would be consistent  to
    some extent because they  were  seeking  to  persuade  the  FTTJ  their
    marriage was genuine. In such circumstances it was appropriate for  the
    FTTJ to give those less weight.  There had been no  need  to  call  the
    parties for interview because the nature of the marriage  was  not  the
    only reason for refusal.  The respondent's evidence had been sufficient
    to raise a suspicion of a marriage of convenience. It was also disputed
    that the appellant should have been put on notice of  oral  examination
    to which he might be subjected: the appellant and his wife  could  have
    been in no doubt  about  the  issues  in  dispute;  they  were  legally
    represented and had been tendered for cross-examination.  The  decision
    was reasoned and followed the guidance in  Papajorgji.   The  FTTJ  had
    accepted there were flaws in the evidence of suspicion. It  would  have
    been inappropriate for the FTTJ to ignore the  inconsistencies  in  the
    oral evidence of the witnesses.

Discussion

 8. Whilst the FTTJ has referred in paragraph 25 to  the  burden  of  proof
    being on the appellant to show on the balance of probabilities that  he
    met the requirements of the immigration rules [sic], the FTTJ had  gone
    on to say that, where  the  respondent  made  an  allegation  that  the
    marriage was one  of  convenience,  the  appropriate  guidance  was  in
    Papajorgji (her paragraph 26).  Thus whilst the  FTTJ  had  incorrectly
    referred both  to  the  burden  being  on  the  appellant  and  to  the
    Immigration Rules, she had cited correctly the guidance  in  Papajorgji
    and  referred  to  the  initial  burden  being   on   the   respondent.
    Furthermore,  it  is  clear  from  her  decision  that  she   initially
    considered the evidence of the respondent on the  issue  of  suspicion.
    Thus her error in referring in paragraph 25 to  the  immigration  rules
    and to the burden being on the appellant is not a material one,  albeit
    it is incorrect.

 9. The FTTJ set out the headnote of Papajorgji in full before  making  her
    findings.  She noted that the issue had been raised as to  whether  the
    respondent had fulfilled the evidential burden by providing  sufficient
    reason to suspect that this marriage is one of convenience so as to  be
    in accordance with the decision in the case of Papajorgji.   She  noted
    that there  was  no  evidential  burden  on  the  appellant  until  the
    respondent  had  raised  the  issue  of  suspicion  of  a  marriage  of
    convenience "by putting forward evidence".  Thus, the  FTTJ  identified
    the correct approach to making her decision.

10. The FTTJ  then  went  on  to  consider  the  evidence  adduced  by  the
    respondent to support her suspicion as to the marriage. She noted,  not
    only the Immigration Officer's  (IO's)  report  on  his  visit  to  the
    appellant's claimed home but also his immigration history,  namely  his
    entry to the UK with a wife and child in  2010.   She  took  particular
    account of the content of the IO's report insofar as  it  detailed  the
    exchange between the IO and the male  who  answered  the  door  at  the
    appellant's and his wife's claimed address.  It  is  notable  that  the
    FTTJ did not cite the remaining part of the statement  which  contained
    the IO's opinion as to the appropriate decision on the application  but
    confined her consideration to his report of events witnessed first hand
    at the property.  She states that she "accept[s] that just  considering
    the evidence on the papers this could in principle be sufficient reason
    to raise the suspicion which meant that  it  would  then  be  upon  the
    appellant to produce evidence  to  address  the  suspicion".   This  is
    followed by: "And indeed this is what happened in this case  on  appeal
    before me".  Whilst her reasoning could be better phrased,  taking  the
    paragraph as a whole it is implicit that she accepted that  the  report
    of the IO, without more, was sufficient  to  raise  a  suspicion  of  a
    marriage of convenience.  It is also implicit from her finding that the
    content of the report was sufficient to  raise  a  suspicion  of  false
    representations as to the nature of  the  appellant's  and  his  wife's
    relationship and, particularly, that they did not live together at  the
    property.  In making her  finding,  the  FTTJ  took  into  account  the
    submissions of the appellant's counsel as regards the  quality  of  the
    evidence adduced by the respondent (paragraph 27).  For these  reasons,
    I am unable  to  find  that  the  FTTJ's  reasoning  on  the  issue  is
    inadequate or that  she  has  failed  to  take  relevant  factors  into
    account. Her decision was open to her on the evidence,  albeit  flawed.
    Her decision and reasons accord with the guidance in Papagorjgi and  IS
    (marriages of convenience) Serbia [2008] UKAIT 00031).

11. Having made that finding appropriately the FTTJ correctly  went  on  to
    analyse the evidence of the appellant  on  the  issue  of  whether  the
    marriage was one of convenience. She noted in  paragraph  30  that  the
    appellant had produced evidence to undermine  the  reliability  of  the
    IO's report. She took into account not only the appellant's evidence as
    regards the layout  of  the  building  which  was  visited  by  the  IO
    (paragraph 30) but also the remaining evidence as  a  whole,  including
    the appellant's own and his wife's oral evidence.

12. I do not accept the submission for the appellant that  he  should  have
    been put  on  notice  of  issues  which  would  be  addressed  in  oral
    examination.  The  appellant  was  fully  aware  that  the   respondent
    challenged the genuineness of his relationship with his wife. He  could
    have expected to be examined on its authenticity.  Indeed if he and his
    wife had been  in  a  position  to  give  consistent  answers  in  oral
    examination, they would have had nothing to fear from such  examination
    as to the "sincerity" of their relationship (to use Mr Nicholson's word
    in submissions to me). The respondent cannot be criticised  for  having
    failed to conduct an interview  before  the  hearing  in  circumstances
    where there were other reasons for refusal  (albeit those grounds  were
    subsequently  conceded  at  the  hearing  as  a  result  of  additional
    disclosure by the appellant).

13. The FTTJ set out at length various concerns arising from  the  evidence
    of the  parties.  It  would  be  surprising  if  there  were  not  also
    consistencies given that the witnesses were attempting to persuade  the
    FTTJ that they were in a genuine relationship. However,  the  FTTJ  was
    entitled to give  weight  to  the  inconsistencies  in  their  evidence
    because they were particularly relevant to the issue in dispute.

14. Taking the evidence and the decision as a whole,  the  FTTJ's  findings
    were open to her on that evidence and she has  given  adequate  reasons
    for her findings. I find no fault in the phrase used in paragraph 40 of
    the decision, mirroring as it does the terminology in paragraph  39  of
    Papajorgji.

15. For these reasons, there is no error of law in the FTTJ's decision  and
    reasons.

Decision

16. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of a material error on a point of law.

17. I do not set aside the decision.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black
