
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42023/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |            Decision & Reasons      |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 30th October 2015                     |            On 18th November 2015   |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                              mr Waseem Haider
                          (no ANONYMITY order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Nasim (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    M A Hall, promulgated  on  9th  March  2015,  following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham Sheldon Court on 23rd February 2015.  In the  determination,
    the judge dismissed the  appeal  of  Waseem  Haider,  who  subsequently
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, who was  born  on  16th
    September 1984.  He appealed against the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    dated 6th October 2014, refusing his application for leave to remain in
    the UK as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is  that  he  is  entitled  to  75  points  under
    Appendix A of the Immigration Rules in relation to attributes  in  that
    all the required documentation had been submitted.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge began his determination at the outset  by  stating  that,  "I
    ascertained that I had received all the documentation  upon  which  the
    parties intended to rely, and each party had served the other with  any
    documentation upon which reliance was to be placed ..." (paragraph 10).
     The judge then went on to set out the background  of  the  appeal  and
    observed how the Appellant had come to the United Kingdom as a  student
    and subsequently his leave had been  extended  in  that  capacity,  and
    thereafter he was granted leave as a Tier 1 (Post-Study)  worker  until
    10th August 2014.  He then submitted his current application before the
    expiry of that leave (see paragraph 13).

 5. The judge went on to hold that the  Appellant  did  not  discharge  the
    burden of proof that was upon him because,

         "I note that the Appellant in his witness statement claimed that he
         had submitted leaflets with his application for  leave  to  remain,
         but I do not accept that to  be  the  case.   Not  only  are  these
         leaflets not included in the Respondent's bundle, but there  is  no
         reference to them  in  Section  7,  at  pages  56  and  57  of  the
         application form, which lists the  documents  that  were  submitted
         with the application.  The list was  prepared  by  the  Appellant's
         previous solicitors ..." (paragraph 26).

 6. The judge went on to hold that  he  would  find  as  a  fact  that  the
    Appellant did not submit with his application an online  advertisement,
    which is contained  at  Section  D  of  the  Respondent's  bundle  (see
    paragraph 27).  The  judge  also  concluded  that  this  was  the  only
    advertisement that was submitted with the application.

 7. This being so (see paragraph 28) the Appellant had  not  satisfied  the
    requirements  of  Table  4(b)(iii)  with  reference  to  paragraph  41-
    SD(e)(iii).  Given that the burden of proof was on the  Appellant,  the
    judge held that the burden had not been  discharged  by  the  Appellant
    (see paragraph 29).  The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application state that  the  decision  was  procedurally
    unfair because the Appellant did not have the benefit of leaflets which
    were included in his application and the judge had wrongly  disregarded
    advertising material included in the Appellant's bundle.

 9. On 4th August 2015, permission to appeal was granted on the basis  that
    there was an online free advertisement in the Respondent's bundle at  D
    which the judge appears to have overlooked.  Secondly, there were  also
    duplicate copies of what appears to be a leaflet  for  the  Appellant's
    business.  Therefore, it was arguable that  the  judge  had  overlooked
    these documents.

10. On 21st August 2015, a Rule 24 response was entered by  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State.  The response stated that the  judge  did  properly
    consider the documents but proceeded to find that the advertisement did
    not satisfy the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  He was entitled
    to so find.

The Hearing

11. At the hearing  before  me,  Mr  Nasim,  appearing  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant, submitted that the sole issue in this  appeal  was  that  of
    advertising.  The judge had misconstrued the evidence  in  relation  to
    the advertising.  This was because he had held (at paragraph  26)  that
    there was no evidence.  However, if one looked at pages 9 to 11B of the
    Appellant's bundle it was  clear  that  there  was  online  advertising
    materials submitted.  They were served on the Respondent  and  were  in
    fact taken from the Respondent's bundle itself.

12. Second, there was no issue raised before the judge in relation  to  the
    absence of this advertising material.   The  leaflets  for  advertising
    were  submitted  with  the  application.   The  judge  had   erred   in
    overlooking them.

13. Thirdly, at paragraph 28, the judge  is  only  looking  at  the  online
    advertisement but at page 35 of the Appellant's  bundle,  it  is  quite
    clear that the answer to D26 is given in terms  of  the  submission  of
    advertising material.  Mr Nasim submitted that I should make a  finding
    of an error of law and remake the decision in  the  Appellant's  favour
    since it was  quite  clear  that  the  advertising  material  had  been
    included.

14. For his part, Mr Nath submitted that the refusal  letter  needs  to  be
    properly read.  Under the section, "Appendix A: attributes" it is  said
    that, "since before  11th  July  2014  and  up  to  the  date  of  your
    application, you have been continuously engaged  in  business  activity
    which was not, or did not amount to, activity pursuant to a contract of
    service with a business other than your own  ..."  The  issue  was  not
    simply that of advertising but of whether the Appellant could show that
    he was providing a contract  of  service  to  another  business.   This
    evidence was absent.  Accordingly, the 75 points could not be  awarded.
    The judge was correct in refusing the appeal.

15. In reply, Mr Nasim submitted that  if  one  looks  at  the  Appellant's
    witness statement, (and there was no cross-examination of the Appellant
    at the hearing), it is clear that the evidence that the  Appellant  had
    submitted was acceptable and should have been treated as  such  by  the
    judge.  His company was incorporated on 21st May  2013.   He  had  gone
    around distributing leaflets  and  that  is  how  he  had  set  up  his
    business.  He was never cross-examined on  this.   A  large  number  of
    additional documents were sent and these all predated the  application.
    The Appellant should succeed.

No Error of Law

16. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law, such  that  I  should
    set aside the decision and remake the  decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

17. Notwithstanding Mr Nasim's clear and  succinct  representations  before
    me, and his attempt to persuade me otherwise,  it  is  clear  that  the
    refusal letter shows there to be quite fundamental  disagreements  with
    the nature of the business that the Appellant was conducting,  so  that
    it was not simply a question of the advertising  having  been  done  in
    relation to that kind of business.

18. The business itself was in question.  This  is  because  there  was  no
    contract of service with the business other than the  Appellant.   Such
    evidence had to be shown for the period under consideration.  It had to
    be shown continuously.  The reason for this is that the  definition  of
    "working" under the Rules "means that the core  service  your  business
    provides to its customers or clients involves your business  delivering
    a service in an occupation at this level ..." (see (iv) in the  refusal
    letter at page 2).

19. This meant that although the Secretary of State had been satisfied that
    the Appellant was applying for  leave  to  remain  and  had  been  last
    granted leave as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant, the evidence  that
    he had submitted in relation to the marketing material and  advertising
    material was not acceptable as it did not  cover  a  continuous  period
    commencing before 11th July 2014, and  up  to  no  earlier  than  three
    months before the date of the application.

20. I am aware that Mr Nasim argues that no issues were raised of this type
    before the judge that the Appellant did not qualify as a worker for the
    purposes of the Rules.  I am also aware that he points  out  that  this
    was an appeal that had been put on the float list in Birmingham and was
    then taken up by a judge only at the last minute, thus resulting in the
    judge inadvertently failing to have regard to the advertising  material
    which was attached to the bundles, but which the judge  did  not  heed.
    However, were this the only issue then I would have  no  hesitation  in
    saying that there was an error of law.

21. The reality is that there was an additional issue in this case, namely,
    that, although the Appellant had produced evidence that he was  engaged
    in business activity before 11th July 2014, this was not  the  kind  of
    business activity which was being delivered pursuant to a  contract  of
    service with a business other than his own, and as such, the  Appellant
    could not comply with the requirements of paragraph 41-SD  because  the
    core service that his business provided to its customers or clients did
    not involve his business delivering a service in an occupation  at  the
    appropriate level.

Notice of Decision

22. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.



23. No anonymity order is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 16th November 2015



