
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/42129/2013
     IA/41661/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23rd February 2016                         |On 29th March 2016            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                  [s s] (1)
                                  [g z] (2)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Karnick of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. These appeals arise as a result of the Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department  successfully  seeking  permission  to  appeal  against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Ransley) which in a decision
    dated 28th July 2014 allowed the appeals of  both  Respondents  against
    the Secretary of State's decision of 20th September  2013  refusing  to
    grant them leave to remain in the UK indefinitely and giving directions
    for their removal to Pakistan.

 2. The appeals come before me by way of a protracted route.  It  necessary
    therefore to set out their history.  First for  the  sake  of  clarity,
    throughout this decision I shall refer to the  Secretary  of  State  as
    "the  Respondent"  and  to  [SS]  and  [GZ]  as  "the  Appellants"   or
    individually as "husband" and "wife". This  reflects  their  respective
    positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

Background

 3. The Appellants are nationals of Pakistan.  They are husband  and  wife.
    Their respective dates of birth are [ ]  1942  and  [  ]  1952.   Their
    immigration history is as follows:

         .    They arrived in the UK on 2 March 1998 in possession of  valid
             visit visas.

         .    On 23 July 1998 they applied for indefinite leave to remain as
             the dependants of their son living in the United Kingdom,  but
             that application was refused on 8 November 1999.

         .     They  subsequently  appealed  that  refusal  and   subsequent
             decisions to refuse leave to remain unsuccessfully.

         .    They first raised Article 8 ECHR grounds on 5 August 2003 when
             they applied for  leave  to  remain  outside  the  Immigration
             Rules. That application was also unsuccessful.

         .    There followed numerous applications on human rights  grounds,
             none of which were successful.  These included an  application
             in 2012 on the grounds that [GZ] was  suffering  from  "severe
             mental ill-health" and therefore her  article  3  ECHR  rights
             would be interfered with if she were removed.

         .    Finally, in their latest application, they sought ILR because,
             they claimed, their rights under article 8 of the  ECHR  would
             be  unlawfully  interfered  with  based  on  their  continuing
             deteriorating health problems. This application was refused by
             the Respondent  on  20  September  2013.  They  appealed  that
             refusal to the FtT.

The Hearings

 4. When the Appellants appeals against the latest refusal came before  the
    FtT (Judge Law) that Tribunal, after hearing evidence, dismissed  their
    appeals. The Appellant's successfully sought permission to  appeal  the
    FtT's decision to the Upper Tribunal. Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lewis
    found that FtT had materially erred in its decision. He  therefore  set
    that decision aside and remitted the matter to the First-tier  Tribunal
    to be heard afresh. The remitted  appeal  came  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Ransley) on 11 July 2014.  In a decision issued  on  28
    July 2014 the FtT allowed both appeals on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

 5. The Respondent sought  and  was  granted  permission  to  appeal  Judge
    Ransley's decision. The matter came before Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Hanbury on 29 September 2014.  Judge Hanbury found a material error  of
    law in Judge Ransley's decision and once again the FtT's  decision  was
    set aside.

 6. Following queries by both parties  owing  to  a  discrepancy  in  Judge
    Hanbury's original decision to  set  aside  Judge  Ransley's  decision,
    Judge Hanbury amended his  decision  under  Rule  42  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

 7. Following promulgation of that amended decision  application  was  then
    made on behalf of the Appellants for  Judge  Hanbury's  decision  as  a
    whole to be set aside under Rule 43 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008. This was on the basis that it was unclear  as  to
    the outcome of the hearing of 29 September 2014.

 8. This application came before UTJ Kebede who found as follows:

              "It seems to me that  there  was  some  confusion  as  to  the
             outcome of the hearing of 29 September 2014 and the nature  of
             the decision made by Judge Hanbury in the initial  version  of
             his determination, leading to a request by  both  parties  for
             clarification and amendment.  The amended decision included  a
             further paragraph dismissing the appellants'  appeals,  whilst
             it appears that the indication given  at  the  hearing  on  29
             September 2014 was that the decision, if set aside,  would  be
             re-made at a  resumed  hearing  on  a  future  date.   As  the
             appellants' application suggests, it appears that the decision
             was accordingly re-made in the absence of clarification of the
             supporting evidence.

              In the circumstances, in the interests of justice, and on  the
             basis that there has been a  procedural  irregularity  in  the
             proceedings, I propose, in accordance  with  paragraphs  43(1)
             and 43(2)(d) of the UT Rules, to set aside that  part  of  the
             decision of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson (sic) re-making
             the  decision  by  dismissing  the  appellants'  appeals,  and
             propose that the decision in the appellants'  appeals  be  re-
             made at a resumed hearing in the Upper  Tribunal.   I  see  no
             reason to set aside Judge Hanbury's decision on the  error  of
             law.  Accordingly the decision of Judge  Ransley  having  been
             set aside, the appellants' appeals are yet  to  be  determined
             and shall be listed for hearing in the Upper Tribunal."

    Thus these appeals come before me for a resumed hearing  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal; an  error  of  law  having  been  found  in  Judge  Ransley's
    decision.



The Resumed UT Hearing

 9. Before me Mr Karnick appeared for the Appellants and Mr Diwnycz for the
    Secretary of State.  I heard evidence from  two  witnesses;  the  first
    [FS], the son of the Appellants and their  Sponsor  and  secondly  from
    [QA],  the  granddaughter  of  the  Appellants.   In  addition  to  the
    documentary evidence  which  was  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  a
    further set of documents was  served  under  cover  of  McManus  Seddon
    Runhams' letter of 19th February 2016.  These  documents  included  the
    following:

     . Witness statement of [FS] (sponsor/Appellants' son)

     . Witness statement of [QA] (granddaughter)

     . Witness statement of [NS] (granddaughter)

     . Witness statement of [AS] (granddaughter)

     . Witness statement of [SaS] (granddaughter)

     . Letter from Bradford Teaching Hospital for [AS]

     . Addendum report from Dr Saima Latif (psychologist)

     . GP update letter for the Appellants' health

     . Supporting letter from Khidmat Centre for the Appellants

     . Accountant's letter for the Appellants' son

    Mr Karnick also  sought  permission  to  submit  an  article  from  the
    American Academy of Neurology.  This article is authored by a Dr Q Khan
    and is headed Dementia: Challenges of Practice in Pakistan. It is dated
    November 2014.

10. I heard evidence from [FS]  who  kept  to  the  lines  of  his  witness
    statement signed and dated 17th February 2016.  His evidence focused on
    his parents' medical and social complaints.  He said that his  father's
    behaviour showed increasing amounts of confusion  and  aggression.   He
    considered that this was a result of his  father  suffering  heightened
    anxiety because of his immigration status or rather lack of it.

11. He outlined the intensive care which the family  members  give  to  his
    father. His father needs help with his day-to-day routine living needs.
     He needs help to get dressed, calmed down when he loses his temper and
    also needs encouragement to eat.

12. He said that he arranges his work as a taxi driver, so that he  remains
    at home during the early part of the day and  then  when  his  children
    return from college in the afternoon, he goes to work and the  children
    take over looking after their grandparents.

13. Turning to his mother's situation, [FS] told me that she  suffers  from
    epilepsy and depression. She is unable to  provide  any  care  for  his
    father.  Her epileptic fits have increased recently because, he thinks,
    of his father's dementia and occasional  aggressive  outbursts  towards
    her.

14. [FS] told me that his mother sleeps in the same room as  his  daughter.
    The family had to move his mother into a  room  away  from  his  father
    because of the disruptive behavioural outbursts mentioned above.  There
    have also been incidents when his father  has  wandered  out  into  the
    street - the family were alerted on one occasion by  a  neighbour.   In
    addition he now has to check on his father during the night because  in
    the past he has woken up and gone to the kitchen at 2am, and  tried  to
    make his breakfast on an unlit gas hob.

15. Mr Diwnycz in cross examination asked the Sponsor what  was  preventing
    the Appellants from returning to Pakistan?  [FS]  responded  that  they
    would perish there as there is no home for them to  go  to  and  no-one
    available to look after them.  He was asked whether  any  other  family
    members could help in particular the  Appellant's  three  brothers  who
    remain   in   Pakistan.    Could   they   offer   meaningful   support?
    Unsurprisingly the Sponsor replied that they could not.   He  said  the
    youngest brother is in his 60s and contact with them ceased  long  ago.
    He asked why in the  world  would  they  take  responsibility  for  his
    parents?  They are elderly themselves and would not have the ability to
    provide the intensive care  required  to  look  after  someone  who  is
    confused,  prone  to  wandering   unless   checked,   and   who   needs
    encouragement with day-to-day living.

16. Finally in response to Mr Diwnycz, the Sponsor said that if his parents
    were forcibly removed to Pakistan, he would have no choice  but  to  go
    with them.  He could not leave them there alone, nor could  he  abandon
    them. He would have to give up  his  work  and  a  further  intolerable
    strain would then be placed on his family. This would  leave  his  wife
    having to cope alone with the family in the  UK,  three  of  whom  have
    serious medical complaints.  That concluded his evidence.

17. I next heard briefly from the  Appellants'  granddaughter,  [QA].   She
    produced a witness statement signed and dated 18th February  2016.   In
    that statement she confirmed that the whole family took part in  caring
    for her grandparents.  She said that if another family  member  is  not
    available to help her grandfather, she assists him getting  dressed  in
    the morning.  She said he sometimes refuses to do  so  and  if  she  is
    unable to get him dressed, she has to call for her father or mother.

18. She said that her grandfather has a tendency to try and wander  off  so
    everyone in the family now has to keep an eye out for  him.   She  also
    reported incidents of him throwing his food around and refusing to eat.
     He becomes irritated and uneasy.  She said that the process of dealing
    with him is a continuous one and as well as her parents, she too checks
    on her grandfather at night.

19. Finally she told me that her grandmother suffers from epilepsy as  well
    as migraine attacks for which she has medication.  She said  that  when
    at home, she shares a room with her grandmother  so  that  she  can  be
    there  for  her  during  the  night.   She  said  she  also  helps  her
    grandmother with her physical needs  including  assisting  her  to  the
    bathroom.  She said that both she  and  her  sister  take  a  share  of
    helping with their grandparents in order to provide relief and help  to
    their parents.  There was no cross-examination of this witness.

20. I heard submissions from the  representatives.   Mr  Diwnycz  helpfully
    indicated that there was no real challenge to the evidence that  I  had
    heard, nor to the documentary  evidence  which  had  been  produced  on
    behalf of the Appellants. Suffice to say there were statements from the
    remaining members of the Sponsor's family confirming what  he  and  his
    daughter had said. In addition there was medical evidence outlining the
    Appellants' present condition.

21. Mr Diwnycz further submitted he was content to rely  upon  the  reasons
    for  the  Respondent's  refusal  decision  dated  20th  September  2013
    together with the grounds seeking to  challenge  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  He did accept however that matters had  moved  on
    since 2013, and that it was likely that the health of  both  Appellants
    had deteriorated.  He  submitted  however,  there  needs  to  be  shown
    compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised by the Immigration
    Rules, which justify departing from them. He said the Respondent's case
    is that:

     . The Appellants cannot  meet  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
       Rules.

       . There are sufficient ties with Pakistan to enable the Appellants to
         return there.

       . Their medical conditions although recognised are  not  such  as  to
         bring them within the high threshold of J [2005] EWCA Civ 629.

       . All these factors have to  be  weighed  in  the  context  that  the
         Appellants had remained here outwith the Rules for many  years  and
         had become a considerable burden upon the UK NHS.

22. Mr Karnick accepted that the Appellants could not meet the requirements
    of the Immigration Rules.  He submitted that pursuant to the  decisions
    in Gulshan [2013] UKUT 640 and Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (admin),  it  will
    be necessary for me to consider as Mr Diwnycz said, whether  there  are
    arguably good grounds for granting leave to remain  outside  the  Rules
    and if so to consider whether there are  compelling  circumstances  not
    sufficiently recognised under the  Rules.   In  order  to  follow  this
    through, it would be necessary to carry out the Razgar [2004]  UKHL  27
    proportionality balancing exercise.  He  submitted  that  there  was  a
    wealth of evidence to show that the  circumstances  of  the  Appellants
    fell within  compelling  circumstances.  This  included  the  level  of
    dependency upon their son, their social care/  medical  needs  and  the
    fact that there was no-one who could reasonably  be  expected  to  look
    after their needs in Pakistan.

23. He pointed out further that although he must accept that the  error  of
    law finding  of  Judge  Hanbury  must  remain  as  per  Judge  Kebede's
    directions, nevertheless it was his view that Judge Ransley had carried
    out precisely the process outlined above  and  which  resulted  in  her
    decision that the appeals should be allowed.

Discussion

24. I am satisfied that pursuant to the approach  adopted  in  Gulshan  and
    Nagre, there are compelling circumstances in these  appeals  which  are
    not sufficiently recognised under the Immigration Rules.  I  find  this
    to be so on the basis that both Appellants now have a  dependency  upon
    their son and grandchildren which is greater than the normal  emotional
    ties between parents and adult  children.   I  am  satisfied  that  the
    evidence before me shows that  because  of  the  Sponsor's  own  family
    circumstances, it would be wholly  unreasonable  and  impracticable  to
    expect him to relocate to Pakistan to look after his parents there.   I
    find that that would be the only option available to the Appellants.

25. I am satisfied therefore  that  the  Article  8  ECHR  rights  of  both
    Appellants  are  engaged  so  far  as  their  family/private  life   is
    concerned.  I therefore proceed by  adopting  the  five  stage  process
    outlined in Razgar.  It was submitted by Mr Karnick (and accepted by Mr
    Diwnycz) that if I found Article 8 is engaged, then what is in issue is
    the proportionality assessment.  In  other  words  is  the  refusal  of
    indefinite leave to remain and the making  of  removal  directions,  in
    these circumstances, disproportionate?

26. What must weigh heavily against these Appellants is  their  immigration
    history.  It is  said  in  the  documents  before  me  that  they  have
    "cynically exploited" the Immigration Rules of this  country  and  that
    "grants of leave outside the Immigration Rules should not be used as  a
    means to circumvent the requirements of the Rules."  I find this to  be
    an unhelpful approach in this instance.  What has to be  looked  at  is
    the present situation of the Appellants and the weight to  be  attached
    to that as against any countervailing circumstances.

27. I fully accept little weight can be attached to family or private  life
    formed at a time when a person's immigration status is  precarious;  it
    is correct to say that in these cases the Appellants have been  in  the
    United Kingdom for many years but with a precarious immigration status.
    Therefore their time in the UK does not give weight to their cause.

28. It is also a factor weighing greatly against the Appellants  that  both
    are receiving National Health Service treatment in  this  country,  and
    that treatment for dementia and  epilepsy  amounts  to  a  considerable
    expense to the tax payer.  Although  Mr  Diwnycz  generously  indicated
    that there was no real challenge to the Sponsor's evidence, it has been
    noted elsewhere that the Sponsor was less than frank in his attempt  to
    give the impression that he pays privately  for  his  parents'  medical
    fees.  I am satisfied that the situation is that both Appellants access
    free services from the NHS.

29. What are the factors weighing against removal?  Neither Appellant is in
    good health.  Both suffer from  what  can  be  termed  as  age  related
    diseases and in [SS]'s case there has been a  marked  deterioration  in
    his dementia over the last eighteen months to two years.   The  medical
    evidence indicates that his disease has  now  advanced  from  early  to
    moderate/severe dementia.  He  presents  with  episodic  confusion  and
    aggression.  It is a progressive illness.  He is cared for  and  looked
    after by his family in  the  UK,  more  particularly  by  his  son  and
    daughter-in-law.  The  medical  evidence  concerning  his  dementia  is
    cogent and clear.  It  supports  the  Sponsor's  evidence  showing  the
    intensive social care which is required to keep [SS] safe.  Effectively
    [SS] lives his life in one room in his son's house where he is fed  and
    kept clean and safe.  He goes to the mosque on occasion  and  sometimes
    his family take him out for short walks but frankly (and this is no way
    meant to be a criticism) he lives a highly restricted  lifestyle  which
    will not get any better.

30. [GZ], although individually not requiring the same  intensive  care  as
    her husband, nevertheless, frankly is not capable of  caring  for  him,
    partly due to the fact that his condition means that he  is  aggressive
    on occasions towards her and this exacerbates her  epilepsy.   She  too
    receives care from her son and his family, to the extent that she lives
    separately from her husband albeit in the same household.

31. I am satisfied that the evidence before me shows that there would be no-
    one in Pakistan, to whom the Appellants  could  turn,  for  support  in
    receiving the intensive care which they need  and  receive  from  their
    family in the UK.  Despite concerns being raised  about  the  Sponsor's
    credibility in previous hearings I accept  his  evidence,  that  [SS]'s
    three brothers would be unable to help.  Aside from the  evidence  that
    there is now little or no contact with those  brothers,  it  stands  to
    reason, that [SS] himself is 72 years of age and therefore his brothers
    are also elderly.  It is unrealistic to expect those relatives to be in
    a position to give the care that the Appellants' require.  In  addition
    I accept that  the  Sponsor  is  the  only  child  of  the  Appellants.
    Therefore there are no siblings in Pakistan available to help  shoulder
    the responsibility of looking after the Appellants.

32. This brings me to the next major aspect of these appeals.  The  Sponsor
    told me, and I accept this, that the only option left  to  him,  should
    the Appellants be removed, would  be  for  him  to  leave  the  UK  and
    relocate to Pakistan with them.  He said he could  not  leave  them  to
    perish on their own nor could he abandon them.   For  him  to  relocate
    with his parents, would in my  judgment,  present  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences for the rest of his immediate family.  First he would have
    to give up his  employment.   Secondly  his  family  is  already  under
    considerable  strain.   Three  of  the  five   children   suffer   from
    debilitating illnesses. The family cope with this  without  any  social
    services help.

33. It has been set out by the Respondent in some detail in her reasons for
    refusal letter at [42 to 46] the extent  to  which  treatment  for  the
    Appellants is available in Pakistan.  The USSD's  Consular  Information
    Sheet on Pakistan reports that:

         "Adequate basic non-emergency medical care is  available  in  major
         Pakistani cities, but is limited in rural areas.  Facilities in the
         cities  vary  in  level  and  range  of  services,  resources,  and
         cleanliness ...  generic  brands  from  well-known  pharmaceuticals
         usually  are  available.   The  quality  of  the  locally  produced
         medication is uneven."

34. The Respondent further  reports  that  the  World  Health  Organisation
    Mental Health Atlas 2005 Pakistan stated that:

         "The primary sources of mental health financing in descending order
         are out of pocket expenditure by the patient or family, tax  based,
         social  insurance  and  private  insurances.    The   country   has
         disability benefits for  persons  with  mental  disorders.   Mental
         health is a part of primary healthcare system.  Actual treatment of
         severe mental disorders is available at the primary  level.   There
         are many residential and day care facilities, especially for people
         with  learning  disability   providing   social,   vocational   and
         educational activities.

         ... There are community care facilities for  patients  with  mental
         disorders.  More than 78 junior psychiatrists have been trained  in
         community  mental  health  to  act  as  resourced  persons  in  the
         development of programmes in their area."

35. Mr Karnick however presented evidence in the form of a paper from Dr  Q
    Khan, the  source  of  this  article  being  the  American  Academy  of
    Neurology.  The article is headed Dementia: Challenges of  Practice  in
    Pakistan. This outline that at the date of the article, Dr Khan was the
    only formally trained dementia  specialist  in  Pakistan.   He  reports
    there are no behavioural, neurology or dementia training programmes for
    graduating psychiatry or neurology residents.  He further reports  that
    in 2012 two dementia clinics were established in Lahore and  Islamabad.
    A national pharmaceutical company has also recruited some physicians to
    see dementia patients in various cities in Pakistan.  Whilst  I  accept
    that this shows that there is some emerging dementia care available  in
    Pakistan, the article goes on to say the following:

         "Social  Services.   Alzheimer's  Pakistan  is   a   non-government
         national organisation that has set up a day care centre  in  Lahore
         with the assistance of Alzheimer's Australia.   There  is  no  long
         term care unit on nursing  home  for  patients  with  dementia  and
         almost all of these people are cared for at home by their families.
          These care givers provide full assistance from the advanced stages
         of the disease until death without benefit of dementia counsellors,
         social workers, case managers or support groups."

36. I accept the evidence produced  in  Dr  Khan's  paper  entitled  Global
    Perspective and I am satisfied neither Appellant  could  reasonably  be
    cared for in Pakistan without the Sponsor being there  to  provide  the
    required assistance in their day-to-day care.

37. I take into account as part  of  the  balancing  exercise,  Dr  Latif's
    expert  report  and  addendum  thereto.   Dr  Latif's  report  was  not
    challenged.  Dr Latif reports that removal of the Appellants would have
    a detrimental impact on the emotional functioning  of  three  of  their
    grandchildren.  She ties this into  their  degenerative  illnesses  and
    their high  degree  of  anxiety  about  their  grandparents'  uncertain
    immigration status.  This is something that I am bound to  have  regard
    to when conducting the balancing exercise.

38. Drawing all these factors together into the balance it is clear  to  me
    that the relationship between the Appellants  and  their  son  is  much
    greater than that of  normal  emotional  ties  between  a  parent/adult
    child.  The dependency of the  Appellants,  because  of  their  medical
    history outweighs the fact that they have remained in the  country  for
    numerous years with precarious immigration status.  In my judgment they
    will not be able to access the medical resources available in Pakistan,
    without their son accompanying them back to Pakistan.  In view  of  his
    family circumstances that would be unreasonable  and  would  be  unduly
    harsh. It follows therefore that to remove these  Appellants  on  their
    own would be unduly harsh.  Consequently for the foregoing reasons  the
    appeals of both Appellants against the Respondent's  decision  of  20th
    September 2013 to refuse them indefinite leave  to  remain  and  remove
    them to Pakistan, are allowed.

Decision

The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated  on  28th  July  2014
contained a material error of law and is hereby set aside.

The decision is remade allowing the appeals of [SS]  and  [GZ]  against  the
Secretary of State's decision of 20th September 2013 refusing them leave  to
enter and making removal directions.

The Appellants' appeals are allowed pursuant to Article 8  of  the  European
Convention of Human Rights.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                              Date: 29.03.2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts
