
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/42353/2013
                                                               IA/42380/2013
                                                               Ia/42393/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



Heard at Field House   Determination Promulgated
On 3 November 2014     On 18 November 2014


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                             MR GURINERJIT SINGH
                              MS PARMINDER KAUR
                             MR PARBHKIRAT SINGH
                       (Anonymity directions not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation
For the appellant: Mr H Rashid of Counsel
For the respondent: Mr Neville-Smart, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellants are citizens of India born on 27 May 1967, 1  August  1970
   and 4 January 1984 respectively. They are father, mother  and  son.  They
   appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the  decision  of   the
   respondent to refuse to grant them leave to remain in the United  Kingdom
   on the basis of their Article 8 rights. First Tier Tribunal Judge  Raikes
   dismissed the appellants' appeals in a determination dated 27 May 2014.


2. At the hearing I was informed that the  third  appellant  in  the  appeal
   (IA/42390/2013) has not appealed the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
   as his appeal was allowed under the Immigration Rules on the  basis  that
   he has been in this country for more than half his life.


3. Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  RC
   Campbell on 12 June 2014 stating that  it  is  arguable  that  the  Judge
   materially erred in law in his determination for not giving  insufficient
   reasons at paragraph 47 and 48 of the determination  in  support  of  her
   overall conclusion that the separation of the third  appellant  from  the
   rest of the family, following their removal to India, would  only  be  of
   modest impact.


    First-tier Tribunal's findings


4. The Judge made the following  findings  in  his  determination  which  in
   summary are the following.


I. The first and his eldest son who was aged 9 entered  the  United  Kingdom
   on 7 August 2004 after having been granted leave  to  enter  as  visitors
   their leave being valid until 4  February  2005.  The  second  and  third
   appellants entered the United  Kingdom  on  15  April  2008  having  been
   granted leave to enter as  visitors  such  leave  being  valid  until  20
   September 2008.


II. The appellant's claim is as follows. The first  appellant  had  arranged
   for an agent to assist him in his eldest son in  getting  to  the  United
   Kingdom and his sister-in-law paid for them to do so. While in the United
   Kingdom the first appellant commenced employment  and  made  a  life  for
   himself. The second appellant entered the United Kingdom in May 2004  and
   returned to India as her father was suffering from cancer. She stayed  in
   India with her younger son at her sister's property for about two  years.
   She returned to  the  United  Kingdom  in  2007  following  her  sister's
   decision to sell the property she was living in.


III. There are aspects of the appellant's accounts in their evidence at  the
   hearing which are either inconsistent or  implausible  when  taken  as  a
   whole. This includes their reason for first coming to the United  Kingdom
   is not credible which  was  due  to  a  family  rift  between  the  first
   appellant and his family.  The  second  appellant  however  in  both  her
   statement and in her evidence stated that there  were  no  such  problems
   with her family in India. The evidence is that the evidence is  that  the
   second appellant has been travelling back and forth  between  the  United
   Kingdom and India on a fairly regular basis. After her  father  died  she
   lived in India for a period of two years  and  travelled  to  the  United
   Kingdom and back to India in 2007.


IV. The evidence of the appellants that they  have  severed  all  ties  with
   India is not credible. The evidence is that they have  people  living  in
   the village who the call aunt and uncle even though they claim  that  the
   rest of their family has left  India.  The  appellant  also  applied  for
   assisted voluntary return to India in 2012 and took substantial steps  in
   the process before abandoning this option.


V. The first appellant in his witness statement stated  that  relocating  to
   India would have severe hardship to the family but in his  oral  evidence
   he said that he was prepared to return to work  hard  to  pay  his  son's
   college fees.


VI. While it is accepted that the appellants all  enjoy  good  relationships
   and have all lived together as a unit since 2007, it is noted  that  they
   have spent several periods of time in the past living apart in order,  it
   appears, to suit them in to ensure that they could achieve their  aim  of
   all remaining in the United Kingdom. Whilst they  have  emphasised  their
   evidence at the hearing that they are very close this  is  not  the  case
   particularly given the lack of communication that clearly existed at  the
   time of the assisted voluntary return application between the parents and
   the children of the family particularly the eldest son.


VII. The appellant's circumstances under private and family life  have  been
   considered within the Immigration Rules. None of the appellants can  meet
   the requirements of appendix FM. The first and second appellant  are  not
   in a subsisting relationship with a British citizen or a  person  settled
   in the United Kingdom, nor are they the parent of a British citizen child
   or a child with continuous residence in the United Kingdom. In respect of
   the third appellant he does not meet the requirements of leave to  remain
   as a child in view of the Immigration Rules and his mother's position. In
   any event it has been accepted in the application that they are unable to
   meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules under either  the  partner
   or parent route.


VIII. In respect of paragraph 276 ADE the appeals of the  first  second  and
   third appellants must be considered separately from that  of  the  eldest
   child in the original appeal. In respect of the first  second  and  third
   appellant while they have been in the United Kingdom  since  August  2004
   and April 2008, they arrived as visitors from India and  have  not  lived
   continuously in the United Kingdom for a period of 20 years  and  further
   in respect of the first and second appellants are  now  aged  46  and  43
   respectively and were adults  at  the  time  of  their  applications.  In
   respect of the third appellant whilst he is under the age of 18, has  not
   lived continuously in the United Kingdom for a period of at  least  seven
   years. The appellants have not therefore met the Immigration Rules.


IX. However given the circumstances and in view of the recent case law,  the
   Judge considered the position of the first, second and  third  appellants
   outside  the  Immigration  Rules.  It  has  to  be  decided  whether  the
   appellants' application raises any exceptional circumstances which  might
   warrant consideration outside the Immigration Rules and under  article  8
   and accordance with the five stage test in Razgar v SSHD [2004] UK HL 27.


X. It is noted that the eldest son in the previous proceedings has leave  to
   remain in the United Kingdom in view of his age and circumstances. It has
   been taken into account that the first second and  third  appellant  have
   lived with the eldest son as son and brother respectively for many  years
   and a familial relationship is an existence, albeit  not  necessarily  of
   such a degree as they do everything together as claimed.


XI. The appellants are all Indian nationals but have  lived  in  the  United
   Kingdom with someone who has a right to remain  in  this  country  for  a
   number of years. The first appellant has sporadically been in  employment
   and the second has  brought  up  children  in  the  third  appellant  has
   attended school. The eldest son has commenced higher  education  in  this
   country. It is stated in MM (tier 1 PSW; Article 8 private life) Zimbabwe
   [2009] that respect for private life does not include a right to work  or
   study in itself however the social ties and relationships  formed  during
   such periods are capable of constituting "private  life".  Therefore  the
   answer to the first question in Razgar is in the  affirmative,  that  the
   appellants have established  private  and  family  life  which  would  be
   breached by the respondent's decision.


XII. The second, third and fourth question in Razgar are  also  answered  in
   the affirmative in that the  interference  would  have  such  gravity  as
   potentially to engage the operation of Article 8.


XIII.  The  fifth  question  is  one  of  proportionality  and  whether  the
   interference would be proportionate to the legitimate public interest  to
   maintain immigration control.


XIV. In assessing proportionality the findings of facts set  out  above  are
   relied upon. The first second and  third  appellants  did  not  meet  the
   requirements of the Immigration Rules as set out. It has been found  that
   the appellant have not severed all ties with India. The first and  second
   appellants have lived their entire lives in India  prior  coming  to  the
   United Kingdom in 2004 in 2008 and by the application  for  AVR  in  2012
   demonstrated their intention to continue to live in India.


XV. The appellants  made  no  attempts  to  regularise  their  status  until
   recently and by virtue of the length of residence  in  this  country  the
   eldest son now meets the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules.  Other
   than the brief period in 2004 and  2008  the  appellants  never  had  any
   status in the United Kingdom and they have been living here when they did
   not have permission to do so. They cannot and should  not  have  had  any
   expectation of settlement when the family, or at least the parents of the
   family, knew that they were in the United Kingdom lawfully. The fact that
   they took steps by applying to voluntary return to India over  two  years
   ago indicates a clear knowledge of this. The appellants  managed  to  get
   birth certificates for the AVR application from friends  in  India  which
   demonstrates that they have friends and ties to India.


XVI. The best interests of the child has been considered  which  must  be  a
   primary consideration in making the decision. The appellants  are  Indian
   nationals who have no right to remain in the  United  Kingdom  and  their
   removal from the United Kingdom is proportionate. Whilst there will be an
   impact and an effect of their removal in view of the eldest son  who  has
   status in the United Kingdom, the third appellant like his parents is  an
   Indian national and not a British citizen. He lives with his parents  and
   would be able to return to India with them as a family unit. The Judge is
   satisfied that in the circumstances  that  the  decision  to  remove  the
   appellants is consistent with the statutory duty to protect the interests
   of the child.




    Grounds of appeal


5. The appellant in her grounds of  appeal  states  the  following  which  I
   summarise. The Judge in her determination has made a  material  error  of
   law and made unlawful findings on  matters  that  were  material  to  the
   outcome, has misunderstood the evidence and has  misdirected  herself  on
   the nature of the evidence and considered irrelevant matters. The Judge's
   finding that there is likely to be a minimal disruption  to  family  life
   should the family be split, is fundamentally flawed. It is incumbent upon
   public bodies, where possible to promote family life.
6.


7. The Judge has failed to consider the fact that  the  eldest  son  of  the
   family who is in full-time education in this country is still  very  much
   dependent on his parents and certainly  is  not  leaving  an  independent
   life. He has just turned 19 years of age and lives with both his  parents
   and the third appellant. If the parents were to be returned to India this
   would leave him without support. The Judge has  failed  to  consider  the
   impact on the eldest son of removal of his parents. The  Judge  has  also
   failed to consider that her decision impacts on the  third  appellant  as
   the decision amounts to the splitting of the family and it cannot  be  in
   the best interests of the third appellant who is still very much a minor.
   It is clear from the evidence that the family have a close bond  and  the
   two brothers enjoy a very good relationship.


8. The Judge's decision this country to the case law in ZB (Pakistan)  v  SS
   HD [2009] EWCA Civ 834 and Muse v ECO [2012] EWCA  Civ  10  which  states
   that "there is a positive duty on the respondent to promote family life".
   The decision of the Judge does not promote family life in this  case  and
   therefore the decision is unlawful.


    The Rule 24 response


9. The Rule 24 response stated the following which I  summarise.  The  Judge
   of the First-tier Tribunal directed herself appropriately. The Judge  has
   given reasons for her  findings  regarding  family  life  and  has  asked
   herself the correct questions and conducted the proportionality  exercise
   appropriately and  therefore  the  determination  does  not  contain  any
   material error of law.


10. With respect to the proportionality challenges,  it  will  be  submitted
   that the Judge has considered paragraph 276 ADE of the Immigration Rules.




11. The Supreme Court has recently commented on this  aspect  in  Patel  and
   ors UK SC 72 [2013] at page 55 to  56,  noting  the  limited  utility  of
   temporary leave in considering Article 8 issues.




The hearing

12. I heard submissions from both parties at the hearing the full  notes  of
   which are in my Record of Proceedings.

Decision on error of law

13. It was argued on behalf of the third appellant by  Mr  Rashid  that  the
   Judge found that the eldest child  has  an  independent  life  while  the
   evidence was that they have been residing together as a family  unit.  Mr
   Rashid argued that it is not right that the eldest  son  should  live  in
   this country alone and independently and his parents and brother be  sent
   back to India as this will result in the splitting up of the family.


14. The first-tier Tribunal Judge in a careful  and  detailed  determination
   considered all  the  evidence  in  the  appeal  in  respect  of  all  the
   appellants individually. The  Judge  found  that  the  first  and  second
   appellants did not meet the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules  and
   there were no exceptional circumstances as to why they should be  allowed
   to remain pursuant to article 8. This was a finding  open  to  the  Judge
   considering that the appellants came to this country on  visitor's  visas
   and after their expiration lived here unlawfully. They Judge was entitled
   to find that there were no exceptional circumstances  in  the  first  and
   second appellants' appeals that they should succeed pursuant to Article 8
   when they cannot satisfy the requirements of the Immigration Rules.


15. It has been argued that as the eldest son who is 19  years  old  and  in
   full-time education in this country, has been  granted  leave  to  remain
   pursuant to the Immigration Rules, it follows that the first  second  and
   third appellant's should also be allowed to remain  as  they  are  all  a
   close family unit.


16. The Judge in his determination stated that  eldest  child  can  continue
   his education in this country because that is what he wants  to  do.  The
   Judge was entitled to find that the eldest son is an adult and  can  live
   independently and pursue his education in this country even if this means
   separation from his family who will return to  India.  There  is  nothing
   perverse in this conclusion based on the  evidence  that  the  first  and
   second appellants have no right to remain in this country. The Judge gave
   sustainable reasons for his finding that the eldest son who is  in  full-
   time education in this country can live on his own as he is an adult  and
   found that the family have lived apart  in  the  past.  Implicit  in  the
   determination is that it is the eldest son's choice whether he wishes  to
   stay in this country to pursue his education or accompany his  family  to
   India.


17. The quarrel with the Judge is that she did not take  into  account  that
   the third appellant who is a minor should be  allowed  to  stay  in  this
   country with his eldest brother and that this violates the older son  and
   the third appellant's rights pursuant to Article 8.


18. The Judge noted that this family have lived apart in  the  past  despite
   their close ties. The Judge was entitled to find on the evidence that all
   the appellants have done different things at  different  times  in  their
   lives. He took into account the evidence that the appellant's mother  and
   the third appellant lived  in  India  apart  from  the  first  and  third
   appellant for almost 2 years. In the circumstances the Judge was entitled
   to find that the family is capable of living independently when the  need
   arises. The Judge was aware that exclusion of the appellants  would  also
   involve the separation  of  the  two  siblings  and  found  that  it  was
   proportionate in the circumstances of this case.


19. In respect of the third appellant the Judge found that he is  under  the
   age of 18, has not lived continuously in the United Kingdom for a  period
   of at least seven years. The Judge placed emphasis of the fact  that  the
   third appellant is not a British citizen which he is entitled to do.  The
   Judge found that the third appellant will be removed with his parents  as
   a family unit and that would be  in  the  best  interests  of  the  third
   appellant. The Judge stated in her determination that the best  interests
   of the third appellant must inform her decision. There is  no  perversity
   in her finding that the third appellant who is a minor can accompany  his
   parents who have no right to remain in this country.


20.  The  Judge  took  into  account  all  the  relevant  factors   in   his
   proportionality exercise and gave cogent reasons for  her  decision.  The
   Judge took into account the  Article  8  rights  of  all  family  members
   individually. The Judge also took into account the case  of  Beoku  Betts
   [2008] UKHL 39 which states that family life of the unit as a whole  must
   be considered. She also considered the case of  Kugathas  v  SSHD  [2003]
   EWCA Civ 31 and was aware that when considering family life there must be
   additional ties  of  dependency  beyond  normal  emotional  ties  between
   related adults. The Judge was entitled  to  find  on  the  evidence  that
   although the family have lived together in this country, there  has  been
   no evidence of additional ties of dependency beyond normal emotional ties
   between related adults. The appellants appeal is no more than  a  quarrel
   with the Judge's findings which she was entitled to make on the evidence.


21. The upshot is that the determination of the Judge is not affected  by  a
   material error and I find that the Judge did conduct a proper  assessment
   of all the appellants' rights individually pursuant  to  Article  8.  The
   Judge also took into account the best interests of  the  third  appellant
   and came to a sustainable conclusion.


22. I find that there is no material error of law in  the  determination  of
   First-tier Tribunal and I uphold her decision.


Conclusions

23. I therefore find that  the  appellants  appeal  must  fail  pursuant  to
   Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.


DECISION

Appeal dismissed



Signed by

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Mrs S Chana                                               Dated 12th day  of
    November 2014





