
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42766/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham, Sheldon Court              |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 11th July 2014                               |On 22nd July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                             ms christine muzaki
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms H Masih (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge P J Holmes, promulgated on 22nd April 2014, following  a  hearing
    at Stoke-on-Trent on 17th March 2014.  In the determination, the  judge
    allowed the appeal of Christine Muzaki.  The  Respondent  Secretary  of
    State applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Uganda who was born on 13th October 1972.
     She appealed against the decision of the Respondent Secretary of State
    refusing her leave  to  remain  indefinitely  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules, following her application on 28th September 2012.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that the Appellant has been  in  this  country
    for more than eleven years and has made a contribution  to  society  in
    the UK, having suffered domestic violence from her husband,  a  Ugandan
    citizen, who has left her, and that she has been dependent  on  friends
    for support, but has strong and  supportive  community  relations  now,
    such that she succeeds on the basis of Article 8 ECHR rights.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge gave consideration to the fact that  the  Appellant  had  not
    taken legal advice at the time of applying and that much of that  which
    was in her favour had simply not been properly put in her  application.
    The judge summarised the facts (at paragraph 13) and heard the evidence
    of the Reverend Harper, from the Church of England, who spoke very well
    of the Appellant (paragraph 14).

 5. He then found the Appellant to be  a  truthful  witness,  who  had  not
    exaggerated her claim, and who had suffered domestic violence, and  had
    been a victim of neglect, but had redeeming features which went in  her
    favour (paragraph 15).  The judge held that  the  Appellant  could  not
    satisfy the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules  in  Appendix  FM.
    However,  she  could  satisfy  freestanding  Article  8   jurisprudence
    requirements and the judge proceeded to allow the appeal on this  basis
    (paragraph 18).

The Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that the judge failed to apply  "case-
    specific guidance" in relation to the way in which Article 8 was to  be
    used, and had misunderstood the import of  MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ
    1192.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on 22nd May  2014  with  the  Tribunal
    observing that the judge  had  committed  a  clear  error  of  law  (in
    paragraph 18)  when  he  said  "there  is  no  test  of  exceptionality
    applicable under Article  8".    Moreover,  the  judge  had  failed  to
    identify any compelling circumstance which enabled  him  to  leave  the
    domain of the Immigration Rules and consider the case of the  Appellant
    under Article 8 ECHR jurisprudence.



Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me on 11th July  2014,  Mr  Mills,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Respondent Secretary of State, explained that  the  judge
    had clearly misunderstood the applicable law.  He  had  said  that  the
    case of Izuazu [2013] UKUT 00045 had now been given  specific  approval
    by the Court of Appeal in paragraph 49 of MF (Nigeria).   He  had  said
    that this judgment was to be preferred over that in Gulshan [2013] UKUT
    00640, but this was plainly wrong.  The judge had wrongly chosen not to
    follow Gulshan . However, Mr Mills submitted that the findings of  fact
    by the judge were entirely open  to  him  and  these  were   not  being
    challenged in this appeal.

 9. For her part, Ms Masih referred to her Rule  24  response.   This  also
    served as her skeleton argument.  In addition, there was  her  "Amended
    Skeleton Argument" as well which I was directed to.  She submitted that
    the judge did refer to the authorities but he was not wrong  in  saying
    that there was  no  legal  exceptionality  test.   He  was  correct  in
    following Nagre and his findings  of  fact  clearly  demonstrated  that
    there were "compelling" circumstances which led him to leave the domain
    of the Immigration Rules and consider the  position  of  the  Appellant
    under Article 8 ECHR.

10. In reply, Mr Mills submitted that Gulshan is the gateway to Article  8.
    MF (Nigeria) accepted that the Rules are a complete code.  The point of
    the gateway is that there has to be something "compelling"  before  one
    can enter the gateway and reconsider the position under Article 8.  The
    judge did not consider the gateway but he also did not then proceed  to
    explain why, his having considered the position under  Article  8  ECHR
    grounds, the Appellant deserved to succeed.  At paragraph 21 the  judge
    had not properly balanced the Appellant's family life with  the  public
    interest.

No Error of Law

11. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the  Judge  does  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside this decision  and  remake  the
    decision.

12. In what  is  a  careful  and  comprehensive  determination,  the  judge
    properly has regard to all the relevant case law.  Before he does  this
    he recognises that the Appellant cannot succeed under Appendix FM.   He
    considers the position under paragraph 276ADE and  he  makes  it  clear
    that  this  "does  not   give   room   for   reporting   the   complete
    proportionality exercise...  It does not permit  consideration  of  the
    qualify of the Appellant's private life in the UK" (a point made by  Ms
    Masih in her skeleton argument).

13. It then refers to Sales J in Nagre [2013] EWHC 720,  where  recognition
    is given to the possibility of an individual succeeding whose roots are
    put down in the UK over his  remaining  ties  in  the  country  of  his
    nationality.

14. When the case law is considered (at paragraph  18)  the  judge  is  not
    wrong in saying that "There is no  test  of  exceptionality  applicable
    under Article 8".  There is none.  Article  8  jurisprudence  does  not
    speak about  "exceptionality".   The  judge  gives  citations  for  the
    references to the judgments given in  the  respective  cases.   He  was
    perfectly aware that

         "Only if there were arguably good grounds  for  granting  leave  to
         remain outside the Rules was it necessary for the judge for Article
         8 purposes to go on  to  consider  whether  there  were  compelling
         circumstances  not  sufficiently  recognised   under   the   Rules"
         (paragraph 18).

15. It was only after the judge had appraised himself of the  proper  legal
    situation in this manner that he went on to say  that,  "I  would  find
    there are indeed arguably good grounds for the reasons I have given  in
    the preceding paragraph" (paragraph 18).  It was only in  this  context
    that he then said that there  were  no  "legal  tests"  of  "compelling
    circumstances".  No judgment of the Court of Appeal has suggested  that
    there are.

16. MF (Nigeria) [2013] is the case that he referred to but he also  refers
    to the later case of Shahzad [2014] UKUT 00085, and what he then  gives
    is a reasoned determination on the basis of this case law.

17. Finally, the judge gives a very fulsome explanation at paragraphs 20 to
    21 in relation to proportionality of the decision by the  Secretary  of
    State.  There is nothing here at all that suggests that the judge  fell
    into error.

18. It has to be borne in mind that under established legal authority  what
    the Appellant has to show in a case such as this is that  the  decision
    of the judge below is "perverse" and that this is a "very high  hurdle"
    (see R [Iran] (2005) EWCA Civ 982).

Decision

19. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  judge's  decision.   The
    determination shall stand.

20. No anonymity order is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 21st July 2014


