
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42156/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 February 2015                          |On 31 March 2015              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                               eliyan madhavan
                          (no anonymity direction)


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Professor Rees, instructed by Ravi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of India,  born  on  13  July  1970  and  he
    entered the UK on 5 November 2003 having been granted  entry  clearance
    as a visitor from the British High Commission  in  Bombay.  That  visit
    visa was valid from 14 October 2003 until 14 April 2004.  On  entry  to
    the UK the appellant proceeded to undertake the  role  as  Minister  of
    Religion with the Free Church England or the Reformed Episcopal  Church
    and he made three applications for leave to remain  as  a  Minister  of
    Religion, all of which were refused.  The appellant was finally "appeal
    rights exhausted in 2006".  Nonetheless the appellant remained  in  the
    United Kingdom.

 2. The respondent subsequently re-considered his application of 7  January
    2013 on human  rights  grounds  and  refused  that  application  on  20
    September 2013.

 3. In a decision dated 6 October 2014 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Seifert
    allowed the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds but this was set
    aside on the basis that the judge made  inadequate  findings  regarding
    the weight to be attached to the position of the Secretary of State and
    why this was  outweighed  by  the  appellant's  private  life  and  any
    findings in relation to whether it was precarious.  In  particular  the
    judge did  not  explain  why  mere  establishment  of  service  to  the
    community through the church should outweigh the fact that he was  here
    precariously and latterly unlawfully.

 4. At the hearing at the error of law stage Professor Rees  had  submitted
    that there were two previous sets of solicitors  who  had  advised  him
    inappropriately who had caused the appellant's applications to fail.

 5. In essence the appellant stated that he was borne and brought up in the
    village of  Mavilangal in India and then moved to Chennai when  he  was
    25 years old and where he worked. His family still reside in India  and
    his mother lives in Mavilangal village and his wife and  daughter,  who
    is 14 years of age, reside in Chennai.  He developed a strong  interest
    in the Christian faith community and a passion  for  religion  although
    owing to financial reasons and pressure from his family he  was  forced
    to study an electrical engineering degree at university, and  in  2002,
    he was awarded a Bachelor of Theology degree at St John's Bible College
    and was awarded a Certificate of Ordination in 2003.

 6. In 2003 he was invited to the annual Keswick Convention by the  Keswick
    Ministries in the UK and he decided this would strengthen his ties with
    the Christian community and he applied for a visit visa to attend.   He
    arrived on 5 November 2003 and stayed with his  wife's  relatives  with
    whom he still lives.

 7. After attending the convention he agreed to assist an elderly  minister
    at the Christchurch in Harlesden and then was  invited  by  many  other
    churches to carry out services in the  Tamil  language  for  the  Tamil
    community.

 8. His visa expired on 14 April 2004.  He made applications to remain  but
    those were refused on the basis of non-payment of fees and then because
    he was unable to 'switch category'.

 9. He gave evidence that it was not his original intention to  extend  his
    leave after he came here but had wanted to return to  India  where  his
    family lived. The situation changed when he became an active member  of
    the church here and he became "an  essential  link"  to  the  community
    preaching at regular services in the Tamil language held in  his  local
    church, Christchurch.  The elderly minister passed away and  he  became
    his successor and he has now worked in the community  for  over  eleven
    years and feels a sense  of  responsibility  for  each  member  of  the
    community.

10. In respect of other churches he has attended and provided services  and
    had provided services all over  the  country  preaching  and  providing
    pastoral care.

11. At the hearing before me in the Upper Tribunal the appellant  confirmed
    that he had preached all over London  and  indeed  in  places  such  as
    Glasgow, Aberystwyth and Manchester.

12. He was financially supported by  donations  given  by  members  of  the
    congregation and churches which he regularly attends and supported  the
    Sri Lankan community, particularly those who were asylum seekers.   His
    Tamil community congregation were part of the Church of Southern India.



13. He had not seen his daughter or wife or  mother for eleven years.  When
    he lived in India he was a pastor for one  year.  He  did  not  provide
    money for his wife, daughter or mother. His wife was a teacher and  his
    mother a farmer and they were self-sufficient.

14. First-tier Tribunal Reverend Robert Wilson gave oral evidence that  the
    appellant  had  become  an  asset  to  the  church  and  had  a  strong
    congregation of followers of Tamil ethnicity who regularly visited  the
    church to attend the appellant's services and who was growing dependent
    on his support.  He conducted a service every Sunday  from  5  p.m.  to
    6.30 p.m. in the Tamil language.  In essence he had  built  up  a  life
    here and a congregation  who  were  "passionate  about  his  services".
    Reverend Wilson confirmed that he had, with the appellant's permission,
    and acted as  part  of  the  service  delivered  by  Mr  Madhavan,  the
    appellant, and that what he said was interpreted into Tamil.

15. Documentation provided showed that the appellant was appointed  to  the
    office of one of the "delegates" for the year ending 28  February  2015
    by the Free Church of England and that he was licensed to officiate  as
    a priest in the diocese named by the  traditional  Church  of  England.
    There  were  photographs  of  the  appellant  with   members   of   the
    congregation.

16. It was  accepted  that  the  appellant  could  not  qualify  under  the
    Immigration Rules as a Minster of Religion or under  paragraph  276ADE.
    In particular the appellant was not given leave to enter as a  Minister
    of Religion and he has not resided in the UK for 20 years or lost  ties
    with his home country. The  question  is  whether  the  matter  can  be
    considered outside the Immigration Rules.  Mr  Melvin  referred  me  to
    Singh v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ  724
    and I note paragraph 64 of that judgment which states

         "What matters is there is nothing in Aiken LJ's comment which casts
         doubt on Sales J's basic point is His that  there  is  no  need  to
         conduct a full separate examination of Article 8 outside the  Rules
         where, in the circumstances of the particular case, all the  issues
         have been addressed in the consideration under the Rules."

17. Paragraph 66 of Singh essentially confirms that that "the second  stage
    can  in  an  appropriate  case  be  satisfied  by  the  decision  maker
    concluding that any family life or private life issues  raised  by  the
    claim have already been  addressed at the first stage-  in  which  case
    there is obviously no need to go through it all again". This,  however,
    still accepts that there is a second stage and that all the issues need
    to be considered fully which, in the circumstances, I proceed to do  in
    this decision.

18. I turn to the questions set in Razgar v SSHD [2004]  UKHL  27.   It  is
    clear that the appellant has been in the UK since 2002  and  Mr  Melvin
    did not proceed to attempt to challenge this assumption. The  appellant
    has spent nearly 13 years in the UK and has developed his preaching for
    the church as set out above.

19. I accept that the appellant will have engaged a right to a private life
    as the threshold to engage Article 8 is low - AG (Eritrea) v SSHD[2007]
    EWCA Civ 801.
    While an interference with private or family life must be real if it is
    to engage art. 8(1), the threshold of engagement (the "minimum  level")
    is not a specially high one. The decision is in accordance with the law
    as set out by the Immigration Rules and  has  been  set  out  as  being
    necessary for the economic wellbeing of the country and the  protection
    of rights and freedoms of others through the maintenance of immigration
    control,  Shahzad (Art 8: legitimate aim) [2014] UKUT 00085 (IAC).

20. I turn to the key question of proportionality and  the  factors  to  be
    taken into account. Mr Melvin did submit that it was very rare  that  a
    positive contribution to the UK, such as preaching, was significant and
    sufficient to outweigh a public interest in immigration control. I  was
    referred to paragraphs 38 and 39 of R (on  the  application  of  Esther
    Ebun Oludoyi & Ors) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    (Article 8 - MM (Lebanon) and Nagre) IJR [2014] UKUT 00539 (IAC)  which
    made it clear that the factor of public value would make  a  difference
    to the outcome of immigration cases only in a relatively few  instances
    where the "positive contribution is 'very significant'". As set out  in
    R v Immigration Appeal Tribunal ex parte Bakhtaur Singh  [1986]  1  WLR
    910 this included essential workers in a business or someone of  public
    importance.

21. Upper Tribunal Judge Gill recorded at paragraph 38

         "It is clear from UE (Nigeria) and the judgment  of  the  House  of
         Lords in R v Immigration Appeal Tribunal ex  parte  Bakhtaur  Singh
         [1986] 1 WLR 910 that the value to  the  community  in  the  United
         Kingdom of an individual is a relevant  consideration  ([21]).  The
         fact that the community in the United Kingdom or a part of it would
         lose something of value if an individual is removed is relevant  to
         an assessment of the extent of the public interest in removal ([24]
         and [35] of UE (Nigeria)). However,  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  UE
         (Nigeria) also made it clear at [36]  that  it  expected  that  the
         factor of public value would make a difference to  the  outcome  of
         immigration cases only in a  relatively  few  instances  where  the
         positive contribution is "very significant", perhaps  of  the  kind
         referred to by  Lord  Bridge  of  Harwich  in  Bakhtaur  Singh.  In
         Bakhtaur Singh, Lord Bridge (at page 917 C-E) referred  to  various
         examples of persons with such value, such as an essential worker in
         a  company engaged in a  successful export  business  or  a  social
         worker upon  whom  a  local  community  depended  or  a  scientific
         research worker engaged on research of public importance"

22. In that case I note that the appellant was a nurse and had  arrived  in
    the UK with a work permit, her husband was a trained teacher  and  they
    had children.  They also had extended family in the UK. At paragraph 39
    Judge Gill was far from persuaded that the mere fact that an individual
    was a nurse and worked in an occupation where there were  shortages  of
    itself sufficient to make a difference to the outcome.

23.  Professor  Rees  accepted  that  Section  117B  of   the   Nationality
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 should be applied but pointed out  that
    the appellant was not a burden on tax payers and  that  he  spoke  good
    English and was active in serving the Tamil community through the  Free
    Church of England.  He argued in relation to paragraph 117B(4) and  (5)
    that the appellant had entered the UK lawfully and had some element  of
    Section  3C  leave.  I  cannot  accept  this  latter  submission.   The
    appellant was appeal rights exhausted in 2006 and  although  he  claims
    that the applications were refused on the basis of non-payment  of  fee
    no documentation to show that there had been a complaint  made  against
    any solicitor was produced. The appellant has not had 3C leave since he
    became appeal rights exhausted and the application was in fact made  on
    7 January 2013. In essence the appellant had known that he had been  in
    the UK without leave from 2006 (following the exhaustion of his  appeal
    rights) to 2013, that is some  six years.  I accept that  he  has  been
    in the UK for nearly 13 years which is a considerable  length  of  time
    and that he entered lawfully, but since the expiry of his visit visa in
    2004 his status has been precarious, to say the least.

24. It is under Section 117B a consideration for the judge to  have  regard
    to the fact that there should be little weight attached to the  private
    life of an appellant established when they have been  in the  UK  on  a
    precarious basis.  The appellant came to the UK  knowing  that  he  was
    only a visitor and has remained subsequently on a risky basis which has
    to be precarious.

25. I accept that there is no authoritative decision or specific definition
    regarding the status of 'precarious' and I reject the proposition  that
    unless someone has indefinite leave to remain or is a  British  citizen
    that they have a precarious status.  That implies risky status when  in
    fact those with leave to remain do not have a 'risky status' such  that
    they are liable to be removed at any point during the validity of their
    leave unless of course  there  is  a  problem  with  adherence  to  any
    conditions.

26. That said I accept the appellant can speak English and that he is not a
    burden on public funds which is to his credit.

27. It was put to me that he was irreplaceable because of the  shortage  of
    Tamil preachers and the fact that his case was unique, and indeed  that
    he was more unique than a nurse.  I cannot accept this. As indicated by
    the Reverend Wilson services can be interpreted and  although  this  is
    not necessarily  a  totally  effective  way  of  communicating  with  a
    congregation. I appreciate his contribution from the  written  evidence
    given by Bishop  Paul  Hunt  who  considered  that  his  removal  would
    seriously damage the Tamil community and "that the appellant  was  very
    effective  integrating  the  Tamil  community  with  the  other   local
    communities in an area that is renowned for difficult race  relations".
    That said the appellant is not directly  employed  by  the  church  and
    indeed relies on charitable donations from the community.   The  church
    has known that he only has  a  voluntary  role.    I  have  taken  into
    account the letters of support for the appellant but I do not find that
     he has a skill which is any more elevated than a nurse and which Judge
    Gill in Oludoyi found did not contribute to one  of  those  rare  cases
    which would outweigh the public interest or removal.

28. I take note of UE v Secretary of State [2010] EWCA Civ 975

         "36.     I would, however, before concluding, emphasise that, while
             this factor of public value can be relevant in the way which I
             have described, I would expect it to make a difference to  the
             outcome  of  immigration  cases  only  in  a  relatively   few
             instances where the positive contribution to this  country  is
             very  significant,  perhaps  of  the  kind  referred   to   by
             Lord Bridge in Bakhtaur Singh. The main element in the public
             interest will normally consist of the need to maintain a  firm
             policy of immigration control, and little will go to undermine
             that. It will be unusual  for  the  loss  of  benefit  to  the
             community to tip the scales in an applicant's favour,  but  of
             course all will depend upon the detailed facts which exist  in
             the individual case and in particular on  the  extent  of  the
             interference with his private and/or family life."

29. I can accept that the appellant has preached all  over  London  and  in
    various parts of the UK but during that  preaching  the  appellant  has
    known that he was here unlawfully and the church's reliance on him must
    have been during a time when it was known that he has was working as an
    overstayer (although I accept he was not in direct  employment  and  he
    relied on donations).  If that  is  not  the  case,  he  has  not  been
    entirely candid with the church. The requirement is that  there  should
    be a balancing exercise and that the decision should  be  proportionate
    to the legitimate aim.

30. Further to  Section  117  "the  public  interest  question"  means  the
    question of whether an interference with a person's  right  to  respect
    for private and family life is justified under Article 8(2).  As I have
    set out above, I have to  consider  the  weight  to  be  given  to  the
    maintenance of the effective immigration control and the weight  to  be
    given to the individual's private life.   I  accept  that  the  matters
    relied on here by way of contribution to the community are  capable  in
    principle of affecting the weight to be given  to  the  maintenance  of
    effective immigration control but it is not possible to ignore that for
    the last six years the appellant has always known that he has developed
    his private life on a very risky basis.

31. Not least I note that the appellant has  not  claimed  that  he  has  a
    family life in the UK (he lives with his wife's relatives). Indeed  his
    wife and child remain in India and that must be a factor  to  be  taken
    into account.  The appellant has no extended family of his own  in  the
    UK although I accept that he has integrated into the church and assists
    his congregation.  This appellant however formed this relationship with
    his congregation (described  as  in  the  region  of  50  persons)  and
    developed his  congregation's  reliance  on  him  during  a  time,  and
    certainly since 2006, when he knew he did not have any status or  right
    to remain.  His immigration history is not exemplary as he knew he  had
    no further right to remain after 2006.

32. I take into account all of the above and the time  that  the  appellant
    has spent in the UK and the connection with the church he has developed
    but overall, I attach little  weight  to  the  private  life  that  the
    appellant has developed.

33. Following Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11

         'In an article 8 case where this question is reached, the  ultimate
         question for the appellate immigration  authority  is  whether  the
         refusal of leave to enter or remain,  in  circumstances  where  the
         life of the family cannot reasonably  be  expected  to  be  enjoyed
         elsewhere, taking full account of all  considerations  weighing  in
         favour of the refusal, prejudices the family life of the  applicant
         in a manner sufficiently serious to  amount  to  a  breach  of  the
         fundamental right protected by article 8'.

34. This refers to family life but I  have  equally  applied  this  to  the
    private life of the appellant.  I am not  persuaded  that  his  private
    life cannot reasonably  be  expected  to  be  enjoyed  elsewhere.   His
    evidence confirmed that he was a preacher in Chennai before he came  to
    the United Kingdom and that is where his family are.  I find  that  for
    the reasons given above the appellant the decision to refuse his  leave
    remain is not disproportionate. There is no doubt  that  the  appellant
    retains ties with his family abroad in India and should he wish  it  is
    open to him to make an application from abroad to return as a  Minister
    of Religion.


Decision

I dismiss the appeal.


Signed                                  Date 29th March 2015


Judge Rimington

Judge of the First-tier Tribunal

