
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: IA/42136/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgation    |
|On November 16, 2015                 |On November 19, 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                              MRS MORIOM KHATUN
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Mr Singer, Counsel, instructed by PGA Solicitors LLP
Respondent  Mr Bramble (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, citizen of Bangladesh entered the United  Kingdom  as  a
    visitor on January 18, 2011. Her leave was due to expire  on  July  18,
    2011. On June 16, 2011 she applied for indefinite leave to remain as  a
    dependent relative of a  person  present  and  settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom. The application was refused on November 10, 2011 and no appeal
    was lodged. On July 12, 2012 she lodged a fresh  application  but  this
    was refused by the respondent on August 7, 2013 and at the same time  a
    direction to remove under section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum  Act
    1999 was made. The appellant appealed this decision on August 29,  2013
    under section 82(1) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002.

 2. The appeal originally came before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Beach on July 18, 2014 and she allowed the appellant's appeal under the
    Rules and under ECHR legislation. The respondent appealed that decision
    and the matter eventually  came  before  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Manuel who found an error in law and remitted the matter  back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal. The appeal then came before Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Carroll on April 29, 2015 and in a  decision  promulgated
    on May 14, 2015 she allowed the appeal under Article 8 ECHR. No  appeal
    on that occasion was pursued under the Rules.

 3. The respondent sought permission to appeal that  decision  on  May  20,
    2015 on the grounds the Tribunal had approached the issue of Article  8
    incorrectly and had then failed to have regard to the factors contained
    in section 117B of the 2002 Act. At an earlier hearing  I  found  there
    had been an error in law because the Tribunal failed to  properly  have
    regard to two important matters:
      a. The appellant had laser eye surgery for her deteriorating eyesight,
         had been provided with a compressed air unit for  when  she  sleeps
         and was attending numerous doctor's appointments. She clearly was a
         financial burden on the state as there was no evidence adduced that
         she was paying for her medical treatment privately.
      b. The maintenance of effective immigration controls remained  in  the
         public interest

 4.  There  is  a  principle  in  the  proportionality  balancing  exercise
    (described in Razgar (2004) UKHL 00027) that  the  public  interest  in
    maintaining firm immigration control qualifies for greater  weight,  or
    is enhanced  and  fortified,  in  circumstances  where  the  Article  8
    claimant is and/or is likely to be a financial burden on the state.   I
    was satisfied the Tribunal took an extremely narrow view  of  financial
    independence because it had no regard to  the  matter  referred  to  in
    paragraph 3(a) above. I found the  Tribunal  materially  erred  because
    when considering the appellant's appeal, the Tribunal should  have  had
    regard to relevant factors raised in section 117B of the 2002 Act.

 5. I adjourned the case with directions.

 6. The matter next came before me on the above  date  for  submission.  Mr
    Singer indicated he had  only  recently  been  instructed  and  had  no
    further evidence, at this late stage, to submit but he  was  instructed
    the appellant's condition had worsened. I  indicated  that  I  was  not
    prepared to adjourn the matter for further evidence.  This  opportunity
    had  already  been  afforded  to   the   appellant   and   his   former
    representatives and whilst I acknowledged his  instructing  solicitor's
    difficulties in obtaining the  previous  bundle  this  would  not  have
    prevented further evidence being submitted. Mr Singer confirmed he  was
    in a position to proceed today  and  in  the  circumstances  I  invited
    submissions from both representatives. The  appellant  and  her  family
    were present at today's hearing.

 7. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I see no reason to make an order now.

    SUBMISSIONS

 8. Mr Bramble that the "error of law"  hearing  highlighted  matters  that
    needed to be considered. It was not disputed  the  appellant  had  some
    medical problems but in considering the  public  interest  set  out  in
    Section 117B(1) of the 2002 Act the Tribunal  could  not  overlook  the
    fact:
      a. The appellant could not speak English.
      b. She was not financially independent and clear evidence that she had
         used NHS facilities for her medical condition.
      c. Whilst she came here lawfully  as  a  visitor  she  had  been  here
         unlawfully since November 10, 2011.
      d. Her private life was precarious as she only ever  had  leave  as  a
         family visitor.

    The medical position remained the same as no further evidence. None  of
    the issues raised previous had been addressed and there was no evidence
    she was unable to travel. She has family in Bangladesh and demonstrated
    she had lived there most of her life.  All of these factors support the
    maintenance of immigration control and her appeal should  be  dismissed
    under Article 8 ECHR.

 9. Mr Singer relied on factual findings made by the previous  Tribunal  in
    relation to her medical condition and personal circumstances as set out
    in paragraphs [9] and [10] of the  previous  decision.  Whilst  it  was
    accepted she was now here unlawfully Mr Singer submitted she  had  been
    here lawfully and had been given bad legal advice in November 2011.  It
    was also accepted she did not speak English and had received assistance
    on  the  NHS  but   the   current   medical   evidence   made   removal
    disproportionate especially in light of her current  circumstances.  He
    submitted there were sufficiently compelling  factors  that  meant  she
    should be granted permission to remain under Article 8  based  on  both
    her family and private life.

10. Following these submissions, I reserved my decision.

    DISCUSSION

11. When this appeal came before the Tribunal on April 29,  2015  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Carroll found the appellant had come here for a
    lawful purpose and that she needed a break with her family here because
    of tensions in Bangladesh. Since being here she has suffered  a  stroke
    and she also had a pre-existing eye-condition,  mobility  problems  and
    was reliant on others for everyday tasks.

12. Today's appeal is brought  on  family  and  private  life  grounds.  At
    paragraph  [11]  of  its  decision  the  Tribunal  recorded  that   the
    respondent accepted there was family life between the appellant and her
    UK based family and it is now argued that  her  health  raises  private
    life fears under Article 8 ECHR. Mr  Singer  argues  that  the  medical
    factors take this case beyond the normal Article 8 health case.

13. Both representatives agreed that the correct approach to  take  is  set
    out in Razagar [2004] UKHL 00027 and agreed that the  issues  for  this
    Tribunal were whether removal was proportionate.

14. It is well established that where the Article 3 medical claim failed an
    Article 8 claim could not prosper without some separate  or  additional
    factual element which brought the case within the Article  8  paradigm.
    That means a specific case must be made under Article 8.  Although  the
    UK courts have declined to state that Article 8 could never be  engaged
    by the health consequences of removal from the  UK,  the  circumstances
    would have to be truly  exceptional  before  such  a  breach  could  be
    established.

15. At paragraph 111 of BA (Ghana) and KK (DRC) v SSHD [2015] EWCA  Civ  40
    Underhill LJ  said,  "First,  the  absence  or  inadequacy  of  medical
    treatment, even life-preserving treatment, in the  country  of  return,
    cannot be relied on at all as a factor engaging Article 8: if  that  is
    all there is, the claim must fail. Secondly, where Article 8 is engaged
    by other factors, the fact  that  the  claimant  is  receiving  medical
    treatment in this country which may not be available in the country  of
    return may be a factor in the proportionality exercise; but that factor
    cannot be treated as by itself giving rise to a breach since that would
    contravene the 'no obligation to treat' principle."

16. In MM (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2012]
    EWCA Civ 279 and May 2012 the Court of Appeal noted that the courts had
    declined to say that Article 8 could never by  engaged  by  the  health
    consequences of removal but they had never found such a breach and  had
    not been able to postulate circumstances in which  such  a  breach  was
    likely to be established. The only cases where the absence of  adequate
    medical treatment in the country to which a person was to  be  deported
    would be relevant to Article 8 was where it was an additional factor to
    be weighed in the balance with other factors  that  engaged  Article  8
    (paras 17 - 23).

17. When this matter first came before me on October 6, 2015 I too accepted
    that the appellant had not intended to remain when she  first  came  to
    the United Kingdom and I also accepted the appellant would struggle  to
    return to Bangladesh. However, in so  far  as  this  latter  point  was
    concerned I do not accept she would be unable to travel at all  because
    the medical evidence does not say this.

18. The issue is whether it would be proportionate to require the appellant
    to leave the United  Kingdom  and  whether  removal  would  breach  her
    private and family life.

19. The Tribunal in Forman (ss 117A-C  considerations)  [2015]  UKUT  00412
    (IAC) at paragraph [17] set out the  correct  approach  when  analysing
    sections 117A and 117B to be as follows:
         "17(a)   These provisions apply in every  case  where  a  court  or
         tribunal is required to determine whether a decision made under the
         Immigration Acts breaches a person's right to respect  for  private
         and family life under Article 8 ECHR and, as  a  result,  would  be
         unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights  Act  1998.   Where  a
         Court or Tribunal is not required to make this determination, these
         provisions do not apply.
         (b)      The so-called "public interest question" is "the  question
         of whether an interference with a person's  right  to  respect  for
         private and family life is justified under  Article  8(2).",  which
         appears to embrace the entirety of the proportionality exercise.
         (c)      In considering the public interest question, the court  or
         tribunal must have regard to the considerations listed  in  section
         117B in all cases: per section 117A(1) and (2).
         (d)      In considering  the  public  interest  question  in  cases
         concerning the deportation  of  foreign  criminals,  the  court  or
         tribunal must have regard to the section  117B  considerations  and
         the considerations listed in section 117C.
         (e)      The list of considerations in sections 117B  and  177C  is
         not exhaustive: this is clear from the words  in  parenthesis  "(in
         particular)".
         (f)      The court or tribunal concerned has  no  choice:  it  must
         have regard to the listed considerations.
         While the court or  tribunal  is  clearly  entitled  to  take  into
         account considerations other than  those  listed  in  section  117B
         (and, where appropriate,  section  117C),  any  additional  factors
         considered must be relevant, in the sense that they  properly  bear
         on the "public interest question".  In this discrete respect,  some
         assistance is provided by reflecting on the public  law  obligation
         to  take  into  account  all  material  considerations  which,   by
         definition, prohibits the intrusion of immaterial factors.   We are
         not required to decide in the present case  whether  there  is  any
         tension between section  117A  (2),  which  obliges  the  court  or
         tribunal concerned to have regard to  the  list  of  considerations
         listed in section 117B and, where appropriate,  section  117C)  and
         the contrasting terms of section 117B (5) and (6) which are  framed
         as an instruction to the court  or  tribunal  to  attribute  little
         weight to the two considerations specified."

20. The appellant may have come  here  lawfully  but  she  came  here  only
    intending to stay for a definitive period. On advice,  she  applied  to
    remain but when that appeal failed on November 10,  2011  she  did  not
    appeal that decision and accordingly, she was here unlawfully when  the
    appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal. It is also clear  that  any
    private life she has developed had been created at  at  time  when  her
    status was precarious. She does not speak English and she is  not  only
    not financially independent  but  she  has  used  the  National  Health
    Service at a time when she had no legitimate right to use the same. She
    did not meet the Immigration Rules and all of these factors are  strong
    factors to support Section 117B(1) of the 2002 Act.

21. The issue for me to decide is whether the appellant's family and health
    circumstances outweigh the importance of immigration control. Whilst Mr
    Singer made a  passionate  argument  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
    medical condition case law is against the appellant.  I  am  unable  to
    find that on the current medical evidence that removal would breach her
    Article 8 private life claim and that is even before  I  have  to  take
    into account the Section 117B factors. There is no doubt the  appellant
    has a number of health issues but the medical evidence  does  not  take
    this case into the type of exceptional case that Mr Singer agrees would
    have to be shown and after applying the negative factors  arising  from
    section 117B I am satisfied that removal would not breach her right  to
    private life.

22. I have also considered her family life position. As  stated  earlier  I
    accept there is family life and again the issue for me to  consider  is
    proportionality of removal.

23. I have to have regard to relevant section 117B factors (set out  above)
    as well as the appellant's claim that she would not  receive  the  same
    level of care from family in Bangladesh. The appellant is an adult  who
    has spent virtually all of her life in Bangladesh. For many  years  she
    lived in Bangladesh and enjoyed 'family life" with her UK based  family
    from a distance. Whilst I note the content of the witness statements of
    Ms Anwara Begum and Md Amirul Islam I find these statements have to  be
    considered against the background that she has lived there all her life
    with many of the problems she currently has as evidenced by the medical
    report from Bangladesh dated April 6, 2015  and  contained  within  the
    appellant's bundle at exhibit RK2.  Her  condition  may  have  worsened
    since being in the  United  Kingdom  but  I  am  not  dealing  with  an
    appellant who was in  good  health  before  her  visit  to  the  United
    Kingdom. I do not find it credible Mr Islam would turn his back on  his
    aunt. It may not be ideal for him but he had  taken  on  responsibility
    for her for many years.

24. Any family life claim under Article  8  has  to  be  considered  having
    regard to Section 117B of the 2002 Act. Her family life existed  before
    she came to the United Kingdom so I do not attach any  weight  in  this
    assessment to any submission she has created family  life  whilst  here
    unlawfully or precariously but I have  to  have  regard  to  the  other
    factors namely she can neither speak English  nor  is  she  financially
    independent. Her family, to an extent, financially support her but  the
    substantial medical bills have been at the expense of the  NHS  because
    she did not have any private medical insurance.

25. The issue is one of proportionality and based on all  of  the  evidence
    before and the importance of immigration control I find  that  refusing
    this application on both family  and  private  life  grounds  will  not
    breach the appellant's Article 8 rights.

    DECISION

26. I have previously set aside the earlier decision to allow  this  appeal
    under Article 8 ECHR as there was a material error.

27. I dismiss the appeal under Article 8 ECHR.

28. I uphold the earlier dismissal of  the  appellant's  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



FEE AWARD

I make no fee award as I have dismissed the appeal.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
