
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: iA/42108/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination Promulgated            |
|on 2 June 2014                       |on 8 June 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                ZUNAIR IQBAL
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant present      No representative
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. By application dated 28 July 2014 the appellant sought to remain in the
    UK as a Tier 4 (General) Student under the Points Based  System  (PBS).
    The respondent refused that application by letter dated 23 October 2014
    for failure to provide a valid Confirmation of Acceptance  for  Studies
    (CAS).  The refusal under the heading of maintenance was  consequential
    upon that.

 2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  He did not ask  for
    an oral hearing but was content for his case to be dealt with  "on  the
    papers".  In his grounds he maintained that he was a bona fide student,
    that he had provided a CAS reference, and that he had  been  unable  to
    sit his English test because the respondent had  delayed  in  returning
    his passport.  In a determination promulgated on 22 January 2015  Judge
    Shergill found the  appellant  had  failed  to  provide  the  specified
    documents and information with his application, that there had been  no
    unfairness in the respondent's procedure, and dismissed the appeal.

 3. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.   By
    decision dated 16 March 2015 Judge Shimmin granted  permission  on  one
    ground only:

         "It is arguable that the respondent should have applied  evidential
         flexibility, returned the appellant's passport to him and given him
         a sufficient period in which to obtain a valid CAS.  This  case  is
         arguably different in that the respondent, by holding the passport,
         prevented the appellant remedying the position."

 4. At the hearing on 2 June the appellant referred to his  letter  to  the
    respondent dated 15 September 2014 asking for return of his passport as
    it was a requirement before he could sit an English language test.   He
    had booked the test provisionally for 23 September 2014.  He said  that
    he never received any reply to his letter.

 5. Mr Matthews submitted that the Rules require the appellant to submit  a
    CAS with his application, not later.  In order to obtain  the  CAS  the
    appellant would have needed to pass the English  language  test  before
    not after he submitted his application.  If he had  been  prevented  by
    the respondent holding his passport from taking the test at an  earlier
    time, that might have been procedurally unfair.    That  was  what  the
    judge granting  permission  appeared  to  think  might  have  happened.
    However, on examination of the timescale that was not  the  case.   The
    appellant had simply left matters too late.  In any  event,  he  has  a
    remedy.  If he is now in a position to make a valid Tier 4  application
    he has 28 days after the end of these  proceedings  to  do  so  without
    leaving the UK.

 6. The appellant in response said that he had been led by the respondent's
    website to believe that he would be given the  opportunity  to  rectify
    any missing document.  Unfortunately the college to  which  he  applied
    would not accept the English language certificate which had  previously
    been sufficient for his purposes.  They wished a "Pearson test".

 7. I advised the  appellant  that  there  was  no  error  of  law  in  the
    determination and that the decision would stand.

 8. The scheme of the PBS is highly detailed and prescriptive.  It requires
    applications to be accompanied by all necessary  evidence.   There  are
    limited exceptions, within which this case does not fall.  There  would
    be no reason for the respondent to think that the appellant might  have
    a valid English language test certificate and valid CAS to produce.  By
    his own account, at the  relevant  time  he  did  not.   There  was  no
    obligation on the respondent to  contact  him  and  give  him  time  to
    perfect his application.





 9. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.






           [pic]


           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
           4 June 2015

