
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers IA/42483/2014
                                                               IA/42490/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 3rd June 2015                     |On 22nd June 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES
                                     and
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                               RIZQAN SHAHZAD
                               FARHANA MUNAWAR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Turner (Counsel, instructed by Farani Javid
Taylor, Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants applied for leave to remain as a Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)
    and dependent which was refused for the reasons given  in  the  Refusal
    Letter of the 8th of October 2014. The Appellants' appeal was heard  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew at Birmingham on the 21st  of  January
    2015 and dismissed for the reasons given in a decision  promulgated  on
    the 5th of February 2015.

 2. The decision centred on whether the Appellant had supplied  advertising
    material dated before the 11th of July 2014, he maintained that he  had
    supplied a copy of his Facebook page. Having summarised the evidence in
    paragraphs 7 and 8 the Judge found that the  Appellant  had  not  shown
    that the advertising material existed before the 11th of July 2014  and
    accordingly dismissed the appeal.

 3. The Appellants sought permission to appeal on the basis that the  Judge
    had wrongly rejected the First Appellant's credibility  when  that  had
    not been challenged by the Home Office  Presenting  Officer  in  cross-
    examination. It was also asserted that the  Secretary  of  State  could
    have verified the date on which the website came into existence and had
    done so in other appeals. It was also argued that no findings had  been
    made in respect of Article 8.

 4. Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Shimmin on the  7th
    of April 2015. He did so on the basis that it was arguable  that  there
    had been insufficient scrutiny of the documentary  evidence.  He  noted
    that there were  removal  directions  and  that  the  Article  8  issue
    required examination but the Record of Proceedings  indicated  that  it
    was not proceeded with.

 5. At the start of the hearing we indicated that the Record of Proceedings
    does clearly state that the Article 8 aspect of the case was not  being
    pursued. That was accepted and  the  hearing  shifted  focus  to  other
    aspects. Before the hearing Mr Tufan for the Home  Office  provided  to
    the Appellant's counsel a copy of a letter from the Home Office to  the
    Appellants dated the 29th of  September  2014,  that  letter  was  with
    regard to missing documentation but did not raise any issue with regard
    to the advertising.

 6. Following the disclosure of that  letter  submissions  were  made  with
    respect to paragraph 245AA(c) of the Immigration Rules which deals with
    evidential flexibility. This states "Documents will  not  be  requested
    where a specified  document  has  not  been  submitted...  [where  the]
    Secretary of State does not anticipate that addressing the omission  or
    error referred to in subparagraph (b) will lead to a grant because  the
    application will be refused for other reasons."

 7. The implication is that when the letter of the 29th of  September  2014
    was sent requesting documentation that must have followed consideration
    of the application by an official acting on the  Secretary  of  State's
    behalf. Given that paragraph 245AA(cc) indicates the request for  other
    documents will only be made if it is thought that the  application  can
    succeed if the omission is addressed, and the letter was referred to in
    the First Appellant's witness statement before the First-tier  Tribunal
    it suggests that  the  appeal  hearing  proceeded  on  a  misconception
    following from an error by the Secretary of State  in  considering  the
    Appellants' case.

 8. It is not the fault of the Judge that neither  of  the  representatives
    brought this  point  to  her  attention  or  sought  to  conduct  their
    questioning on the basis of the letter  that  had  been  sent  and  the
    implications that it contained.

 9. Having considered the matter we are satisfied that the approach by  the
    Secretary of State is flawed to the extent that this is a  matter  that
    ought to be considered by the Secretary of State fully in the light  of
    all of the information that was provided  and  is  available.  On  that
    basis we find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  a
    material error of law and the  decision  is  set  aside,  the  case  is
    remitted to the Secretary of State to make a  lawful  decision  on  the
    Appellants' applications.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law.

We set aside the decision.

This case is remitted to the Secretary of State for a lawful decision to  be
made.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and  we  make  no
order.

Fee Award

In the light of the decision to re-make the decision in the  appeal  and  to
remit the case to the Secretary of State,  we  have  considered  whether  to
make a fee award (rule 23A (costs) o f the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal
(Procedure) Rules 2005 and section 12(4)(a) of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
Enforcement Act 2007).

We have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

We make a whole fee award.

Reasons: the decision contained an error of law.



Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 18th June 2015

