
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/42185/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25 July 2014                               |On 8 August 2014             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                            mr s m saifur rahman
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms D Qureshi, Counsel, instructed by Taj Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, born on 15th  May  1985.   He
    appeals  with  permission  against  the  determination  of   First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Paul promulgated on 10 March 2014 in which he  dismissed
    the appeal against the respondent's decision made on 24 September  2013
    to remove the appellant from the United Kingdom.

 2. At a hearing before the Upper Tribunal held  on  12  June  2014,  Judge
    Paul's decision was set aside and directions for it to be remade  at  a
    hearing on 25 July 2014 were given. A copy of that decision is attached
    to this determination as an annex.

 3. The appellant's maternal grandparents live in the  United  Kingdom,  as
    does his mother and two of his brothers.  The  appellant's  mother  has
    lived  here  for  several  years  as  do  her  brothers.   Two  of  the
    appellant's brothers live in the United Kingdom including the youngest,
    born here in 2005, who is a British citizen; another brother  lives  in
    Bangladesh with his father.  Although the appellant's father  (and  the
    appellant and his brothers) made applications to  come  to  the  United
    Kingdom to join his mother in 2002, that application was refused as was
    a further application made by the appellant's father in 2013.

 4. After the appellant's leave to remain had been curtailed, he was unable
    to make an application for further leave to remain as a student as  his
    family were no longer able to support him financially to the  necessary
    extent of paying fees.   He  therefore  applied  for  leave  to  remain
    outside the Immigration Rules on the basis that he is dependent on  his
    mother and his grandparents are dependent on him.  It is also his  case
    that he has lost ties to Bangladesh during the years he had come  here.



 5. The appellant's case is that he is entitled to leave to remain pursuant
    to paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules and that his removal would
    be in breach of the United Kingdom's obligations pursuant to Article  8
    of the Human Rights Convention given that he has a family  and  private
    life established here and the interference caused with that by removing
    him is disproportionate.

 6. The respondent refused the application concluding:-

      i) that Appendix FM was not engaged as  the  family  life  claimed  to
         exist fell outside the parameters of those provisions;

     ii) that the appellant did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
         276ADE (vi) as he has not  shown  that  he  has  no  ties  to  this
         country; and,

   iii) that the application did  not  raise  or  contain  any  exceptional
        circumstances which warranted consideration outside the Immigration
        Rules

 7. When the appeal came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Paul  he  heard
    evidence from the appellant, the appellant's  mother,  the  appellant's
    maternal grandmother and the appellant's uncle, Asadur  Rahman.   Judge
    Paul noted [25] that it had been conceded that the appellant could  not
    succeed under Appendix FM in relation to family life.  The judge found:-



      i) that the evidence given in relation to the family in Bangladesh had
         been embellished, the evidence that the family had been  trying  to
         get into the country for many years not being evidence of a  family
         that  had  disintegrated  and  the  appellant's  evidence  had  not
         persuaded him that there was no family life for  the  appellant  in
         Bangladesh;

     ii) that the appellant came here as a student expecting to  return  and
         in that context he was not satisfied that interference with  family
         life is established or, were he  wrong  about  that,  that  removal
         would be disproportionate having had regard to the factors set  out
         by the respondent's representative;

    iii) that there was no compelling evidence to show  that  the  appellant
         plays such a significant role in the life of  his  mother,  brother
         and grandparents so as to "trump any ongoing  insignificant  family
         life in Bangladesh".

 8. The Upper Tribunal concluded that it was not possible to  discern  from
    the determination whether Judge Paul had concluded that a  family  life
    exists between the appellant, his brother, mother and  grandparents  in
    this case or not, there being confusion between the specific meaning of
    family life for the purposes of Article 8 and the wider,  more  general
    use of the term.   On that basis that part of the decision  relating to
    whether there the appellant had formed a family life was set aside; the
    finding by Judge Paul that the appellant did not meet the  requirements
    of paragraphs 276 ADE of the Immigration Rules was preserved.

 9.  When  the  matter   reconvened   I   heard   submissions   from   both
    representatives.  Ms Qureshi submitted that the appellant has a  strong
    bond with the family in the United Kingdom consisting of his mother and
    younger brother, aged 9, as well as his older brother who is  in  full-
    time education.  She asked me to note also that he lives  in  the  same
    household as the mother  and  brother  and  that  he  looks  after  his
    grandparents and has other close relatives including uncles, aunts  and
    so on.  She accepted that he is 29 years old but that he has  a  strong
    bond and needed to support his mother who is suffering from  depression
    and that his removal would have a detrimental affect on her and on  his
    younger brother.  She submitted it would be difficult for him to return
    to Bangladesh and that his siblings are not able to support the younger
    brother and mother and that the impact on the youngest child  will  not
    be in accordance with current case law.  She submitted also that family
    life as it exists could not exist outside the United Kingdom.

10. Mr Whitwell submitted that the applicant had been here for a relatively
    short period and that he had failed to establish there was  in  fact  a
    family life in this case between himself and his mother and his brother
    given there was no medical evidence to support that she  was  suffering
    from depression and that despite that she appeared to be continuing  to
    work full-time.  He  submitted  further  that  there  was  no  separate
    evidence of the grandparents being in ill-health and so the  extent  to
    which they needed rather than desired assistance had  not  been  shown.
    He asked me to note also that there were uncles of  the  appellant  who
    could help and that there was no evidence regarding the position of the
    other brother, aged 27, who has limited  leave  to  remain  here  as  a
    student.  He submitted that there was nothing in the evidence before me
    indicative of anything above and beyond an  ordinary  family  life  and
    thus no family life for the purposes of the Human Rights Convention.

11. Mr Whitwell asked  me  to  note  also  that  it  had  always  been  the
    appellant's case that he wanted to be here as a student and intended to
    return to Bangladesh; that he has a father and  brother  in  Bangladesh
    and in the circumstances the decision to remove was proportionate.

12. In reply Ms Qureshi submitted that  the  evidence  of  the  appellant's
    mother and how he helps his brother is more than an emotional bond.  It
    was accepted that he came here as a student, there had been a change of
    circumstances due to the mother's  mental  condition,  the  refusal  of
    entry clearance to the mother and the situation had now changed.

13. In assessing whether there is, as the appellant claims, a  family  life
    for the purposes of Article 8 between him and his mother  and  him  and
    his younger brother, the starting point is the decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha policy) Nepal [2012]
    UKUT 160 as approved on that point by the Court of  Appeal.   I  accept
    that as is noted in that case, this issue is highly fact sensitive  and
    that family life may continue between the parent and child  even  after
    the child has attained his majority.

14. In this case, however, it could not be  said  that  the  appellant  had
    lived all his life with his mother.  She had come to the United Kingdom
    in 1994 and the appellant came to the United Kingdom on 11 October 2009
    some fifteen years later.  Whilst I accept  that  the  relationship  is
    close, I find that there is insufficient evidence to  demonstrate  that
    the family life between the appellant  and  his  mother  had  continued
    despite the separation of fifteen years although I do accept there  was
    some contact between them during  this  period.   Similarly,  whilst  I
    accept that the family have had difficulty in the father being able  to
    enter the  United  Kingdom,  it  does  not  follow  that  although  the
    appellant, his younger brother and mother lived in the same  household,
    that the situation has now changed to such an extent that  the  younger
    brother is dependent on the older when there  is  his  mother,  another
    brother and several other relatives on whom he can rely.

15. Further, I find significant merit  in  Mr  Whitwell's  submission  that
    there is in effect no medical evidence to show that the various members
    of the family are  suffering  from  medical  conditions  requiring  the
    appellant to look after them and I note that  although  the  mother  is
    suffering from depression she appears to be able still  to  work  part-
    time.  Whilst I have no doubt that the various members  of  the  family
    would prefer the appellant to remain here, I am not satisfied that  the
    bonds between the appellant and his mother and the  appellant  and  his
    younger brother are such that family life for the purposes of Article 8
    exists between them.

16. I accept the appellant has a private life in this country and that that
    involves his continual interaction with his relatives in this  country.
    I accept that he was unable to continue his studies owing to a lack  of
    funds but equally I accept that he  has  a  brother  in  Bangladesh,  a
    father in Bangladesh although from whom he is estranged and that he had
    in the past indicated through his student applications that he intended
    to return there.  I accept that intentions do change  but  equally  the
    appellant had lived in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a  relatively  short
    period.  It is evident that  he  does  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

17. Although I accept that there are some  unusual  factors  in  this  case
    which require a full analysis of  Article  8  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules,  for  the  reasons  set  out  above  these  are  confined  to  a
    consideration of the impact of removal on the appellant's private  life
    and on his mother and younger brother.  There is no evidence  that  any
    significant harm will be caused  to  them  and  there  is  insufficient
    evidence to show that they would not be able to remain  in  contact  by
    telephone, Skype or similar electronic means or that  the  brother  and
    mother would be unable to visit the appellant in Bangladesh.

18. I consider that  in  the  circumstances  the  interference  with  their
    private  lives,  that  is  the  appellant  and  his  family,  would  be
    proportionate given the strong public interest in  the  maintenance  of
    immigration control which includes the maintenance of a system of Rules
    applicable to all.  In summary, there is nothing in this case  which  I
    find is such, either taken singly or cumulatively,  which  debases  the
    strong public interest  in  the  maintenance  of  immigration  control,
    bearing in mind that the appellant cannot meet the requirements of  the
    Immigration Rules.

Summary of Conclusions

 1) The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making  of
    an error of law and was set aside to be remade in part.

 2) I remake the decision by dismissing the appeal on all grounds.



Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
                        Annex - Error of law finding

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/42185/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12 June 2014                               |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                        THE HONOURABLE LORD MATTHEWS,
                  SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                            mr s m saifur rahman
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Hashim, Counsel, instructed by Taj Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

19. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, born on 15th  May  1985.   He
    appeals  with  permission  against  the  determination  of   First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Paul promulgated on 10 March 2014 in which he  dismissed
    the appeal against the respondent's decision made on 24 September  2013
    to remove the appellant from the United Kingdom.

20. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on  11  October  2009  with
    leave to enter and remain as a Tier 4 Student.  His leave to remain  in
    that capacity was later extended  until  30  May  2015  but  was  later
    curtailed to expire on 7 September 2013 as the college to which he  had
    been admitted had had its licence revoked.

21. The appellant's maternal grandparents live in the  United  Kingdom,  as
    does his mother and two of his brothers.  The  appellant's  mother  has
    lived  here  for  several  years  as  do  her  brothers.   Two  of  the
    appellant's brothers live in the United Kingdom including the youngest,
    born here in 2005, who is a British citizen; another brother  lives  in
    Bangladesh with his father.  Although the appellant's father  (and  the
    appellant and his brothers) made applications to  come  to  the  United
    Kingdom to join his mother in 2002, that application was refused as was
    a further application made by the appellant's father in 2013.

22. After the appellant's leave to remain had been curtailed, he was unable
    to make an application for further leave to remain as a student as  his
    family were no longer able to support him financially to the  necessary
    extent of paying fees.   He  therefore  applied  for  leave  to  remain
    outside the Immigration Rules on the basis that he is dependent on  his
    mother and his grandparents are dependent on him.  It is also his  case
    that he has lost ties to Bangladesh during the years he had come  here.



23. The appellant's case is that he is entitled to leave to remain pursuant
    to paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules and that his removal would
    be in breach of the United Kingdom's obligations pursuant to Article  8
    of the Human Rights Convention given that he has a family  and  private
    life established here and the interference caused with that by removing
    him is disproportionate.

24. The respondent refused the application concluding:-

      i) that Appendix FM was not engaged as  the  family  life  claimed  to
         exist fell outside the parameters of those provisions;

     ii) that the appellant did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
         276ADE (vi) as he has not  shown  that  he  has  no  ties  to  this
         country; and,

    iii) that the application did  not  raise  or  contain  any  exceptional
         circumstances which warranted consideration outside the Immigration
         Rules.

25. When the appeal came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Paul  he  heard
    evidence from the appellant, the appellant's  mother,  the  appellant's
    maternal grandmother and the appellant's uncle, Asadur  Rahman.   Judge
    Paul noted [25] that it had been conceded that the appellant could  not
    succeed under Appendix FM in relation to family life.  The judge found:-



      i) that the evidence given in relation to the family in Bangladesh had
         been embellished, the evidence that the family had been  trying  to
         get into the country for many years not being evidence of a  family
         that  had  disintegrated  and  the  appellant's  evidence  had  not
         persuaded him that there was no family life for  the  appellant  in
         Bangladesh;

     ii) that the appellant came here as a student expecting to  return  and
         in that context he was not satisfied that interference with  family
         life is established or, were he  wrong  about  that,  that  removal
         would be disproportionate having had regard to the factors set  out
         by the respondent's representative;

    iii) that there was no compelling evidence to show  that  the  appellant
         plays such a significant role in the life of  his  mother,  brother
         and grandparents so as to "trump any ongoing  insignificant  family
         life in Bangladesh".

26. The grounds of appeal, at  seven  and  a  half  pages  in  length,  are
    unnecessarily prolix and unfocused, referring in  excessive  detail  to
    reported decisions rather  than  focusing  on  errors  in  the  judge's
    reasoning.  In summary the grounds challenge the  judge's  decision  on
    the basis that:-

      i) the judge had failed to identify whether a  family  life  had  been
         established for the purposes of Article 8 between the appellant and
         his mother [15] and between the appellant and his brother [19];

     ii) that the judge had failed to give adequate reasons  for  concluding
         that the appellant had ceased to have ties to Bangladesh  and  thus
         that his finding that the requirements of paragraph 276ADE were not
         met was unsafe [24]; and,

    iii) the judge's conclusions were not properly reasoned [23].

27. Mr Hashim submitted that  the  judge  had  erred  in  setting  out  his
    findings at [32] as he failed to give adequate reasons as to why it had
    been embellished.  He submitted further that the judge  had  failed  to
    set out whether he considered family life had been established  and  if
    so with whom and that it was not  possible  to  discern  the  reasoning
    process by which he had reached his conclusions.  He submitted  further
    that with regards to findings in respect of paragraph 276ADE, there  is
    an insufficiency of reasoning and no reference is made to the  evidence
    given.

28. Ms Isherwood submitted that  the  determination  did  not  involve  the
    making of a material error of law and that the  reasons  given  by  the
    judge for his findings could not be insufficient if there was  (as  she
    submitted was  the  case  here)  simply  no  evidence  to  support  the
    propositions put forward.  She  submitted  that  the  judge  had  taken
    account of the evidence given at [10], [12] and also at [19]  and  [25]
    and had been entitled on the basis  of  what  was  put  before  him  to
    consider that the evidence had been embellished in the context  of  the
    family trying to come here and in the context that this was related  to
    what was said about the family relationship in Bangladesh.

29. Ms Isherwood submitted also that  following  the  decision  in  Gulshan
    (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT  640  (IAC,  the
    judge had found for  proper  reasons  that  there  were  no  compelling
    reasons why the appellant should not be removed to Bangladesh.

30. In reply Mr Hashim submitted that  it  cannot  be  discerned  from  the
    determination what evidence the judge accepted and what he did not.

31. This is a case in which it is asserted,  unusually,  that  family  life
    exists between the appellant who is 28 and his mother; and also between
    the  appellant,  his  younger  brother  aged   9   and   his   maternal
    grandparents.  Ordinarily such  a  family  life  for  the  purposes  of
    Article 8 does not exist between adults  other  than  partners,  unless
    there is more than the usual emotional ties (see Kugathas  v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31 and Ghising (family
    life - adults - Gurkha policy) [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC) approved on that
    issue by the Court of Appeal).  It is not possible to discern from  the
    determination whether Judge Paul had concluded that such a family  life
    exists between the appellant, his brother, mother and  grandparents  in
    this case or not.  There appears to be confusion between  the  specific
    meaning of family life for the purposes of Article  8  and  the  wider,
    more general use of the term.  The  reference  by  the  judge  [33]  to
    family life existing in Bangladesh, presumably between  the  appellant,
    his father and brother despite the fact the appellant  is  28  and  has
    lived apart from them for five years, is  indicative  of  a  degree  of
    confusion.

32. Whether a family life for the purpose of Article 8 exists in this  case
    is important; it is not in dispute that such a family  life  would  not
    fit within the parameters of Appendix FM and thus,  following  Gulshan,
    would require further consideration.

33. Whilst the judge does refer to the submissions made  by  Mr  Davies  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State, these do not deal with  the  specific
    issues nor could it be said that they provide  adequate  reasoning  for
    concluding, as would have been open to the judge, that  there  were  no
    compelling circumstances here such that the  appellant  should  not  be
    removed given that it is not at all clear what  findings  of  fact  had
    been reached.  A finding that a family life exists in this  case  would
    have proceeded from a finding  of  dependency  over  and  above  normal
    emotional ties and such a  finding  requires  a  proper  analysis  with
    respect to article 8, which is not found here.

34. Accordingly, we are satisfied  that  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Paul did involve the making of an error of law and it is
    set aside.  That part of the decision will need to  be  remade  and  we
    give below directions as to how this is to be done.

35. We are not, however, satisfied that the errors affect the finding  with
    regard to paragraph 276ADE.  The judge has given sufficient reason  for
    concluding that the appellant had not lost all ties to  Bangladesh  and
    indeed, given the  appellant's  own  evidence  [19]  that  his  closest
    friends remain in Bangladesh, a country he left at the age of 23,  some
    five years ago, it is difficult to see how he could come to  any  other
    conclusion.

Summary of Conclusions and Directions

    1. The decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Paul  did  involve  the
       making of an error of law and is set aside in part to be remade. The
       finding that  the  appellant  had  not  lost  ties  to  Pakistan  is
       preserved.

    2. The matter is to be listed before the Upper Tribunal at a reconvened
       hearing on 25 July 2014 at Field House.

    3. If either party wishes to adduce further evidence, it must be served
       on the other party and on the Upper Tribunal on or  before  18  July
       2014. It must also be accompanied by a statement pursuant to rule 15
       (2A) of the Procedure Rules explaining in detail why  it  should  be
       admitted and why it was not submitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Signed                                  Date:  1 July 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

