
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42070/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                                |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 31st July 2014                             |On 23rd September 2014       |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                               AARTEE GUNGARAM
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Miss Pickering instructed by Jacobs Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr Harrison -Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Pooler promulgated on 5th March 2014 in  which  he  dismissed
        the Appellant's appeal on all grounds against the refusal  to  vary
        her leave to remain in the United Kingdom and a direction  for  her
        removal  made  pursuant  to  section  47  Immigration  Asylum   and
        Nationality Act 2006.


     2. The Appellant is a citizen of Mauritius born on 1st February  1981.
        The date of the decision under challenge is 30th September 2013.


     3. The Judge notes the  chronology  is  not  disputed.  The  Appellant
        entered the United Kingdom as a visitor on 30th January  2005  with
        leave valid until 13th July 2005 which was extended  by  subsequent
        applications as a student until 30  November  2009  and  21  August
        2011.  On 21 July 2011 she made  the  application  leading  to  the
        decision  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  Appellant
        asserts she received no correspondence after  the  application  was
        made until receiving a letter from the Respondent dated 21st August
        2013  advising  her  that  her  application  to   study   an   ACCA
        qualification QCF level 5 was refused as it was  not  a  course  of
        study leading to an approved qualification, although the  Appellant
        was advised that a decision had been made  exceptionally  to  allow
        her the opportunity to vary her application to study  ACCA  at  QCF
        level 6. Such a course  of  study  required  to  the  Appellant  to
        demonstrate an ability to speak English at a level B2 of the Common
        European Framework of References for Language (CEFR) as a result of
        which the Appellant was asked to send original  evidence  that  she
        had attained such a level.  A timescale of seven working days  from
        the date of the letter was  set  with  it  being  stated  that  the
        refusal of the application, on the basis the course does  not  lead
        to an approved qualification, would follow in the absence  of  such
        evidence.  Judge Pooler refers to further correspondence thereafter
        resulting in an extension of time to 16th September 2013  in  which
        to provide evidence of the required English-language  ability  and,
        in absence, of the refusal on 30th September 2013.


     4. The Judge found that in the context  of  this  appeal  we  was  not
        persuaded the Secretary of  State  had  failed  to  act  fairly  in
        relation to the request for additional evidence. It was  noted  the
        Appellant asked for more time, which was granted to 16th  September
        2013, and to the  fact  there  was  no  further  contact  from  the
        Appellant until after the date of decision which is also  noted  to
        have been after she had taken and failed her English-language  test
        certificate. The Judge found it was open to the Appellant  to  have
        contacted the Respondent and to have asked for  further  time,  but
        she failed to do so. The refusal decision was therefore found to be
        unlawful.


     5. In relation to the Article 8 elements, based on private and  family
        life, it was noted that Miss Pickering did not seek to persuade the
        Judge that the Appellant had established a family life and  it  was
        noted that she did not meet the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
        Rules relating  to  family.  Paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Rules  was
        considered relating to private life but it was found the  Appellant
        could only meet this requirement if she could demonstrate that  she
        had no ties to  Mauritius  which  the  Judge  found  had  not  been
        established on the facts.  Judge Pooler concluded there was no good
        arguable case for granting leave on a private life  basis  for  the
        reasons set out in the determination.



Error of law


     6. The determination is challenged on two grounds the first being that
        as the Appellant made her application on 21st July 2011,  prior  to
        the introduction of the new Immigration Rules  in  July  2012,  the
        human rights element should have been considered under  the  Razgar
        principles and not under Appendix FM or 276ADE.


     7. In submissions Miss Pickering  referred  to  the  Court  of  Appeal
        decision in Edgehill  and  submitted  an  analogy  could  be  drawn
        between the two cases although I find no merit in such a submission
        as there was no provision in the Immigration Rules  prior  to  July
        2012 relating to human rights applications. Of more importance,  is
        that in December 2012 the Rules were changed by the introduction of
        paragraph A277C  which states:


          A277C.  Subject to paragraphs A277 to A280,  paragraph  276A0  and
              paragraph GEN.1.9. of Appendix FM of these  rules,  where  the
              Secretary of State deems  it  appropriate,  the  Secretary  of
   State  will                    consider  any  application  to  which  the
   provisions of Appendix FM                 (family  life)  and  paragraphs
   276ADE to 276DH (private  life)  of  these                 rules  do  not
   already    apply,    under    paragraphs    R-LTRP.1.1.(a),    (b)    and
   (d), R-LTRPT.1.1.(a), (b) and  (d)  and  EX.1.  of  Appendix  FM  (family
     life) and paragraph 276ADE  (private  life)  of  these  rules.  If  the
          applicant meets the requirements for leave under those  provisions
               (except  the  requirement  for  a  valid  application),   the
   applicant  will  be                 granted  leave  under  paragraph   D-
   LTRP.1.2. or D-LTRPT.1.2. of                       Appendix FM  or  under
   paragraph 276BE of these rules.


     8. In Edgehill the Tribunal had applied the  provisions  of  the  post
        July 2012 rules in ignorance of the transitional  provisions  in  a
        case  in  which  the  pre-July  2012  rules  contained  a  specific
        provision under which the applicant may have been able to  succeed.
        This is not the case in this appeal and no arguable legal error  is
        established.


     9. The second Ground is based on a 'fairness' argument. It is asserted
        the Judge failed to apply the principles arising from the cases  of
        Thakur, Patel and Naved on the basis that through no fault  of  her
        own the Appellant was on a course that did not exist and the  Judge
        erred in finding that the Secretary  of  State  had  been  fair  in
        offering  to  16th  September  2013  rather   than   60   days   in
        circumstances where the Appellant was not  at  fault.   The  period
        allowed was 24 days whereas the  Appellant  eventually  passed  the
        test on 12th October 2012 50 days from receipt of the letter.


    10. This ground is also without merit. The 60 day period relates  to  a
        situation  in  which  an  individual's  College  may   lose   their
        sponsorship licence as a result of  which  it  is  the  policy  and
        practice of the Secretary of State to curtail any extant  leave  to
        60 days to allow that person an opportunity to find an  alternative
        place of study or, if their leave is below 60 days, to  allow  that
        leave to  expire.  Although  Miss  Pickering  submitted  there  was
        analogy such an argument has no  merit.   The  Secretary  of  State
        exercised  discretion  when  advising  the   Appellant   that   her
        application was defective but that she was to be  given  additional
        time to remedy the defect. She may have been admitted to  a  course
        that did not exist but that is a matter between her and the College
        and she cannot argue prejudice as her application  was  not  simply
        refused. Seven working days was granted  to  obtain  the  necessary
        English-language  evidence  and  when  this  proved   to   be   too
        restrictive, a request for  an  extension  of  time  was  made  and
        granted.  It is noted that part of the reason for the delay in  the
        English-language  evidence  becoming  available  is  the  fact  the
        Appellant failed the test she initially took. There is no  evidence
        the Appellant contacted the Secretary of  State  directly  advising
        her that the extension to 16th September 2013 was  insufficient  or
        requesting  additional  time.   There  is  evidence  the  Appellant
        contacted her MP and that  correspondence  originated  there  from,
        including e-mail  correspondence  dated  5th  September  2013.  The
        evidence  indicates  the  MP  accepted  the  Secretary  of  State's
        position in response prior to  the  deadline;  but  an  MP  has  no
        authority in matters such as occurred in this case relating to  the
        imposition of a timetable.


    11. Whilst a timetable of seven working days from the date of a  letter
        may in some circumstances be said to be short,  the  extension  has
        not been shown to be unreasonable.  In relation to the  authorities
        relied  upon  by  Miss  Pickering;   in   Kaur   (Patel   fairness:
        respondent's policy) [2013] UKUT 344 it was held that  the  60  day
        period was a policy designed to deal fairly with  applicants  whose
        college  of  choice  loses  a  sponsorship   licence   whilst   the
        application of leave to remain is  outstanding  but  this  decision
        provides no support for the assertion this  Appellant  should  have
        been granted a similar  period,  expressly  or  by  analogy.  Naved
        (student - fairness - notice of points) [2012] UKUT 00014 is a case
        in which the tribunal held that fairness required the Secretary  of
        State to give an applicant an opportunity  to  answer  grounds  for
        refusal of which he did not know and could not have  known  failing
        which a decision could be contrary to the law.  In  this  case  the
        Secretary of State provided Miss Gungaram an opportunity to address
        grounds which could have led to refusal in  relation  to  a  matter
        that it is arguable she should and could have known about,  and  so
        no breach of principle is established. This is  not  a  case  of  a
        change occurring in relation to a post application situation.


    12. In Thakur (PBS decision -  law  fairness)  Bangladesh  [2011]  UKUT
        00151 it was found the principles of fairness are not to be applied
        by rote: what fairness demands is dependent on the context  of  the
        decision and the particular circumstances of  the  applicant.    In
        this case Judge Pooler set out the correct legal self-direction  in
        the determination and it has not been established on the facts that
        the actions of the Secretary of State can be said to  be  perverse,
        irrational, or contrary to the law.  This is a case  in  which  the
        Judge examined the relevant issues and  principles  and  has  given
        adequate reasons for findings made. No  arguable  the  legal  error
        material to the decision or otherwise has been established  in  the
        determination.


Decision

    13. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    14. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005. I make not such order pursuant to rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
        Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 19th September 2014












