
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/42935/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 21 October 2015                   |On 23 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SS
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:      Mr Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:     Mr Bajwa, Bajwa & Co solicitors


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

 1. The respondent is a citizen of India.  I have anonymised the respondent
    because this decision refers to sensitive, medical information and  the
    circumstances  of  two  minors.   The  respondent  has  suffered   from
    tuberculosis in the past.

 2. The respondent arrived in the United Kingdom ('UK') in June 2009  as  a
    working holiday maker (with leave until June 2011), and has remained in
    the UK ever since.  He married his British  citizen  wife  in  November
    2010 and made an in-time application to remain as a spouse but this was
    refused.  The respondent and his wife have two British citizen children
    (born in 2011 and  2012  respectively).   They  both  have  significant
    health concerns.  The respondent made a further application  to  remain
    on the basis of his relationship with his wife and  children  but  this
    was refused by the SSHD  in  a  letter  dated  17  October  2014.   The
    respondent appealed against this decision to the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. In a decision dated 27 May 2015 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  K  Wiseman
    allowed the respondent's appeal on Article 8 grounds only. The  hearing
    before the judge proceeded in the absence of the SSHD's representative,
    save that she made submissions at the beginning of the hearing  (before
    the judge heard any oral evidence).

 4. The matter now comes before me to decide whether the Tribunal has acted
    unfairly in proceeding with the hearing in the absence  of  the  SSHD's
    representative.  I must decide whether the Tribunal acted  unfairly  in
    proceeding in this manner,  not  whether  it  acted  reasonably  -  see
    Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 418 (IAC).

 5. After hearing submissions from both parties  I  reserved  my  decision,
    which I now provide with reasons.

 6. I accept that the Tribunal followed an unusual procedure that  did  not
    bear all the necessary hallmarks of fairness.  The  judge  acknowledged
    that submissions in advance of hearing the evidence was unlikely to  be
    sufficient in advancing or clarifying the SSHD's case.   Neither  party
    has provided me with any evidence as to what happened at  the  hearing.
    I have checked the record of proceedings but it did not  assist  as  to
    what happened at the beginning of the hearing.

 7. Having weighed up all the information that is available to  me  I  have
    decided that whilst the course adopted by the judge is likely  to  have
    been unfair to the SSHD in many cases, it  was  not  unfair  given  the
    particular circumstances of this case, for the reasons I set out below.



 8. It is not clear from the  decision  but  it  appears  that  the  SSHD's
    representative did not invite the judge to adjourn the appeal to enable
    the respondent to provide  medical  evidence  that  he  was  no  longer
    suffering from tuberculosis.  The SSHD's representative explained  that
    in the absence of such evidence  the  SSHD's  policy  required  her  to
    withdraw from the hearing.   The judge was satisfied  that  the  appeal
    should proceed even though that meant that  the  SSHD's  representative
    felt compelled to withdraw but has not recorded any objection  to  this
    or any other application on the part of the SSHD.

 9. Mr Clarke was not able to take me to any evidence that  an  adjournment
    had been requested.   He  was  able  to  show  me  a  copy  of  a  note
    summarising what happened at the hearing, but as he  acknowledged  this
    did not assist.  Where as here the SSHD's representative fails to  seek
    an adjournment and appears to accept the judge's  suggested  course  in
    proceeding with the hearing, it will be  more  difficult  to  establish
    that there has been procedural unfairness to the SSHD.

10. Mr Clarke reminded me that this is a case in which the  full  ambit  of
    the relevant facts did not become known until the hearing, particularly
    when the respondent gave evidence.  The judge observed [2] "most of the
    relevant facts of the case only emerged  in  oral  evidence...the  case
    considered in the refusal letter appears to bear little resemblance  to
    the full case put forward at  the  appeal  hearing...".   However,  the
    SSHD's representative would have been  provided  with  a  copy  of  the
    respondent's bundle of  evidence  in  advance  of  the  hearing.   This
    contained evidence supporting the subsistence of the marriage  as  well
    as powerful and  persuasive  evidence  concerning  the  long  term  and
    serious welfare and care needs of the  respondent's  children  and  his
    role in assisting in meeting those needs, alongside his wife and social
    services.

11. Whilst the SSHD  disputed  the  subsistence  of  the  marriage  in  the
    decision letter, the respondent's bundle provided cogent evidence  that
    the marriage was genuine and subsisting  at  all  material  times.   Mr
    Clarke has submitted that the SSHD was deprived of a  fair  opportunity
    to test this evidence.  In my judgment there is very little to  support
    the submission that by the time of the hearing before the  judge  these
    matters were seriously in dispute.  The SSHD's representative  said  it
    "was for the tribunal to decide".   This is not  a  case  in  which  an
    application for an adjournment was made in order for the evidence to be
    tested.  This gives a strong implication that  the  issues,  which  had
    previously been disputed, were no longer seriously in dispute.

12. Rather, the SSHD's representative agreed with the course  suggested  by
    the judge.  There is nothing to indicate that the  SSHD  was  concerned
    about the procedural fairness of such a course.  When  considering  the
    appropriate way for the hearing to proceed  the  SSHD's  representative
    must have considered the cogent evidence now available to  support  the
    genuineness  of  the  parties'  marriage  and   the   very   compelling
    circumstances of the children.  Indeed, I invited Mr Clarke to  clarify
    the SSHD's current position on the relevant facts.   He  accepted  that
    the SSHD no  longer  disputed  the  genuineness  of  the  marriage  and
    accepted the medical and social care evidence concerning the children.

13. It is noteworthy that an earlier hearing listed on 24  April  2015  had
    been adjourned the day before on 23 April due to a lack  of  judiciary.
    This caused the respondent and  his  family  considerable  expense  and
    inconvenience as they were already on  their  way  to  the  hearing  in
    London from Scotland when told about the adjournment.  Mr  Bajwa  asked
    me to find that this is likely to have been  a  relevant  consideration
    when the SSHD's representative agreed to take the course  suggested  by
    the judge. There is likely to have  been  a  shared  concern  that  the
    appeal should not be adjourned on a second occasion, particularly  when
    any adjournment would inevitably impact upon the care arrangements  for
    the children.  In addition, when the appeal was adjourned on the  first
    occasion the SSHD did not take the opportunity to set out her  concerns
    regarding the  respondent's  tuberculosis  in  advance  of  the  second
    hearing so that the appropriate arrangements could be made and / or  to
    put the respondent on notice that he needed to bring with him  evidence
    confirming the medical position regarding his tuberculosis.

14. In all the circumstances I am satisfied  that  the  appeal  was  justly
    determined.  The SSHD's consented to  the  approach  suggested  by  the
    judge.  The judge conducted a critical and detailed assessment  of  the
    relevant evidence and has made comprehensive findings.  As set  out  by
    the judge the findings are consistent  with  the  detailed  documentary
    evidence available.   Mr  Clarke  was  unable  to  indicate  how  those
    findings might  have  been  different  if  the  witnesses  were  cross-
    examined.  He was unable to take me to any evidence  that  called  into
    question the judge's findings.  As I set out above Mr Clarke  confirmed
    that the SSHD no longer disputes the genuineness of  the  marriage  and
    the very compelling circumstances of the children.

15. Having reached those findings the judge was entitled to  find  that  it
    would not be reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK, and  to
    allow the appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.  The children  have  been
    diagnosed as having an abnormality of part of chromosome 22 as well  as
    autism.  There was clear evidence  that  these  were  having  and  were
    expected to continue to have a major  impact  on  the  children.   They
    required and would continue to require a high level of constant support
    and care from both parents, with the assistance of social services.

16. If am I wrong and the hearing was infected by procedural unfairness,  I
    would still not exercise my discretion to set aside the decision.   The
    factual issues that were in dispute  are  no  longer  in  dispute.   Mr
    Clarke accepted on behalf of  the  SSHD  that  the  marriage  has  been
    genuine and subsisting at all material times.   He  also  accepted  the
    circumstances of the children as set out by the judge.   The  reasoning
    of the judge as to why in the particular exceptional  circumstances  of
    this case it would be a disproportionate breach of  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR to remove the  respondent  or  require  him  to  apply  for  entry
    clearance (paras 40-42) is unassailable.

Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law and I do not set it aside.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
23 October 2015
