
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42270/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23rd  March 2016                   |On 11th April 2016                   |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
                                   Between

                                 Um Ul Banin
                        [No anonymity direction made]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Not represented
For the respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the  claimant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Shiner promulgated 25.8.15,  dismissed  her  appeal  and
    that of her partner Mr Imran  Ali  Khan  (IA/42268/2014),  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of  State,  dated  10.10.14,  to  refuse  his
    application made in August 2014  for  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  1
    Entrepreneur  and  this  appellant's  application  to  remain  as   his
    dependent spouse.  The Judge heard the appeal on 31.7.15.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth granted permission to appeal  on
    19.1.16.

 3. Thus the matter came before me on 23 March 2016 as  an  appeal  in  the
    Upper Tribunal.

Error of Law

 4. For the reasons summarised below, I find no error of law in the  making
    of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  such  as  to  require  the
    decision of Judge Shiner to be set aside.

 5. Only the appeal of Mrs Banin was listed before me.  On  examination  of
    the case papers it is clear  that  by  letter  dated  15.1.16  Mr  Khan
    withdrew his appeal and it was recorded as withdrawn  on  18.1.16.  His
    reason for withdrawing the appeal was that he had decided to seek leave
    to remain on the basis of 10 years continuous lawful residence and  had
    an interview scheduled for 20.1.16. However, his letter requested  that
    the appeal of his dependant wife continue.

 6. Mr Khan's appeal having been dismissed in the First-tier  Tribunal  and
    there being no extant appeal to the Upper Tribunal,  there  can  be  no
    basis for this appellant's appeal to continue. As a partner Mrs Banin's
    claim is entirely dependant on that of Mr Khan. Notwithstanding,  Judge
    Hollingworth saw fit to grant permission to appeal to Mrs  Banin.  That
    permission should not have been granted.

 7. In the circumstances, there is  no  merit  in  the  appeal.  It  cannot
    succeed and must be dismissed.

Conclusions:

 8. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.


Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a fee award.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: the appeal has been dismissed.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated

