
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42512/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 4th July 2014                                |On 21st July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                the Secretary of State for the home deparment
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                            Michael Peter de vos
                         (ANONYMITY order NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Bonavero of Counsel instructed by Breytenbachs
Immigration Consultants


                            NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL


 1. The Secretary of State was granted permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal against a determination of Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Parker promulgated on 14th April 2014.

 2. Judge Parker had allowed the Appellant's appeal under  the  Immigration
    Rules, and under Article 8 of the 1950  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights.

 3. Mr Whitwell advised that  the  file  had  been  reviewed,  and  it  was
    accepted that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  disclose
    a material error of law,  and  requested  permission  to  withdraw  the
    appeal.

 4. Mr Bonavero had no comment to make.

 5. Rule 17(2) of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 states
    that a notice of withdrawal will  not  take  effect  unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal consents to the withdrawal.  I agreed to the withdrawal of the
    appeal, and there is consequently no appeal before the Upper  Tribunal.
    The First-tier Tribunal determination therefore stands.






Signed                              Date 4th July 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


