
[pic]
IAC-fH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42396/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 March 2016                              |On 21 April 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY



                                   Between

                              Mr ASIFUR RAHMAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss N Rafique, J A Stifford Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Turquet (the Immigration Judge) promulgated on  29  July
    2015. The Immigration Judge decided to dismiss the  appellant's  appeal
    against the respondent's decision to refuse him leave to  remain  as  a
    Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant and decide to remove him from the UK.

2.   I have carefully considered the grounds on which permission  to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal was given by Upper Tribunal Judge Freeman  on  11
    February 2016.  Unfortunately, Judge Freeman, as he  acknowledged,  was
    not supplied with all the earlier  decisions  of  the  Immigration  and
    Asylum Chamber.  In particular, Judge Freeman pointed  out  that  there
    was an earlier decision of the Upper Tribunal in this case which he had
    not been given. That is a decision of Judge  Digney  dated  15th  March
    2015, as it subsequently transpired.

3.   I not only have the benefit of having seen Judge Digney's decision  but
    also the earlier decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Carroll  on  18
    December 2012, against whose decision the appellant appealed  to  Judge
    Digney.

 4.  The grounds that are now raised on behalf of the appellant argue that:
    (1)  that the Immigration Judge misapplied the  evidential  flexibility
    policy;
    (2)   that  the  Immigration  Judge  misapplied  section  85A  of   the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("2002 Act");
    (3)  that the Immigration Judge failed to properly apply the public law
         duty to act fairly.

5.   It is clear to me that the grounds raised seek to  re-litigate  matters
    that  were  determined  by  Judge  Carroll,  which  were   subsequently
    dismissed by Digney. The background to the decision of the  Immigration
    Judge can be established from  the  decision  of  Judge  Digney.    The
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal determined by Judge Digney related  solely
    to the removal directions under Section  47  of  the  2002  Act.  Judge
    Digney did not allow an appeal or revisit the substantive merits of the
    decisions made by the First-tier Tribunal by  Judge  Carroll  in  2012.
    However, he set-aside the removal decision made by the  respondent  and
    remitted it back to her to make a fresh decision. The respondent made a
    fresh decision to refuse to extend the appellant's leave to remain  and
    on 6th October 2014 issued a fresh  notice  to  the  appellant  to  the
    effect that the appellant was liable to removal. That was the  decision
    appealed to the Immigration Judge in 2015.

6.   Miss Rafique, who appeared for the appellant at the hearing before  the
    Upper Tribunal as well as appearing in the Tribunal below, has raised a
    number of interesting arguments including the application of the  ratio
    decidendi of the Supreme Court in a case called  Mandalia  [2015]  UKSC
    59. However, having read that  decision  it  does  not  deal  with  the
    situation where an appellant has provided a  series  of  documents  but
    there are missing pages or extracts from those documents. The  argument
    that a request could have been  made  by  the  respondent  for  further
    information before reaching a decision is therefore  incorrect,  in  my
    view. Miss Rafique also has sought to raise an issue  about  the  wider
    public law duty of fairness but I am satisfied that the decision is not
    unfair in the public law sense.  In any  event  the  Immigration  Judge
    fully considered this in her decision, finding that the respondent  had
    correctly applied the evidential flexibility  policy.  There  does  not
    appear to be any material error of law on her part.

7.   Miss Rafique has also sought to amend her grounds to add an  additional
    ground under paragraph 3C of the Immigration Act 1971 on the basis that
    her client has been prejudiced in some way by being treated an  illegal
    overstayer.   This  has  not  previously  been  the  subject   of   any
    application for permission to appeal but she makes an oral  application
    before me to amend her grounds to deal with this.

8.   As Miss Sreereman, who appears for  the  respondent,  has  made  clear,
    these matters were the subject of  clear  findings  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. In particular, the Immigration  Judge  felt  bound  by  Judge
    Carroll's finding that the appellant failed to meet the requirements of
    the Immigration Rules. That  is  clearly  the  extent  of  the  earlier
    decision. Nevertheless, the arguments that the appellant now  seeks  to
    raise were considered but rejected by Judge Digney.  Therefore,  whilst
    the arguments raised by  Miss  Rafique  are  interesting,  they  cannot
    ultimately succeed. The FTT made clear findings, in so far as it needed
    to, given that many of the matters raised had already been dealt  with.
    I have to consider whether there is a material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the FTT. I am satisfied that the grounds of appeal  do  not
    establish any material error of law.

9.   In the light of my findings, the Immigration Judge's  decision  stands.



10.  Judge Freeman in giving permission was clearly  somewhat  perplexed  as
    to the background of this case and I am grateful to the parties as they
    have at least expanded on that background. Having considered  the  full
    history of this matter, I have decided to dismiss this appeal.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error in the decision of the FTT.  The  appeal  against
that decision is dismissed.

No anonymity direction  was  made  by  the  FTT  and  I  make  no  anonymity
direction.





Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

