
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42662/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 July 2017                       |On 10 August 2017                    |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                                 ADNAN ANWAR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance.
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant has permission to appeal to  this  Tribunal  following  a
    grant of permission by the Vice President, which  itself  followed  the
    quashing of an earlier refusal of  permission  by  Order  of  the  High
    Court, Mr Justice Turner.

 2. The appellant has not appeared by himself or  any  representative.   We
    proceed in his absence.  The appellant  had  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom until 30 October 2014.  The Secretary of  State  appears
    to have decided on 8 May 2013 that his leave should be curtailed so  as
    to expire on 7 July 2013.  That decision was never in fact served.  The
    appellant became aware of it on 20 October 2014 but it is not said,  so
    far as we can see, by either him or by the Secretary of State, that his
    becoming aware of that decision which  had  not  been  formally  served
    constituted service of it - which would, in any event, have required  a
    formal notice.  No application was made for the extension of his  leave
    before its expiry  on  30  October.   He  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal apparently against  the  decision  curtailing  his  leave  and
    apparently on the basis that that decision, although only known by  him
    in October 2014, was a decision on the date it was made, that is to say
    in May 2013.  Judge Singh took the view that  there  was  no  right  of
    appeal  because  the  notice  was  in  standard  form,  curtailing  the
    appellant's leave but curtailing it only on the expiry of 60 days  from
    the date  of  the  decision.   Under  those  circumstances,  his  leave
    extended beyond the date of the decision and this was not a case  where
    as a result of the curtailment, he had, at the date of the decision, no
    leave.

 3. That conclusion was evidently the subject of argument in the High Court
    leading to Mr Justice Turner's decision; we have  not  seen  what  that
    argument was, but it looks as though Mr Justice Turner  may  have  been
    persuaded that the terms of s 82(2)(e) of the 2002 Act before amendment
    by the Immigration Act  2014  might  enable  the  appellant  to  appeal
    against a notice of curtailment which was served on him at a time  when
    he had no leave to curtail.  With the greatest respect, if that is  the
    reason  why  permission  was  granted,  there  may   have   been   some
    misunderstanding: a curtailment can have no effect  at  all  unless  it
    takes effect during a period of leave.

 4. It seems to us, therefore, that  the  position  now  is  that  although
    permission has been granted to appeal against Judge  Singh's  decision,
    there is no perceptible error  in  it;  the  curtailment  decision,  if
    served, was unappealable, if not served, could  not  found  an  appeal;
    there was no appeal before Judge Singh, as he correctly decided.

 5. We are told that the appellant has, in any event, now  been  granted  a
    residence card  under  the  provisions  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations; that may indeed explain why he  appears  to
    have taken no steps to pursue this appeal and it may therefore be  that
    his position in the United  Kingdom  is  sufficiently  secure  for  his
    purposes.

 6. So far as this appeal is concerned, we dismiss it.







                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                         Date: 1 August 2017

