
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42045/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision and Reasons           |
|                                           |Promulgated                    |
|On 30 October 2014                         |On 6 November 2014             |
|Prepared 30 October 2014                   |                               |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY



                                   Between

                            SELETE SEBASTIO TETA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr F Singarajah, Counsel, instructed by Londonhelp4U
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


1.   The appellant, a citizen of Angola, appeals, with  permission,  against
    a determination of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Sweet  who,  in  a
    determination promulgated on 27 May 2014, dismissed her appeal  against
    a decision of the Secretary of State  to  refuse  her  application  for
    indefinite leave to remain  under  the  fourteen  year  long  residence
    provisions and also to  refused  her  leave  to  remain  on  Article  8
    grounds.

2.   When the appellant appealed against that  decision  she  asserted  that
    she was in a durable relationship  with  an  EEA  national  who  was  a
    qualified  person  under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006.  She also claimed the decision was in breach  of  her
    human rights under Article 8 of the ECHR.

3.   At the hearing  of  the  appeal  the  judge  heard  evidence  from  the
    appellant and Mr Bruno Araujo, her partner.  Mr Araujo asserted that he
    was born in Portugal but had travelled to Angola from time to  time  as
    his mother and her family members lived there.

4.   In paragraphs 39 onwards the judge set out his findings  of  fact.   He
    noted that the appellant had used a  forged  Portuguese  identity  card
    which she had obtained in 1995 and that she had used a  false  name  to
    gain employment in Britain. He noted that the appellant  had  confirmed
    that she had wrongly claimed job seekers  allowance  and  benefits  but
    that she denied that she had received benefits between 2006 and 2013 as
    stated in a letter from HMRC.  He concluded that she had been receiving
    benefits to which she was not entitled. He accepted that the  appellant
    satisfied the fourteen year requirement under paragraph 376.

5.   However, he did not consider that the appellant  met  the  requirements
    of the Rules because he considered that her dishonesty was such that it
    would be undesirable for her to be given indefinite leave to remain  on
    the grounds of long residence: he concluded that  the  public  interest
    meant that it was undesirable for her to remain  in  Britain  on  those
    grounds.  In reaching that conclusion he referred  to  the  appellant's
    blatant fraud in entering Britain on a forged Portuguese  passport  and
    thereafter seeking state benefits, employment  and  access  to  medical
    services in Britain. He stated that he did not accept her  evidence  as
    to when she had stopped obtaining benefits.

6.   He went on to say

         "I have not found her evidence to be credible in that regard nor as
         to her relationship with her partner Bruno Araujo,  who  gave  oral
         evidence before me.  It is suggested that they met  each  other  in
         1988/1999 and started a relationship  soon  after,  but  they  both
         accept this had been an on/off relationship and it  has  only  been
         since 2011 that they have  been  living  together.  There  is  very
         limited evidence of them residing at the same address, save  for  a
         utility and TV  licence  bill  dated  in  July  and  November  2013
         respectively.  There is some evidence that they have been obtaining
         medical treatment together, but I am not satisfied  that  there  is
         sufficient evidence that they have indeed been living  together  or
         in an ongoing relationship."

7.   Having weighed up a number of  other  factors  he  concluded  that  the
    appellant could not have a claim under family life  under  Appendix  FM
    "or pursuant to Razgar".  He stated that:

         "Because of my views as to her failing to meet the public  interest
         test under paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules, it follows  (in
         my view) that it cannot be disproportionate for her  to  return  to
         Angola, even though she has spent seventeen years in the  UK.   She
         had previously lived for 25 years in Angola.  I  am  not  satisfied
         that she has an ongoing relationship with her partner  and  in  any
         event, though he is Portuguese, his  mother  lives  in  Angola  and
         there is no reason why he could not return to that country with the
         appellant in order to continue their claimed relationship.  I  have
         also taken into account the findings in ZH (Bangladesh) [2009]."

8.   Although permission was refused in the First-tier I granted  permission
    on 19 August 2014 on the basis that I considered that it  was  arguable
    that there was a lack of clarity in the judge's findings regarding  the
    status of Mr Araujo and the relationship between him and the  appellant
    and that moreover the judge had failed to engage with  the  Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2006.

9.   At the hearing of the appeal before me Mr Singarajah  argued  that  the
    judge  should  have  found  that  the  appellant  was  in   a   durable
    relationship with an EEA national exercising Treaty rights but that  in
    any event he should  have  found  that  there  was  a  disproportionate
    interference with her rights under Article 8 of the ECHR  in  requiring
    her to leave the jurisdiction.

10.  He stated that the judge incorrectly placed weight in the fact that  Mr
    Araujo did not have permanent residence  in  Britain  although  it  was
    pointed out to him that that was not a  finding  which  the  judge  had
    made, it was merely a submission made by the  Presenting  Officer.   He
    then went on to assert that in paragraph 39 the judge had  stated  that
    "Since 2007 she has lived at her current address, where she also  lives
    with her long term partner, Bruno Araujo".  He argued that that  showed
    the judge had assessed the length of relationship but he said that that
    finding was inconsistent with what the judge had written  in  paragraph
    43 where he said that he was not satisfied that  there  was  sufficient
    evidence that the appellant and Mr Araujo had been living  together  or
    were in an ongoing relationship.

11.  He went on to argue that the judge had  not  considered  the  issue  of
    whether or not the removal of the appellant would be disproportionate -
    the Rules had not incorporated the  relevant  Strasbourg  jurisprudence
    and that that should be taken into consideration.  He referred also  to
    the rights of Mr Araujo and argued that  the  judge  had  not  properly
    taken into account the issue of whether  or  not  the  removal  of  the
    appellant would be disproportionate.   His contention was  that  either
    the judge had been consistent in his findings or alternatively, that he
    had failed to give reasons but in any event had  failed  to  apply  the
    correct  law.   He  argued  in  particular  that  it   would   not   be
    proportionate to expect the appellant to leave Britain  and  return  to
    Angola to make an application for leave to remain.

12.  In reply Mr Nath argued that  the  judge  had  made  clear  findings  -
    particularly those in paragraph 43 where he had stated that  there  was
    insufficient evidence that the appellant and Mr Araujo had been  living
    together or were in an ongoing relationship.  He stated that the  judge
    had properly considered the  issue  of  the  appellant's  rights  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR which had themselves been  considered  in  detail
    in the refusal letter of 24 September  2013.   This  was  a  considered
    determination and he asked me to find that the judge had made no  error
    of law in the determination in  concluding  that  not  only  could  the
    appellant not qualify under the rules but  moreover  that  her  removal
    would be disproportionate.

Discussion

13.  The appellant's initial application was for leave to remain  under  the
    fourteen year provisions. However when that application was refused she
    raised, in the grounds of appeal, two further issues - her rights under
    Regulation 8 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 and  her  rights
    under Article 8 of the ECHR.  For both of these issues it is  necessary
    to consider the relationship between the  appellant  and  Mr  Araujo  -
    whether or not they are unmarried partners in a durable relationship  -
    and the further questions as whether or not  Mr  Araujo  is  exercising
    Treaty rights here or whether or not the removal of the appellant would
    be a disproportionate interference with her rights under Article  8  of
    the ECHR.

14.  When considering the issue of  the  appellant's  relationship  with  Mr
    Araujo the judge appears to reach two  contradictory  conclusions.   In
    paragraph 43 he  states  that  he  is  not  satisfied  that  there  was
    sufficient evidence that Mr Araujo and the appellant  had  been  living
    together or were in an ongoing relationship, whereas in paragraph 39 he
    states that she has lived "with her long-term partner,  Bruno  Araujo".
    It is difficult to reconcile these two findings.  It  may  be  that  in
    paragraph 39 the judge is summarising the evidence before him but  that
    does not clearly reflect the heading before that paragraph which refers
    to his findings of fact.

15.  I consider that there is a material error of law in  the  determination
    in that there requires to be a clear finding of fact on this issue - is
    the appellant in a durable relationship with Mr Araujo or is  she  not?
    It is only where there is a clear finding of fact on  that  that  issue
    that it would be possible to go on to consider whether or not Mr Araujo
    is a qualified person under Regulation 6 or indeed whether or  not  the
    removal of the appellant would be such an interference with her  rights
    under Article 8 of the ECHR that her removal would be considered to  be
    disproportionate.

16.  I therefore consider that the determination  of  the  First-tier  Judge
    should be set  aside  insofar  as  it  relates  to  the  issue  of  the
    appellant's rights under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 and her
    rights under Article 8 of the ECHR.  I consider that there is no  error
    of law in the decision of the judge relating to the  appellant's  claim
    to have a right to remain under the fourteen year Rule  and  of  course
    that was not challenged before me.

17.  I consider that as the findings of fact made by the judge  are  unclear
    this is a case where it would be  appropriate  for  the  appeal  to  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal as the requirements of  the  Senior
    President of Tribunal's Directions are met.




Directions.


    This appeal will proceed to a hearing afresh when the issues set out in
    paragraph 15      above can be  determined.  To  be  listed  at  Hatton
    Cross, 2 hours, Portuguese interpreter.



Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy           3 November 2014

