
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/42532/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 December 2015                  |On 26 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between


                         MISS RUTH RINA RESURRECCION
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Othieno, Geo Immigration Consultants Ltd
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                       ERROR OF LAW DECISION & REASONS

1.    The Appellant is a national of  the  Philippines,  born  on  15  March
1985. She came to the United Kingdom on 9 February 2010 in order  to  attend
the University of Winchester where she undertook a  Degree  in  Professional
Practice in Health and Social Care. She graduated with  a  BSc  in  February
2012. Prior to that time the Appellant graduated with a  degree  in  Nursing
from the University of Bangatas  in  the  Philippines  in  March  2006.  The
Appellant also worked  during  her  studies  and  has  been  employed  as  a
healthcare assistant both by the NHS and BUPA.

2.    On 15 August 2012, the Appellant obtained an extension of leave for  2
years as Tier 1 Post Study Migrant. On 8 August 2014,  she  applied  for  an
extension  of  leave  outside  the  Rules  to  complete  her  studies.  This
application was refused on 9 October 2014 and her appeal came  before  Judge
of the First-tier Tribunal Suffield-Thomas for hearing on 12 May  2015.  The
appeal was confined to consideration  of  Article  8  of  ECHR  outside  the
Rules.

3.    In a decision and reasons  promulgated  on  18  May  2015,  the  Judge
dismissed the appeal. She considered at [23]  that  there  were  exceptional
circumstances that would lead the Tribunal to make an Article  8  assessment
outside the Rules. She noted at [25] that the  Appellant  does  not  have  a
family life in the UK and that her mother and son live in  the  Philippines.
She found at [26] that the Appellant has a private life in the UK. She  went
on to find at [28] that the Appellant  has  been  an  overstayer  since  her
leave as a post-study migrant ended in August 2014. The  Judge  went  on  to
conclude at [32] that the decision of the Respondent refusing to  grant  her
further leave to remain was proportionate.

4.    An application for permission to appeal was sought in-time on  29  May
2015. The grounds in support of the application  asserted  that  the  First-
tier Tribunal Judge erred  materially  in  law:  (i)  in  holding  that  the
Appellant had overstayed her visa when she made the  application  underlying
her appeal and that  this  erroneous  finding  has  coloured  her  view  and
affects the application of  section  117A  &  B  of  the  2002  Act  to  the
detriment of the  Appellant;  (ii)  the  Judge  erred  in  holding  that  no
evidence of the inability of the Appellant to secure employment as  a  nurse
in the Philippines when the Appellant has testified as to  the  difficulties
in  securing  employment  and  has  provided  objective  backdrop   evidence
supporting her assertion; (iii) in failing to give clear reasons as  to  why
the public interest in removal outweighs the compassionate circumstances  of
the case.

5.    Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Colyer
on 18 August 2015 on the basis that:

    "4. It is arguable that the judge fell into material error  in  finding
    (at paragraph 28) that the appellant had been  an  overstayer  with  no
    valid leave to be in the UK; whereas in paragraph 2 the judge sets  out
    the appellant's immigration history indicating  her  application  on  8
    August 2014 which predates the conclusion of her leave to remain  as  a
    tier 1 post study migrant on 15 August 2014.

    5. It is arguable that the judge erred  in  fact  in  holding  that  no
    evidence of the inability of the appellant to secure  employment  as  a
    nurse in the Philippines (at paragraph 30). This  formed  part  of  the
    appellant's case and is referred to by the judge at paragraph 12(viii).
    In addition the  appellant's  bundle  contains  a  number  of  articles
    relating to that issue.

    6. It is arguable that erroneous factual finding may have coloured  the
    judge's view and diminish the quality of the  appellant's  lengthy  and
    lawful residence in the UK. It  is  also  arguable  that  it  may  have
    affected considerations of section 117A and 117B of the 2002 Act to the
    detriment of the appellant.

    7. It is also arguable that the judge's assessment  of  proportionality
    and public interest may have been tainted by factual inaccuracy."

Hearing

6.    At the hearing before me, Mr Othieno stated that  he  had  nothing  to
add to the  grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal.  He  stated  that  the
Appellant is still residing in the UK with leave by virtue of section 3C  of
the Immigration Act 1971 and that this would have had a bearing  on  whether
or not her appeal should  be  allowed.  He  submitted  that  in  respect  of
maintaining integrity of immigration laws an overstayer or  illegal  entrant
is less attractive than someone who entered with leave. In  respect  of  the
issue of securing employment, the Judge did  refer  to  what  the  Appellant
said [at 12(viii)] but at [30] found that there was  no  evidence.  However,
there was background evidence which Judge did not  look  at.  The  Appellant
faces an uncertain future there, whereas in the health sector  here  she  is
of benefit to the UK. Mr Othieno acknowledged that in  respect  of  sections
117A & B the Appellant's leave had been precarious cf. AM Malawi so  he  was
not pursuing this point very  hard.  In  respect  of  the  third  ground  of
appeal, the Judge does deal with the issue of proportionate response as  the
Appellant could maintain friendships here by way of  modern  means  but  the
proportionality exercise was flawed by a lack of clear reasons.

7.    In response, Ms Holmes submitted that, in respect of the  first  point
and the error of fact relating to the Appellant being  overstayer  when  she
is not, this has not clouded her view. At [28] the Judge does not take  that
as a point against the Appellant and does not mention as  a  factor  in  her
consideration that the Appellant has overstayed. Consequently, she  did  not
accept it is a material error. In respect of the  second  point,  Ms  Holmes
stated that she did not agree with this. The  Judge  makes  a  note  of  the
evidence and she states this at [12(viii) but  what  she  actually  says  at
[30] is: "I have no evidence before me that the  Appellant  could  not  find
work in the Philippines." This does not mean she has not  taken  account  of
the evidence before her. If one looks at the bundle and the  evidence  dated
from 2011, the Judge may well have looked at this and concluded that it  did
not confirm that the Appellant would not get a job as  there  is  oversupply
but also undersupply of trained nurses. In relation to  the  evidence  about
nurses taking different career paths dating from 2014, this  does  not  help
the Appellant because it is referring to  other  jobs  done  by  people  who
trained as nurses. The Appellant may not be able to work as a  nurse,  which
is debatable in any event, but there are other jobs she can  do.  The  Judge
took account of the Presenting Officer's submissions  that  she  has  gained
education and experience here. The Judge considered  the  evidence  but  did
not consider it of assistance and it was open to her to do this. No-one  has
a guarantee they would have a certain kind of job. There is nothing to  show
she would not be able to get other work if she were  to  be  unable  to  get
work as a nurse. In respect of the third ground of appeal  and  the  alleged
absence of reasons, Ms Holmes  submitted  that  there  are  not  really  any
compassionate circumstances and it  was  open  to  the  Judge  to  make  her
findings and she has set out everything she needed to. The Judge  considered
the evidence about the Appellant's work and her private life.  There  is  no
merit in the grounds of appeal and no material error.

8.    Mr Othieno did not wish to respond.





Decision

9.    I find that whilst the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  made  errors,  when
the appeal is considered as a  whole  and  in  the  proper  context  of  the
current jurisprudence those errors are  not  material.  My  reasons  for  so
finding are as follows:

9.1.  whilst the Judge made a factual error in  finding  at  [28]  that  the
Appellant is an overstayer,  the  error  is  not  material  given  that  the
Appellant's leave to remain  was  precarious,  in  accordance  with  section
117B(5)   rather   than   developed   when   she   was    here    unlawfully
[section117B(4)]. The application of  either  of  these  sub-sections  means
that little weight can be given  to  a  private  life  established  in  such
circumstances. In any event I find  that  this  did  not  infect  or  impact
negatively  upon  the  Judge's  overall  conclusion  that  the  Respondent's
decision was proportionate;

9.2.  in respect of the Appellant's ability to obtain employment as a  nurse
in the Philippines, I accept Ms Holmes' submission that the Judge's  finding
at [30] that there was no evidence before her that the Appellant  could  not
find work in the Philippines does not mean she has not taken account of  the
evidence before her. At 12 (viii) she records the Appellant's oral  evidence
that: "There are no  jobs  for  nurses  in  the  Philippines  as  they  have
thousands of nurses and not enough jobs." However, this does not  mean  that
the Appellant would be unable to get a job but that she may not be  able  to
easily get a job as a nurse.  The  Judge  at  [30]  expressly  accepted  the
submission by the Presenting Officer that the qualifications and  experience
she had gained in the UK would stand her in good stead if she returns  home.
I find that the Judge was aware of  the  evidence  on  this  issue  and  her
finding in this respect was open to her on the evidence before her. Even  if
the Judge failed to consider the documentary evidence as to  the  oversupply
of nurses in the Philippines, I do not consider that this would have made  a
material difference given that the evidence was dated and in any  event  did
not show that the Appellant would be unable to get a job there at all.

9.3.   the  application  was  made  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  as   a
"freestanding" Article 8 case, however, this is no longer permissible  since
the coming into force of the amended Immigration  Rules  in  July  2012.  SS
(Congo) & Ors [2015] EWCA Civ 387  [23.4.15]  makes  clear  that  compelling
circumstances would have to be identified to support a claim  for  grant  of
LTR outside the new Rules in Appendix FM  [33].  Judgment  had  been  handed
down by the date of the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  but
was not considered by her in determining the appeal and  the  test  set  out
therein was not applied by the Judge at [24] where she  applied  a  test  of
"exceptional circumstances."

9.4.  I further accept the submission by Ms Holmes that the Judge fails,  in
any event, to give reasons as to why she considered there  were  exceptional
circumstances justifying consideration of Article 8 outside the  Rules.  The
only reason provided at [24] is that "it can be that the  Immigration  Rules
do not provide discretion to examine whether  the  immigration  decision  is
proportionate  in  the  light  of  the  Appellant's  circumstances  and  the
consequences  of  that  decision  may  have  a  significant  impact  on  the
Appellant's private and family life continuing."  I  agree  with  Ms  Holmes
that this does not justify a finding that, on  the  facts  before  her,  the
Appellant's  case  discloses  exceptional  or  compelling  circumstances  to
consider the appeal outside the Rules. The  Appellant  had  resided  in  the
United Kingdom since 9 February 2010. The  Judge  found  correctly  at  [25]
that she has no family life in the United Kingdom and  her  mother  and  son
reside in the Philippines. The only possible basis for  finding  that  there
was an exceptional and compelling circumstance is that  the  Appellant,  who
is qualified as a nurse in the Philippines, wished to complete  her  studies
so as to qualify as a nurse in the United Kingdom, but  whilst  laudable,  I
find this is neither exceptional nor compelling.

9.5.  Whilst I can accept the argument put forward by Mr  Othieno  that  the
Judge's reasons at [28]-[32] for finding that the Respondent's  decision  is
proportionate lack clarity and detail, given my findings above it would  not
have been possible for  the  Appellant  to  succeed  on  the  basis  of  the
evidence before the First-tier Tribunal Judge. In any  event,  her  findings
were not tainted by factual inaccuracy so as to render this  aspect  of  the
case a material error.

10.   For the reasons set out above, I find that whilst there are errors  in
the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Suffield-Thomas  these  are  not
material errors in that the outcome of the appeal would  have  remained  the
same on the basis of the facts and evidence before her. It remains  open  to
the Appellant to apply for entry clearance or  leave  to  remain  under  the
Immigration Rules, under the Points Based  System  should  she  qualify  for
such leave.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

23 February 2016
