
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA 42242 2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 8 September 2015                           |On 16 October 2015                |
|                                              |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              SYED SAQIB ABBAS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G Davison, Counsel, instructed by Zenith
Solicitors
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal brought by the Secretary of State against  a  decision
    of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Majid  who  allowed  an  appeal  by  the
    respondent, a citizen of Pakistan, against a decision of  the  Secretary
    of State refusing him leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  under  the
    European Economic Area Regulations.

 2. I begin by looking at the Secretary of State's refusal letter.  This set
    out three bullet points which  identified  things  that  the  Respondent
    (hereinafter "the claimant") had to prove.

 3. Firstly he had to prove that he based his case on  rights  of  residence
    established during the time that he was married to an EEA national.  The
    Secretary of State said that the Claimant had to provide  evidence  that
    his former spouse, who was accepted to be a national of  an  EEA  state,
    was exercising free movement rights in the United Kingdom at the time of
    the divorce.

 4. Secondly the claimant had to prove that his marriage had lasted  for  at
    least three years and that for at least one of those years  he  and  his
    former spouse had lived together in the United Kingdom.

 5. Thirdly the claimant had to prove that he was currently employed or self-
    employed or self-sufficient as if he were himself an EEA national.

 6. This summary is not the extent of the letter which also makes  it  clear
    that in order to meet the  requirements  of  Regulation  10(6),  and  so
    qualify for permanent residence, the claimant had  to  provide  evidence
    that since the date of divorce he had been a "worker" (as  is  suggested
    above) and, additionally, that he had to  prove  that  he  had  retained
    rights of residence following the divorce or that he had  resided  under
    the Regulations for five continuous years.   The  need  for  five  years
    continuous residence before becoming entitled to reside  permanently  is
    important and it is something which appears to have been overlooked.

 7. Dr Majid is  well-known  to  the  Tribunal  and  his  Decisions  have  a
    distinctive style.  Here he has made findings, particularly at paragraph
    13.  No doubt thinking of the bullet points identified  in  the  refusal
    letter he noted, and, I am satisfied, noted in a way that must amount to
    a finding, that the claimant had been married for more than three years,
    that at least twelve months of those three years had been spent  in  the
    United Kingdom and, and this is the crucial, at  paragraph  13(c),  that
    the [claimant's] bundle contained the wage slips (in May 2014  when  the
    divorce took place), a form P60 relating to the claimant's former spouse
    and a letter from the claimant's landlady confirming that the claimant's
    now divorced wife was working when the divorce took place.

 8. None of the evidence identified there was completely conclusive  but  it
    was perfectly cogent evidence in the form of a statement or a letter  or
    apparently genuine wage slips or copies thereof, and there is  no  basis
    for criticising the First-tier Tribunal Judge for believing that part of
    the evidence.  The Secretary of State's grounds mount  a  challenge  but
    they are wrong. For  example  they  suggest  at  point  9  that  it  was
    incumbent upon the Tribunal to make an Amos direction (see Amos  v  SSHD
    [2011] EWCA Civ 55).   It was not. The appeal was not about the Tribunal
    making investigations but about the claimant proving his  case.  It  was
    incumbent upon the Secretary of State to turn up and argue her case  and
    if she chose not to do that she cannot  complain  if  apparently  cogent
    evidence is  accepted  at  face  value  without  more.   Believing  such
    evidence was not a fault on the part of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    and I am  satisfied  that  the  evidence  was  accepted  and  the  judge
    necessarily, by implication if not expressly,  made  findings,  and  the
    findings were that at the time of  the  divorce  both  parties  were  in
    regular work, that since the divorce the claimant has continued to be in
    regular work and the claimant's wife was in regular work from 3  October
    2013.  All of foregoing is proved by documents which I am satisfied  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted rationally.

 9. The difficulty is  that  that  these  are  not  sufficient  reasons  for
    allowing the appeal.   The difficulty, as is indicated  in  the  refusal
    letter although not emphasised, is that the claimant had to show that he
    had resided in accordance with  the  Regulations  for  five  years,  not
    merely that he had resided for five years. The period of five years  can
    include time when the claimant had a continuing right of residence after
    the divorce but he cannot rely on his work before the divorce, he has to
    rely on his wife's work.  The  evidence  does  not  establish  that  the
    claimant's wife was exercising treaty rights earlier than  October  2013
    and that is just not long enough to establish the five  years  which  is
    necessary to qualify under the Rules.

10. It is right to say that there is  evidence  before  the  Tribunal  which
    hinted at the possibility of the claimant's wife.   There  were  letters
    referring to a tax code identifying an employer by name but not  by  the
    employer's trading name, but they equivocal.  They might be a  reference
    to the job that the claimant's wife started in  October;  certainly  the
    tax code is the same, in which  case  she  would  appear  to  have  been
    unemployed for most of 2013.  It might be that she took a  job  in  2013
    with the employer name on the document but for whatever reason  the  job
    was unsatisfactory and she was only employed for  a  short  time  before
    taking a different in October.  We do not know.  Any analysis  would  be
    entirely speculative. I cannot find anything in the evidence which would
    support a finding, even on its most generous  interpretation,  that  the
    claimant's wife was exercising treaty rights at that relevant time.  She
    may have been. That is all that can be said with any confidence  and  is
    not enough to support a conclusion that she was probably working.

11. It follows therefore that the First-tier Tribunal not only neglected  to
    make a finding on a point of fundamental  importance  but  the  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal did not support the conclusion that would
    have been necessary to have allowed the appeal.

12. It follows therefore that I set aside the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

13. That said, I emphasise  that  I  see  no  basis  for  going  behind  the
    findings of fact that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  made.  It  follows
    that this claimant has established a continuing right of residence  from
    his divorce and it may well be that the time is not very far  away  when
    he would become entitled to a permanent right of residence based on time
    that he has accumulated  but  that  time  has  not  come  yet.  That  is
    something about which I am confident Mr Davison will give clear advice.

14. I make it plain  that  I  find  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    findings were that the claimant has established  a  right  of  residence
    under Regulation 41(3) of the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006  and
    that he was entitled to reach that conclusion. It  remains  my  decision
    that I should dismiss  his  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision. I simply draw attention to the finding that has  already  been
    made by the Tribunal.

15. It follows therefore that I set aside the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  I substitute a  decision  dismissing  the  claimant's  appeal
    against the refusal of a residence card recognising a permanent right of
    residence but I indicate that I emphasise that I have approved  findings
    which show that the claimant  has  established  a  continuous  right  of
    residence.









Notice of Decision



16. I allow the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal.  I  substitute  a  decision
    dismissing the  claimant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to refuse to grant him a Residence Card.



|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 9 October 2015                 |






