
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42607/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 17 February 2016                       |On 23 March 2016                 |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY

                                   Between

                                    MR MI
                        (anonymity has been directed)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No Representative
For the Respondent:    Ms Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of  Ghana  born  on  28  October  1989.   He
    appealed the Respondent's decision of 13 October 2014  refusing  him  a
    Residence  Permit  under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006.  His appeal was heard by  Judge  of  the  First  Tier
    Tribunal Geraint Jones and dismissed under the EEA Regulations 2006 and
    on human rights grounds in a decision promulgated on 26 June 2015.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was  made  to  the  First  Tier
    Tribunal and this was refused by Judge of the First Tier Tribunal  Page
    on 21 September 2015. An  application  for  permission  to  appeal  was
    lodged with the Upper Tribunal and  permission  was  granted  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Coker on 20 October 2015.  The permission states that it
    is arguable that it is perverse for the Judge to find that although the
    Appellant and his partner have been co-habiting for about  a  year  and
    have a child, the relationship is not genuine and subsisting.   It  may
    also be that the Appellant`s partner is not  exercising  Treaty  Rights
    but that does not appear to have been explored in the appeal.

 3. The Appellant handed additional evidence to the Tribunal. This evidence
    was not before the judge at  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  Hearing.   The
    Appellant was represented at the First  Tier  Tribunal  hearing  and  I
    asked the appellant if he wanted representation for this error  of  law
    Hearing but he said he wanted to present it himself.

 4. He submitted that the Upper  Tribunal  permission  states  that  it  is
    arguably perverse for the Judge to have found that he and  his  partner
    have been co-habiting for more than a year and have a child but do  not
    have a genuine and subsisting relationship.  He submitted that  his  is
    not a marriage of convenience.

 5. The Appellant submitted that the Directive states that there can be  no
    interference with the rights of EEA Nationals exercising free movement.
     He submitted that he and his EEA National wife  are  staying  together
    and his wife is exercising her Treaty Rights.  He  submitted  that  the
    Judge had before him some of his wife's  payslips  and  contracts.   He
    submitted that his wife was on maternity  leave  at  the  date  of  the
    Hearing but she is working again now.

 6. He submitted that even if the Judge does not accept that  his  marriage
    is legal, he can still qualify under  Regulation  8(5).   He  submitted
    that he and his wife have been living together for almost two years and
    there is evidence of this.  He submitted that they now have a baby  and
    his wife is pregnant again.

 7. He submitted that he and his wife have now been to the registry  office
    and got married in the United Kingdom on  6  January  2016.   This  was
    after the date of the First-Tier Hearing.  He submitted that  the  Home
    Office did  not  want  to  interview  them  before  the  marriage.   He
    submitted that he and his wife are in a durable  relationship  and  all
    the relevant evidence has now been  provided.   He  submitted  that  at
    paragraph 16 of the decision the judge states that he,  the  appellant,
    stays with Ms Sissoko, now his wife and is the father of her child.  He
    submitted that the reference to the Immigration Rules at  paragraph  20
    is irrelevant as it is the EEA Regulations which are being  considered.
    He submitted that his representative only referred to Article 8 because
    he realised that the Judge was not going to allow the appeal.

 8. He asked me to allow the appeal and set aside the  First  Tier  Judge`s
    decision.

 9. The Presenting Officer submitted that she is relying  on  the  Rule  24
    response dated 15 December 2015.  She  submitted  that  the  Judge  was
    entitled to find that the relationship was one of convenience  and  the
    Judge gave adequate reasons at paragraphs 17 and 18 for  this  finding.
    She submitted that for the finding of the Judge to  be  perverse  there
    has to be an extremely high threshold and this threshold has  not  been
    satisfied.

10. The Presenting Officer referred to the relationship and its  durability
    and submitted that the Judge made his findings based on what was before
    him and he found he did not have sufficient evidence before him to show
    that the appellant was in a durable relationship.   In paragraph 18  he
    states "The evidence speaking to an appeal based on  Regulation  8  has
    been scant and in my judgment falls well short of satisfying me that it
    is  more  probable  than  not  that  the  Appellant  is  in  a  durable
    relationship with Ms Sissoko."  She submitted that the finding was open
    to the First Tier Judge and  his  decision  is  supported  by  adequate
    reasons.

11. The  Presenting  Officer  referred  to  the  relationship  between  the
    Appellant and his now wife, starting with when the Appellant was in the
    United Kingdom unlawfully.   This  is  referred  to  by  the  judge  at
    paragraph 21 of the decision.  At the date of the Hearing the period of
    co-habitation had been short, (paragraph 17).   She submitted that  the
    Judge  noted  that  the  Appellant`s  name  is  on  the  child`s  birth
    certificate.  She submitted, however, that based on what was before the
    Judge he was entitled to find that there was a lack of  evidence  of  a
    durable relationship between the Appellant and his partner.   What  the
    claim focuses on is co-habitation.  She submitted that there is nothing
    in the decision and there was nothing before the Judge about  the  role
    the Appellant plays in the life of his partner and his child.   He  has
    not met his wife`s parents. The Judge noted this at paragraph 12.

12. The Presenting Officer then referred to the Judge`s Article 8  findings
    submitting  that  these  cannot  be  material  as  the  Judge  had   no
    jurisdiction to make a decision under Article 8 based on  the  case  of
    Amirteymour and Others (2015) UKUT466(IAC).  This is an EEA application
    for a Residence Card.

13. The Appellant submitted that the Judge overlooked  important  evidence,
    being his  co-habitation with his wife and the birth of their child.  I
    pointed out that the judge did not overlook this, he accepted  both  of
    these issues at paragraph 16.  The appellant submitted that although he
    has not met his wife`s parents they call each other on Face time and he
    was in touch with them three days ago.   He  submitted  that  they  are
    separated so it is her mother he speaks to.

14. He submitted that as he and his wife and child are living as  a  family
    it must be an error to find that this is not  a  durable  relationship.
    He submitted that they are now married, she is pregnant  again  and  he
    plays a large part in his child`s life.  He submitted that he took  his
    child to be immunised and everything to do with the child is  addressed
    to him as his wife does not speak much English. He said he communicates
    with his child's doctor and plays a big role in his child's life.

15. I asked him if this was brought out at the First Tier  Hearing  and  he
    stated that it was not and that is why he is no longer represented.

16. The Appellant referred me to the Upper Tribunal permission  to  appeal,
    submitting his wife has been working  and  is  now  working  with  Best
    Connection Agency and there is evidence  of  this  in  the  new  bundle
    supplied.  He referred to the case of MRAX v Belgian State [2002] ECR1-
    6591 which states that it would be wrong to say that an Appellant could
    not be issued with a Residence Card  solely  because  of  his  previous
    status as an over-stayer.

Decision & Reasons

17. This is an application for a Residence Card under the EEA  Regulations.
    Article 8 has not to be considered.  There are  no  Removal  Directions
    (said case of Amirtymour).

18. The Judge has not  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the  refusal  of  a
    Residence Permit  because  the  Appellant  was  an  over-stayer.  Under
    Regulation 8(5) of the 2006 Regulations the  appellant  must  establish
    that he is the partner of an EEA National exercising her Treaty  Rights
    and he  must  be,  on  the  balance  of  probabilities,  in  a  durable
    relationship with her.  I am considering the evidence that  was  before
    the Judge as this is an error of law  hearing.  Each  case  has  to  be
    assessed on an individual basis.

19. The Appellant's application was made on 5 August 2014. At that date and
    at the date of the First Tier Hearing, the Appellant  and  his  partner
    had been married by proxy.  The fact that they have now  married  in  a
    Registry Officer in the United Kingdom cannot  be  considered  at  this
    hearing.  The marriage certificate produced to the First Tier Judge was
    a Ghanaian customary marriage  certificate.   There  was  no  statutory
    declaration with this.  At the date of the  application  the  Appellant
    showed that he is Ghanian descent but not his wife.  At the date of the
    application the Appellant`s  marriage  was  deemed  not  to  have  been
    contracted in accordance with the  law  so  he  was  considered  as  an
    unmarried partner under Regulation 8(5) of the EEA Regulations 2006. To
    succeed he had to be in a durable relationship.  It is clear  from  the
    First Tier Judge`s decision that he did not find that the Appellant was
    in a durable relationship with the EEA national.  The judge  considered
    the personal circumstances of the Appellant and  his  partner.   For  a
    durable relationship to exist it would be expected that  the  Appellant
    and his sponsor would have been living  together  for  two  years  with
    intent to live together permanently.

20. In the decision the Judge deals with the background  to  this  case  in
    paragraphs 6 to 8 and paragraph 10.  In paragraph 11  of  the  decision
    the Judge states "there is no evidence of a durable  relationship  over
    and above co-habitation since June 2014 a period of  about  one  year".
    He goes on to state that there is now the birth of a child.   Based  on
    the evidence before him the Judge  was  asked  to  decide  whether  the
    Appellant was in a durable relationship with Ms  Sissoko.  He  accepted
    that they reside together and that  the  Appellant's  name  is  on  the
    child`s birth certificate but he found that that was not conclusive  in
    the issue of a durable relationship in the modern age.   He states that
    he has to balance this evidence against the desire of an illegal  over-
    stayer finding some basis on which  to  procure  continued  but  lawful
    residence in the United Kingdom and he then states that the  period  of
    time they have been co-habiting is inadequate to allow him to  conclude
    that the relationship is durable.

21. He states that the evidence  produced  was  originally  to  support  an
    appeal under Regulation 7 but this is now an appeal under Regulation  8
    and he finds that for  Regulation  8  to  be  satisfied  there  is  not
    sufficient evidence before him of a durable  relationship  between  the
    appellant and Ms  Sissoko.   No  evidence  was  before  him  about  the
    Appellant's role as a partner or a father.

22. Based on what was before  the  Judge  he  was  entitled  to  reach  his
    conclusion.  The evidence now  produced  by  the  Appellant  cannot  be
    considered.  Article 8 cannot be considered as  there  are  no  Removal
    Directions.

Decision

23. I find there is no material error of law in the First  Tier  Tribunal`s
    decision promulgated on 26 June 2015 and that this decision must stand.

24. Anonymity has been directed.





Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

