
IAC-TH-WYL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42647/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 December 2014                          |On 31 December 2014           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                           MIss anastasia dontsova
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Wilford, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen  of  Russia,  born  on  7  June  1970.   She
    appealed the respondent's decision of 18 August 2013 to refuse to grant
    her a residence card for the United Kingdom on the basis that she is an
    extended family member of  an  EEA  national.   The  appellant  is  the
    unmarried partner of Mr Dario Bevilacqua, an Italian citizen exercising
    treaty rights by working in the United Kingdom.  The respondent was not
    satisfied that the appellant met the requirements of paragraph 8(5)  of
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006  of  proving
    that she was in a durable relationship with her EEA  national  sponsor.
    The  respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  she  had  shown  that   the
    relationship was durable as the couple had not been living together  in
    a relationship akin to marriage for at least two years.

 2. The appellant appealed and following a hearing at Nottingham, and in  a
    determination promulgated on 22 July  2014,  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Place dismissed the appellant's appeal.

 3. Albeit that the appellant's  relationship  preceded  January  2013  the
    judge found that she and her  partner  did  not  "officially"  move  in
    together prior to that month.  She found that the  relationship  became
    one akin to marriage when cohabitation  began  in  Norwich  in  January
    2013.  Prior to that they were  only  "dating".   Therefore  the  judge
    found the relationship akin to marriage lasted some eighteen months.

 4. She gave consideration to the  authority  of  YB  [2008]  UKAIT  00062.
    Although accepting that the two year measure in the  Immigration  Rules
    is only a "rule of thumb", the judge concluded  that  as  the  parties'
    relationship here fell considerably short of that measure there  was  a
    significant shortfall and accordingly the appellant had  not  satisfied
    the burden upon her to show that she is in a durable relationship  with
    Mr Bevilacqua and therefore the decision  under  the  EEA  Regulations,
    made by the respondent was a correct one.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal which was  initially  refused
    by the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  decision  of  8  August  2014  Judge
    Davidge found that the grounds, whilst reflecting a  disagreement  with
    the judge's conclusions did not reveal an arguable  material  error  of
    law.

 6. That was not accepted by the appellant who subsequently appealed to the
    Upper Tribunal.  Judge of the Upper Tribunal Grubb, in  a  decision  18
    November 2014 gave the following reasons for granting permission:-

         "1.   The  First-tier  Tribunal   (Judge   Place)   dismissed   the
             appellant's appeal against a  refusal  under  the  Immigration
             (EEA) Regulations 2006 to grant her a  residence  card  as  an
             "extended family member" of an EEA national exercising  Treaty
             Rights on the basis that the parties had not established  they
             were in a "durable relationship".

         2.   Whilst the Judge recognised that a  relationship  of  2  years
             akin to marriage was not essential, she has  arguably  reached
             an irrational finding that the parties' 18 month  relationship
             akin to marriage was not  a  "durable"  one  because  it  fell
             "considerably short" of the 2 year measure in the  Immigration
             Rules.  Further, it is arguable  that  the  Judge  misdirected
             herself by  effectively  equating  "durable"  with  "duration"
             rather than with "sustainable".

         3.   For  these  reasons,  the  Judge  arguably  erred  in  law  in
             dismissing the appellant's appeal and permission to appeal  is
             granted."

 7. Thus the matter came before me today.

 8. Mr Wilford argued that it was not essential for a two year relationship
    akin to marriage to be a requirement and that it was arguable the judge
    had reached as a consequence  irrational  findings  that  the  eighteen
    month relationship of the appellant and her partner was not a "durable"
    one because it fell "considerably short" of the two year measure in the
    Immigration Rules.  He emphasised that two years was not a "cast  iron"
    requirement.   The  judge  had  made  clear  findings   regarding   the
    relationship and that the appeal ought to be allowed.

 9. Mr Avery submitted that the judge had properly taken into  account  the
    authority of  YB  and  was  entitled  to  come  to  findings  that  the
    relationship fell significantly short of what might be expected to be a
    durable one.  He acknowledged the judge had not treated  the  two  year
    period as a defined requirement but that in all  the  circumstances  it
    was difficult to appreciate how the judge could have proceeded  in  any
    other way.

10. I indicated to both parties  that  my  view  was  that  the  judge  had
    materially erred as asserted.  Both representatives invited me in those
    circumstances to allow the appeal to the  limited  extent  that  it  be
    remitted back to the respondent for consideration of her discretion.

Conclusion

11. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

12. I set aside the decision.

13. I re-make the decision in the appeal by  allowing  it  to  the  limited
    extent that it is now remitted back to the respondent.

14. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 31 December 2014.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard


