
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42408/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 June & 21 July 2015             |On 11 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                              Khaliq Ur Rehman
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Khaliq Ur Rehman, was born on 1 January 1962  and  is  a
    male citizen of Pakistan.  He had  applied  for  a  residence  card  as
    confirmation of a right to reside in the United Kingdom as the  primary
    carer (single parent) of an EEA national child present  and  exercising
    treaty rights in the UK as a self-sufficient person.   His  application
    was refused by a decision of the respondent dated 11 October  2014  but
    the appellant appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Ransley)
    which, in a decision  promulgated  on  27  January  2015,  allowed  the
    appeal.  The Secretary of State appealed against that decision and  was
    granted permission by Judge Mailer on 12 March 2015.  The appeal turned
    on a single issue.  Judge Ransley considered [29]  that  the  appellant
    satisfied each of the criteria required in order to be granted proof of
    residence as the father of a  Lithuanian  national  aged  7  years  and
    attending primary school in the United Kingdom and  from  whose  mother
    the appellant is now divorced.  The judge found that the appellant  had
    "maintained comprehensive health insurance for himself and the  child".
    That statement was, unfortunately, not  entirely  correct.   In  cross-
    examination before the First-tier Tribunal, the  appellant  had  stated
    that his  health  insurance  did  not  cover  "serious  diseases".   It
    transpired at the first hearing before the Tribunal on 3 June 2015 that
    the appellant had taken out two separate policies although he  did  not
    at that time have details available.  He produced  particulars  of  the
    second policy at the hearing  on  21  July  2015.   The  appellant  was
    correct in stating that his first  medical  insurance  policy  did  not
    cover certain diseases but that which he additionally  took  out  which
    ran from 20 April 2015 is, indeed, comprehensive as  Mr  Harrison,  for
    the respondent, accepted.  It follows that the judge made an  error  of
    law.  It also follows that, in remaking the decision, I am now entirely
    satisfied that the appellant, as at the  date  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
    hearing, is able to meet each of the requirements for the  issue  of  a
    residence card.

Notice of Decision

 2. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 27  January
    2015 is set aside.  I have remade the decision.  The appellant's appeal
    against the decision  of  the  respondent  dated  11  October  2014  is
    allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date 4 August 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

