




Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42099/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 12th July 2016                          |On 22nd July 2016                |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                     upper tribunal DEPUTY judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                                  MISS F F
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Noor, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  It is
appropriate to continue that direction.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant a citizen of Iran born [ ]  1987  appeals  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, with permission, against the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Ford)
    which in a decision promulgated on 29th  October  2015,  dismissed  her
    appeal against the Respondent's refusal to vary  her  leave  to  remain
    exceptionally on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

Background

 2. There is a protracted history to this appeal.   The  Appellant  entered
    the UK in January 2010  with  leave  as  a  student.   That  leave  was
    extended to 20th October 2014; but on 29th August 2014 she applied  for
    variation of the leave on the basis of her Article  8  family/  private
    life.

 3. The Respondent  refused  her  application  and  her  subsequent  appeal
    against the refusal came before the FtT (Judge James)  in  2015.  Judge
    James allowed the Appellant's appeal  in  a  decision  issued  on  18th
    February 2015 and after making clear findings that should the Appellant
    be removed to Iran, she would be  at  risk  from  the  current  Iranian
    Government.  The risk found by Judge James extended  to  the  appellant
    being treated as an apostate, for which the  penalty  is  death,  being
    considered a dissident and political activist. This is because  of  the
    expression of her views in her writings on social media. Those findings
    were on the whole adopted in a subsequent Tribunal hearing,  as  I  set
    out in paragraph 8 below, with the exception of  the  conflict  arising
    from the  Appellant  returning  to  Iran  to  access  family  money  as
    mentioned in paragraph 5 below.

 4. The Respondent sought and obtained permission to  appeal  Judge  James'
    decision on the basis that the judge had failed to have regard  to  the
    factors set out in Section  117B  of  the  2002  Act  when  considering
    proportionality and had not resolved the apparent conflict, whereby the
    Appellant specifically did not seek asylum in the UK because she wished
    to have the facility to travel  to  Iran  in  order  to  access  family
    monies.  It is correct to say that  the  evidence  before  Judge  James
    showed that since her entry to the UK the Appellant had travelled  back
    to Iran on several occasions. However she had only remained  there  for
    around 3 weeks  on  each  occasion.   Her  evidence  was  that  it  was
    dangerous to do so but this was the only way she  could  access  family
    money which was still there. This was the reason she  had  not  claimed
    asylum.

 5. Judge James also found that the Appellant's nuclear family were now all
    in the UK apart from the Appellant's grandmother who remained in  Iran.
    I pause here to note that the Appellant's grandmother  has,  since  the
    start of these proceedings, died.  No close family  members  remain  in
    Iran.

 6. Following the Respondent having obtained  permission  to  appeal  Judge
    James' decision, the matter came before the Upper Tribunal on 21st  May
    2015. That Tribunal appeared to accept that Judge James  had  erred  in
    his proportionality assessment by failing, it was said,  to  take  into
    account the considerations set out in S  117  of  the  2002  act.  That
    Tribunal remitted the matter, once more to the First-tier Tribunal, for
    a fresh hearing.

 7. The fresh hearing took place before Judge Ford on  14th  October  2015.
    For the purposes of this decision it is recorded that Judge  Ford  took
    into account, as unchallenged, the evidence given to  Judge  James,  by
    the Appellant  and  her  witnesses.  It  was  further  noted  that  the
    Appellant could not meet the Immigration  Rules  and  that  the  appeal
    amounted to an Article 8 claim outside the Rules.  After  consideration
    Judge Ford dismissed the appeal  directing  herself  that  despite  the
    findings made she could only attach little weight  to  the  Appellant's
    private life because it had been established at a time when  her  leave
    to remain was precarious in that it was temporary leave only.

 8. The Appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  Judge  Ford's  decision.
    Permission was refused initially by the FtT but granted  on  a  renewed
    application before the Upper Tribunal.  The grounds seeking  permission
    argued that Judge Ford's proportionality assessment was flawed  because
    of a misapplication of Section 117B(5) because she considered that  the
    limited weight attaching to private life built up on a precarious basis
    justified boosting the public interest in removal, thereby  outweighing
    strong factors against removal.

 9. The grant of permission succinctly sets out the issues before me and is
    set out here below:-

         "1   The Appellant is a citizen of Iran who came to the UK in 2010.
             She appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
             Ford dismissing her appeal against the  refusal  of  leave  to
             remain on Article 8 grounds.  The Appellant had  travelled  to
             Iran  on  several  occasions  and  did  not  wish  to  make  a
             protection claim.

         2     The  grounds  submit   that   the   judge's   assessment   of
             proportionality was irrational and incompatible with Bensaid v
             UK.  It was accepted that the Appellant could not satisfy  the
             Immigration Rules.

         3    The judge concluded that the Appellant's return to Iran  would
             be an affront to her physical  and  moral  integrity.   It  is
             arguable that the judge erred in law in  concluding  that  she
             could only attach little weight  to  the  Appellant's  private
             life, no matter how strong it was, no matter  how  strong  her
             philosophical and religious beliefs were, in  accordance  with
             Section 117B(5).  The grounds are arguable."

The UT Hearing

10. Before me Mr Noor  appeared  for  the  Appellant;  Mr  Walker  for  the
    Respondent.  The Appellant attended the hearing but  in  the  event,  I
    found did not need to call upon her to give evidence.

11. Mr Noor's  submissions  kept  to  the  lines  of  the  grounds  seeking
    permission.  He submitted that there was no challenge to  the  findings
    of fact made both by Judge James and Judge Ford.  Both Judge James  and
    Judge Ford found that there was a real risk to  the  Appellant  if  she
    were to be forcibly removed to Iran. This is  because  she  would  face
    persecution or ill-treatment.  Judge Ford accepted that forced  removal
    of the Appellant  would  be  an  affront  to  her  physical  and  moral
    integrity.  Both Judge James and Judge Ford accepted that the Appellant
    is an apostate of Islam and has strong anti-regime views.

12. The difficulty in the Appellant's claim arose over the  fact  that  she
    did not wish to claim asylum.  She wished  to  retain  the  ability  to
    return to Iran for two to three weeks at a time in order  to  sort  out
    the family money which was still there and to see her grandmother.  (As
    I  recorded  earlier  by  the  time  of  the  hearing  before  me,  the
    Appellant's grandmother had died).

13. Mr Noor further submitted that despite Judge Ford finding as  she  did,
    she considered that she was unable to reconcile  Section  117B(5)  with
    the Secretary of State's retained discretion to grant leave outside the
    Rules  when  there  are  exceptional  compelling   circumstances.    He
    submitted that  Judge  Ford  had  misdirected  herself.   She  said  at
    paragraph [49]:-

         "... the statutory provision under Section 117B(5) is clear.  I can
         only attach little weight  to  the  Appellant's  private  life,  no
         matter how strong it is, no matter how strong her philosophical and
         religious  beliefs  are  when  looking   at   the   proportionality
         exercise."

14. He submitted that this had led the judge into an irrational  assessment
    under the fifth stage of the Razgar test. Judge Ford, he said,  appears
    to contradict herself because at [50] she accepts in her analysis of S.
    117 that she takes the phrase "little weight" to be a recognition  that
    there will be a small number of  cases  where  despite  the  fact  that
    little weight can be attached to  the  Appellant's  private  life  ,the
    interference will be so great that the decision is disproportionate. He
    submitted there being no challenge to the  fact-finding  exercise,  the
    decision of the FtT  should  be  set  aside  and  the  decision  remade
    allowing the Appellant's appeal.

15. Mr Walker whilst  not  conceding  the  matter,  agreed  that  what  was
    required in this appeal was a re-evaluation of the  FtT's  findings  in
    the light of the  fifth  stage  proportionality  test  in  Razgar.   He
    accepted that should I find an error of law, there was no challenge  to
    the factual matrix set out in the decision. He agreed that I  would  be
    in a position to substitute my own decision in this matter.

Consideration

16. I am satisfied that Judge Ford's decision contains a material error and
    that the decision must be set aside and remade.  Whilst  this  Tribunal
    will always hesitate to interfere with the reasoning of the  First-tier
    Tribunal,  I find that too much  emphasis  has  been  placed  upon  the
    weight to be attached under S.117B(5) and this in turn has affected the
    proportionality assessment such as to render it flawed. The  FtT  judge
    appears to have interpreted S 117 B(5)  as  a  cap  which  fetters  the
    importance of other weighty factors.  The decision cannot be sustained.



17. I find force in Mr Noor's submission that the judge misdirected herself
    at [49] by accepting with  reasoned  findings,  that  it  would  be  an
    affront to the Appellant's physical and moral integrity to force her to
    return to Iran and then in contradiction to that, saying little  weight
    only can be attached to the Appellant's  private  life  no  matter  how
    strong it is and no matter how strong her philosophical  and  religious
    beliefs are when looking at the proportionality exercise.

18. That contradiction renders the decision unsustainable and the  decision
    is therefore set aside.

Remaking the Decision

19. I find I am in a position to remake  the  decision,  since  no  further
    evidence is required and as Mr Walker sensibly pointed out the facts of
    the Appellant's case are not challenged.

20. I accept, as did Judge James and Judge Ford that Article 8  is  engaged
    in respect of the Appellant's private life.  I identify, as Judge James
    did, that  the  proportionality  limb  of  Razgar  is  in  issue.   The
    Appellant's case is one which engages exceptional circumstances  and  I
    agree.

21.  The  findings  of  fact  made  by  both  FtT  Judges  are  clear   and
    unchallenged, namely that there would be an affront to the  Appellant's
    physical and moral integrity if forced to return  to  Iran,  where  she
    would feel greatly restricted philosophically, religiously and  in  her
    personal and sexual life. Both FtT judges accepted that  the  appellant
    no longer adheres to her Islamic beliefs. That places her  at  risk  if
    forced to return.

22. Whilst I accept that the Appellant has not claimed asylum and the  fact
    that she chooses to place herself at some risk by returning to Iran  to
    access family money that is not a matter to be held against her when it
    comes to assessing the strength of her claim under Article 8.

23. Her Article 8 claim requires her to show that  this  is  one  of  those
    small number of cases where leave to remain should be  granted  outside
    the Rules because the  exceptional  circumstances  of  the  case  would
    result in an unjustifiably harsh decision otherwise.  It is hard to see
    how  the  facts  of  this  particular  case  could  be  otherwise  than
    exceptional since it is clear that both FtT judges found that she would
    be at risk if forcibly removed and it would be an affront to her  moral
    and physical integrity. The strength of those  findings,  I  find,  are
    capable of outweighing the public interest  consideration  set  out  in
    S.117B(5) when considering the proportionality test under Razgar.

24. For the foregoing reasons therefore  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal promulgated on 29th October  2015  is  hereby  set  aside.   I
    remake the decision allowing the Appellant's  appeal  under  Article  8
    ECHR.

Notice of Decision

The Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's refusal of leave  to  remain
on Article 8 grounds, is allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     21 July 2016


Upper Tribunal Deputy Judge Roberts




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award, and have decided to make a  fee  award
of any fee which has been paid or may be payable.




Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     21 July 2016


Upper Tribunal Deputy Judge Roberts

