
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/42943/2013
                                                               IA/42944/2013
                                                               IA/42945/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22 April 2015                              |On 9 June 2015               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                                MS RUTH GOTO
                             MISS KUDZAI MUTSIWA
                            MASTER FARAI MAGAISA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Byrne, Advocate instructed by Drummond Miller
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) The appellants are a mother and two children from Zimbabwe.  They  appeal
   against a decision by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Fox  dismissing
   their appeals under the Immigration Rules and under Article 8.

2) At the start of the hearing I drew attention of the parties to  the  fact
   that a complaint had been referred to me against Judge Fox arising out of
   his determination, in which at paragraph 23 he made what was  alleged  to
   be an unjustified criticism of the appellants' solicitor, which could  be
   construed as damaging to his professional reputation.   Consideration  of
   this complaint had been deferred pending the outcome of the appeal to the
   Upper Tribunal.  None of the parties had any objection to my hearing  the
   appeal.

3) Mr Byrne indicated that  there  were  preliminary  matters  on  which  he
   wished to address me.  He  sought  to  vary  the  grounds  on  which  the
   application for  permission  to  appeal  was  made.   On  behalf  of  the
   respondent Mr Matthews indicated that he had no objection to the proposed
   variations, which he had had the opportunity of discussing with Mr Byrne.

4) Mr Byrne indicated that he did not wish to proceed  with  the  allegation
   of bias on the part of the judge at paragraph 6 of the grounds.   Instead
   he intended to show that the judge had erred in law at  paragraphs  21-23
   of the determination.  He would argue that the judge had erred by failing
   to take into account material factors and by failing to allow evidence to
   be produced to rebut allegations made on behalf of  the  respondent.   In
   relation to the opportunity to rebut these allegations he referred to the
   decision of the Inner House in Koca [2005] CSIH 41.

5) Mr Byrne then addressed me on the grounds set out in the application  for
   permission to appeal.  He  pointed  out  that  in  terms  of  a  skeleton
   argument lodged before the Tribunal the third appellant relied  not  only
   on sub-paragraph 276ADE(iv) but also on sub-paragraph (v).  In  terms  of
   sub-paragraph 276ADE(iv), the third appellant had spent 7 years in the UK
   while under the age of 18 and this raised the question of  reasonableness
   of expecting him to leave.  The judge failed to address this  issue.   In
   addition, by the date of the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  the
   third appellant met the requirements of sub-paragraph  276ADE(v)  as  set
   out in the skeleton argument, because he was aged between 18 and  25  and
   had spent at least half of his life living continuously in  the  UK.   Mr
   Byrne acknowledged that in terms of paragraph 276ADE(1) the  requirements
   in that paragraph had to be met as at the date of the application but  he
   submitted that the fact that the third appellant satisfied 276ADE(v)  was
   relevant to an assessment outwith the Immigration Rules.

6)  In  addition,  it  was  pointed  out  that  at  paragraph  10   of   the
   determination,  in  relation  to  sub-paragraph  276ADE(iv),  the   judge
   referred to there being "no evidence before me that he meets any  of  the
   restrictions imposed by the Immigration  Rules."   It  was  difficult  to
   ascertain what the judge meant by this  phrase.   The  question  for  the
   judge  to  decide  under   sub-paragraph   (iv)   was   a   question   of
   reasonableness.

7) Mr Byrne  continued  that  paragraphs  5  and  42  of  the  determination
   indicated that the judge had been focused on the significance  of  family
   life rather than private life.  Only at paragraph 39 did the judge  refer
   to private life.  If the third appellant were to succeed under  paragraph
   276ADE only then  would  family  life  arise.   Paragraph  276ADE  itself
   related to private life.  This was a significant error by the judge as if
   the family returned together there would be no interference  with  family
   life.

8) Mr Byrne then turned to  the  judge's  treatment  of  an  email  from  an
   Admissions Officer at the University of Abertay, which was  submitted  on
   the day of the hearing.  This email related to the second  appellant  and
   stated that she was given home fee status on  the  basis  she  was  a  UK
   national and ordinarily resident in the UK since 2000.   The  judge  then
   questioned at paragraph 22 why  no  attempt  had  been  made  to  produce
   evidence from  the  University  and  the  "clearing  system"  (presumably
   meaning the admissions service, UCAS) to support the view of  the  second
   appellant that she had at all times declared her nationality.  The  judge
   then concluded that evidence to support the second  appellant's  position
   did not exist.

9) Mr Byrne submitted that the  issue  of  the  fee  status  of  the  second
   appellant had arisen for the first time only on the day of  the  hearing.
   It was unfair of the judge to found on a supposed failure by  the  second
   appellant to produce evidence when she had not had  fair  notice  of  the
   point at issue.  The judge was wrong to take this matter into account  as
   material.  It might have been permissible for the judge to find that  the
   evidence he had  heard  was  not  sufficient  to  satisfy  him  that  the
   appellant had declared  her  nationality  in  applying  for  a  place  at
   university and in taking up that place, but the judge  went  further  and
   criticised the lack of any attempt by the  second  appellant  to  provide
   evidence from the university.

10) Mr Byrne concluded by  saying  that  the  grounds  on  which  he  relied
   referred to the second and third  appellants,  who  where  the  children,
   rather than to their mother, who was the  first  appellant,  but  if  the
   position of the children had been properly considered and  an  appeal  by
   either of them had succeeded, then the  issue  of  proportionality  would
   have arisen in relation to the mother.

11) For the respondent Mr  Matthews  emphasised  the  proviso  in  paragraph
   276ADE to the effect that the private life requirements of that paragraph
   must be met at the date of the application.  Although by the date of  the
   hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the third appellant had spent half
   his life here, this was not the material date  for  consideration,  which
   was the date of the application.  Accordingly the third  appellant  could
   not meet the requirements of the sub-paragraph (v)  in  this  appeal  and
   would require  to  make  a  further  application.   Mr  Matthews  further
   submitted that it was not proper to look at whether the  third  appellant
   satisfied sub-paragraph (v) in relation to proportionality.  This  was  a
   "near miss" argument of the sort  considered  by  the  Supreme  Court  in
   Patel.  It was difficult to succeed in making an  application  under  the
   Rules and then rely on grounds outside the Rules, as  considered  by  the
   Upper Tribunal in Hamid [2014].  The judge could not  be  criticised  for
   not considering sub-paragraph (v).

12) Mr Matthews acknowledged that there was  no  direct  reference  to  sub-
   paragraph (iv) in the determination.  The judge acknowledged at paragraph
   11 that at the date of the application the third appellant was under  the
   age of 18 and had lived continuously in the UK for at least 7 years.  The
   judge clearly did not consider that this was  sufficient  for  the  third
   appellant to succeed.  Although the judge did not refer to reasonableness
   as such, paragraphs 12-15 of the determination referred to  the  relevant
   circumstances and made findings  of  fact  which  were  material  to  the
   question of reasonableness.

13) Mr Matthews pointed out that the skeleton  argument  before  the  First-
   tier Tribunal referred to the first appellant  seeking  to  satisfy  sub-
   paragraph 276ADE(vi) on the basis that she had no ties with  her  country
   of origin.  The judge had considered this and referred to the evidence of
   the uncle of the  second  and  third  appellants,  who  referred  in  his
   evidence to  having  numerous  relatives  in  Zimbabwe.   The  judge  was
   entitled to take this evidence into account.  The judge  pointed  out  at
   paragraph 14 that the third appellant had secured a good education in the
   UK despite being here unlawfully.  Although at  paragraph  15  the  judge
   referred to family life, rather than to private life, he also referred to
   Article 8.

14) In relation to the second  appellant  and  the  issue  of  fairness,  Mr
   Matthews submitted that at the hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   evidence was lodged on behalf of the respondent showing that  the  second
   appellant was treated by her university as a UK national.  This  evidence
   cried out for an explanation as to how she was  able  to  remain  without
   leave to obtain her degree.  This should only have occurred  if  she  had
   leave as a Tier 4 Migrant and paid fees  as  an  overseas  student.   Or,
   alternatively, the university believed  her  to  be  a  UK  national  and
   ordinarily  resident  in  Scotland.   Although  this  cried  out  for  an
   explanation the second appellant had not submitted  documentary  evidence
   in relation to this.  When the evidence was produced by  the  respondent,
   the second appellant had been entitled to ask for an adjournment.   Steps
   could even have been taken on the day of the hearing to  provide  further
   evidence.  Although the judge may have gone too far  in  criticising  the
   second appellant for not producing evidence, the judge  was  entitled  to
   take into account possible reasons why the evidence was not produced.

15) Mr Matthews continued that  there  was  no  apparent  challenge  to  the
   decision made in respect of the first or principal appellant.  The  judge
   decided she would not succeed on the basis of paragraph 276ADE and  found
   against her on the question of whether she had ties with Zimbabwe.  There
   was no error in relation to the outcome of her appeal.

16) Mr Byrne responded that  in  relation  to  sub-paragraph  276ADE(v)  the
   judge was entitled to take into account the circumstances at the date  of
   the hearing.  The purpose of paragraph  276ADE  was  to  protect  private
   life.  As the third appellant met the requirements of  sub-paragraph  (v)
   at the date of the hearing there was no public interest in removing  him.
   This was an issue of proportionality and there was no  need  for  him  to
   make another application.

17) In addition, Mr Byrne emphasised that the judge failed  to  address  the
   question of reasonableness under sub-paragraph 276ADE(iv).

18)  In  relation  to  the  email  produced  from  the  second   appellant's
   university on the day of the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal,  Mr
   Byrne submitted that the judge had gone too far in saying that the second
   appellant had failed to produce rebuttal evidence.   The  whole  decision
   was unfair.

19) Having heard the submissions of the parties, I  am  satisfied  that  the
   judge made significant errors of law  in  his  decision.   He  failed  to
   address properly  the  question  of  reasonableness  under  sub-paragraph
   276ADE(iv) of the Immigration Rules.  Although Mr Matthews submitted that
   the factors relevant to reasonableness were addressed  by  the  judge  at
   paragraph 12-15 of the determination, it is not clear  from  the  judge's
   discussion of the factors set out in this paragraph whether the judge had
   directed his mind towards the question of whether it  was  reasonable  to
   expect the third appellant to leave the UK.  This is the first  error  of
   law.

20) The second error  of  law  relates  to  the  second  appellant  and  the
   question of whether  she  had  fair  notice  of  the  evidence  from  her
   university in the form of an email, which was lodged on the  day  of  the
   hearing.  The judge used this email as the basis of a significant adverse
   credibility finding.   It  cannot  be  said,  however,  that  the  second
   appellant had fair notice of this evidence and the reliance which was  to
   be placed upon it. Mr Matthews questioned why the  second  appellant  had
   not sought an adjournment.  I was not addressed directly on this issue on
   behalf of the second appellant.  It may be that  the  appropriate  course
   would have been to seek an adjournment but this was not pursued.   In  my
   view it does not follow  that  the  absence  of  an  application  for  an
   adjournment at the hearing renders the action taken by the judge fair  in
   procedural terms.  The judge himself ought to have been aware of the lack
   of notice with which this evidence was produced.  Although  the  evidence
   itself appears to have been relevant and material, the judge should  have
   been alert to the needs of fairness.

21) It is not  necessary  for  me  to  comment  in  further  detail  on  the
   submissions made before me.  On the basis of the errors identified  above
   I am satisfied that the decision of the Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
   should be set aside, with no findings preserved, and the  appeals  should
   be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for the decisions to  be  re-made.
   Although as Mr Matthews pointed out, there did not appear to be an  error
   of law arising in the case of the  first  appellant,  as  the  appellants
   present themselves as a family unit  I  consider  that  all  the  appeals
   should be remitted to be considered together under the Immigration  Rules
   relating to private and family life,  and  under  Article  8  so  far  as
   appropriate.  In view of the extent of judicial  fact  finding  required,
   remission to the First-tier Tribunal is appropriate.

Conclusions

22) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  involve  the
   making of errors on points of law.

23) I set aside the decision.

24) The appeals are remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  with  no  findings
   preserved for the decision to be re-made before a judge other than  Judge
   Fox.

Anonymity

25) The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   It  has
   not been submitted before me that an order should be made and  I  see  no
   significant reason for making such an order.





Signed                                             Date


Judge of the Upper Tribunal

