
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/42936/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 30 July 2015                      |On 3 August 2015                      |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                               MS SAIMA ASGHAR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms T Murshed, Counsel (Direct Access)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1.     The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
         Tribunal Levin on 1 April 2015 against the determination of  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge Parkes who had dismissed the Appellant's appeal
         against the refusal on 9 October 2014 of her application made under
         paragraph 287 of the Immigration Rules for leave to remain  as  the
         spouse of a British Citizen and on human rights grounds (Article  8
         ECHR family life) in a  decision  and  reasons  promulgated  on  30
         January 2015.

    2.     The Appellant is a national of Pakistan, born on 2 January 1980.
          The Appellant had entered the United Kingdom as  a  spouse  on  19
         April 2011 with leave to enter until 19 July 2013.  She applied for
         further leave to remain on 14 January  2014,  after  her  leave  to
         enter had expired.  Removal Directions were made against  her.   It
         was accepted that the Appellant had not passed the test required in
         Appendix  KoLL  and  so  could  not  meet  paragraph  287  of   the
         Immigration Rules.  The judge found that the Appellant had had time
         and opportunity to pass the test but had not done so, without  good
         reason: see [11] of the decision and reasons.  The judge found that
         the Appellant's two young British Citizen children could remain  in
         the United Kingdom with their father while  the  Appellant  applied
         for  re-entry  from  abroad  once  she   had   passed   the   test,
         alternatively that the family could relocate  to  Pakistan  without
         very significant difficulties.

    3.     Permission to appeal was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Levin because he considered that it was arguable that the judge had
         erred in his consideration of paragraph EX.1(a) in failing to  have
         regard to the fact that the children are British, their  young  age
         and best interests.  It was also considered arguable that the judge
         should have considered  Article  8  ECHR  outside  the  Immigration
         Rules.  There was, however, little merit in the contention that the
         judge had erred  in  finding  that  there  were  no  insurmountable
         obstacles to the Appellant's husband moving to Pakistan.

    4.     Standard directions were made by the tribunal,  indicating  that
         the appeal would be re-decided immediately if a material  error  of
         law were found.  A rule 24 notice in the form of a letter dated  10
         April 2015 had been filed on the Respondent's behalf  opposing  the
         onwards appeal.

    Submissions

    5.     Ms Murshed for the Appellant relied on  her  skeleton  argument,
         the grounds of onwards appeal and the  Upper  Tribunal's  grant  of
         permission to appeal.  In summary, she mounted a  sustained  attack
         on the decision and reasons, contending that the judge  had  failed
         to take account  of  all  of  the  evidence  before  him.   Counsel
         contended  that  the  Appellant's  husband  refused  to  allow  his
         children to go to Pakistan for family reasons.  There had  been  no
         proper consideration of Article 8 ECHR family life issues.  It  was
         a particular omission that the judge had failed to  deal  with  the
         consequences of temporary separation if the Appellant  returned  to
         Pakistan, in that both children were very young and the Appellant's
         husband would be physically unable to look after them in his wife's
         absence.  He also had responsibility of his  elderly  parents.   He
         would  have  to  leave  his  job.   This  would  all  have  grossly
         disproportionate consequences.  The judge had failed to  deal  with
         Article 8 ECHR at all, which was a further material error  of  law.
         The determination should be set aside and the  decision  remade  in
         the Appellant's favour.

    6.     Mr Whitwell for the Respondent relied on  the  rule  24  notice.
         There was no error of  law  and  the  determination  should  stand.
         Although the determination was not very  detailed,  the  judge  had
         covered all relevant and material points.  Whether there would be a
         family split was, as the judge explained, was a question of  choice
         for the family concerned.  There was nothing for the judge to  have
         added about Article 8 ECHR as everything relevant to the  facts  of
         the present case had been covered by paragraph EX.1.

    7.     In reply, Ms Murshed reiterated that the  judge  had  failed  to
         address the impact of temporary separation.  Chikwamba [2008]  UKHL
         40 and Chen [2015]  UKUT  00189  (IAC)  applied.   There  would  be
         significant  interference  with  the  Appellant's  Article  8  ECHR
         rights, even where separation was temporary.

    8.     Mr Whitwell responded to the Chen point, submitting that nothing
         in the determination failed to recognise the  principles  discussed
         there.

    9.     The tribunal indicated at the conclusion of submissions that  it
         reserved its determination, which now follows.

    No material error of law finding

    10.    In the tribunal's view the grant of permission to appeal to  the
         Upper Tribunal was generous.  The grounds of  onwards  appeal  were
         little more than an attempt, as so often seen  in  the  Immigration
         and Asylum Chamber, to dress  up  a  difference  of  opinion  or  a
         disagreement with a First-tier Tribunal Judge's proper findings  as
         an error of law.  It may  be  said  that  the  experienced  judge's
         decision and reasons were notably compressed, but  they  were  none
         the worse for that, and addressed all key issues.

    11.    Seeking to do the best for her clients, Ms Murshed's submissions
         resembled an attempt to reargue the  appeal.   Any  change  in  the
         underlying evidence (if significant) must form the basis of a fresh
         application to the Secretary of State, not a  complaint  about  the
         judge's treatment of the evidence which was before him.  The  judge
         accurately summarised  that  evidence  and  the  various  competing
         factors.  The Appellant had made certain choices in  the  past  and
         had to accept the  consequences  of  failing  to  comply  with  the
         Immigration Rules.   The  judge  was  entitled  to  find  that  the
         Appellant now was faced with the choice of moving to Pakistan  with
         her husband and British children, or returning there on her own  to
         seek entry clearance once she had passed  the  relevant  test:  see
         [13] and [14] of the decision and reasons.  The children  could  be
         adequately cared for by her husband  in  her  absence.   The  judge
         considered the relevant medical issues adequately at [15] and [16].



    12.    Chen (above) does not appear to have been cited  to  the  judge.
         In Chen it is noted by Upper Tribunal Judge Gill that the  question
         of whether it would be disproportionate to expect an individual  to
         return to his home country to make an entry  clearance  application
         to rejoin family members in the  United  Kingdom,  i.e.,  temporary
         separation,   was   not   addressed   in    Appendix    FM.     Any
         disproportionality resulting from temporary separation is however a
         matter to be proved by the applicant.

    13.    The consideration of the  impact  of  temporary  separation  was
         implicit if not explicit in the judge's analysis of  the  evidence:
         again see [13] and [14], and also [17] of the decision and reasons.
          It hardly need to have been  said  that  any  separation,  even  a
         temporary one, was not in the children's best  interests,  but  (a)
         such separation was neither necessary nor inevitable as the  family
         could relocate to Pakistan, which was a choice open  to  them,  and
         (b) the children's interests were not paramount and could, as here,
         be outweighed by the legitimate objective of immigration control as
         embodied  in  the  Immigration  Rules.   The  impact  of  temporary
         separation was thus not shown to be disproportionate.

    14.    Further, the judge  found  that  there  were  no  compelling  or
         compassionate circumstance which required the consideration of  the
         exercise of discretion  by  the  Secretary  of  State  outside  the
         Immigration Rules: again see [17].  It was open to him to find,  as
         he did at [12] of his decision and  reasons,  that  the  long  term
         Article 8 ECHR family life issues  were  covered  in  Appendix  FM,
         paragraph EX.1 of the Immigration Rules.  He might have added  that
         Article 8 ECHR does not provide a "general dispensing power" to the
         tribunal (see Patel v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72), but there was  no  need
         to cite such a well-known authority.

    15.    The tribunal finds that  there  was  no  error  of  law  in  the
         succinct yet sufficient decision and reasons and there is no proper
         basis for interfering with the experienced judge's decision.

    DECISION

    The making of the previous decision did not involve the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law and stands unchanged






    Signed Dated


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
