
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42297/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 7 July 2014                                  |On 21 July 2014            |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               mr Waleed Abrar
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:

For the Secretary of State:     Ms A Holmes, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent/Claimant:    Mr Atif Wattoo, Solicitor, Sky Solicitors
Limited


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the  claimant's  appeal  under  the
    Rules and under Article 8 ECHR against the decision by the Secretary of
    State to refuse his application for leave to remain as the partner of a
    British national, who was under the age  of  18  at  the  date  of  his
    application. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an  anonymity  order,
    and I do not  consider  that  such  an  order  is  required  for  these
    proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The claimant is a national of Pakistan, whose date of birth is 4  April
    1986.  On 31 January 2011 he was granted limited  leave  to  enter  the
    United Kingdom as a student.  His leave in this capacity expired on  30
    November 2012.  On 27 November 2012 he  applied  for  an  extension  of
    stay, using a form FLR(O), version 07/2012.   He  was  asked  in  which
    category he was applying, and he indicated he was applying for a reason
    not covered by other application forms.  In a covering letter dated  27
    November 2012 he said he was applying for leave to remain on the  basis
    of family life with his  British  wife,  Ms  Jade  Kurtiss.   They  had
    contracted an Islamic marriage on 15 November 2012  at  a  mosque,  and
    their marriage had been solemnised at Hounslow Register  Office  on  17
    November 2012 in the presence of their family members.   He  first  met
    his wife around 14 November 2011 when they were  working  at  the  same
    workplace, namely Asda.  They had got engaged on 27  August  2012  with
    the blessing of their families.  They have been living together since 1
    September  2012.   As  they  had  been  together  about  three  months,
    inevitably they had built  up  a  very  strong  relationship  with  one
    another as a married couple.

 3. The claimant referred to Chickwamba v SSHD [2008] for  the  proposition
    that only in a small number of cases involving family life would it  be
    proportionate to  return  an  applicant  to  make  an  entry  clearance
    application from abroad.

 4. Under the heading of Family Life, the claimant said he  was  sorry  for
    his criminal conviction, namely drink driving.  Since meeting Jade,  he
    had improved.  If he was removed from the United Kingdom now  it  would
    be too stressful and  daunting  to  even  reconsider  readapting  to  a
    lifestyle in Pakistan, as his wife would be unable to return with  him.
    She had never been to Pakistan, and  furthermore  her  life  was  here,
    where she had a job and family.

 5. The claimant's letter ended with a discussion of MF (Article  8  -  new
    rules) Nigeria [2012] UKUT 00393 (IAC).  The  claimant  relied  on  the
    fact that the Upper Tribunal held in MF that the new Immigration  Rules
    did not constitute a complete code for assessing human rights,  and  he
    indicated that his Article 8 claim should  be  allowed  on  exceptional
    circumstances outside the new Rules.

The Reasons for Refusal

 6. On 30 September 2013 the  Secretary  of  State  gave  her  reasons  for
    refusing the claimant's application for leave to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom based on his relationship with Jade Kurtiss.   The  application
    had been considered under the partner route in Appendix FM.  He  stated
    that his partner's date of birth was 18 January 1995.  At the  time  of
    his application, his partner was  17  years  and  10  months  old.   To
    qualify for leave under Section D-LTRP his partner had to be  over  the
    age of 18.  He therefore  failed  to  fulfil  the  requirements  of  E-
    LTRP.1.4 of Appendix FM of the Rules.   As  his  application  fell  for
    refusal under the eligibility requirements of the Rules, he  could  not
    benefit from the exemption criteria set out at EX.1.

 7. A decision had also been made on  exceptional  circumstances.   It  had
    been  considered  whether  his  application  raised  or  contained  any
    exceptional circumstances which, consistent with the right  to  respect
    for private and family life contained in Article 8 of the  ECHR,  might
    warrant consideration by the Secretary of State of a grant of leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom outside the requirements of the Rules.  It
    had been decided that it did not.  His application for leave to  remain
    in the United Kingdom was therefore refused.

The Grounds of Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 8. The grounds of appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  contained  extensive
    citation of authority.  It was argued that the  appellant's  Article  8
    claim was  not  properly  considered  under  the  new  Rules,  and  not
    considered at all under Article 8 outside the Rules.  The appellant had
    been in the UK for over two and a half years, and  had  a  very  strong
    family life in the UK.

 9. The hearing of the appeal was fixed  for  17  January  2014  at  Hatton
    Cross.  On 13 January 2014  there  was  received  at  Hatton  Cross  an
    indexed and paginated bundle compiled by Sky Solicitors  Limited  on  9
    January 2014, and apparently posted  on  that  day  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and to the Presenting Officers' Unit in Feltham.   The  bundle
    contained a statement of additional grounds by the appellant signed  on
    8 January 2014.  He said  he  was  making  a  statement  of  additional
    grounds as a one-stop notice in accordance  with  Section  120  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  He intended to apply for
    and was entitled for leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  under
    Appendix FM  of  the  Rules  under  the  partner  route.   He  met  the
    eligibility criteria in Appendix FM,  including  the  requirement  that
    both he and his wife were over 18 years old.  He also met the financial
    requirements.  He and his wife had a combined  specified  gross  annual
    income of at least �18,600; and he had successfully completed his entry
    level in ESOL International (Speaking and Listening) (Entry  1)  A1  of
    the CFR with distinction in October 2013.

10. He understood the Tribunal was under a statutory obligation to act as a
    primary decision maker to consider and determine the  contents  of  his
    statement as a fresh  application.   So  he  invited  the  Tribunal  to
    exercise this function, and to allow his appeal.

The Hearing before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

11. The appellant's appeal was heard by  Judge  Khawar  sitting  at  Hatton
    Cross on 17 January 2014.  Mr Randahwa, Home Office Presenting Officer,
    appeared on behalf of the Secretary of  State,  and  Mr  Rana,  Counsel
    instructed by Sky Solicitors Limited appeared on behalf of the claimant
    (although the judge got the representation the wrong way round  in  his
    subsequent determination).

12. The judge received oral evidence from the claimant and the sponsor, and
    found that they had given a truthful account of events as  set  out  in
    their witness statements (paragraph 16).

13. In his closing submissions on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State,  the
    Presenting Officer submitted that the decision appealed against was  in
    accordance with the Rule and in accordance with the law.  The  claimant
    had failed to make a further application under the Rules which he would
    have been entitled to do under Section 3 of the Immigration  Act  1971.
    He submitted that the claimant should return to Pakistan  in  order  to
    make an appropriate entry clearance application under the Rules.

14. On behalf of the claimant, Mr Rana relied on the majority  decision  of
    the Court of Appeal in AS (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 1076  in
    support of the proposition that the claimant was entitled to a decision
    by the Tribunal as to whether he now satisfied all the requirements  of
    Appendix FM.

15. Judge Khawar ruled in the claimant's favour.  He found  as  follows  at
    paragraph 22:

         "Accordingly, on the basis of the evidence before me and  the  law,
         as set out herein above, I am satisfied that the  [claimant]  meets
         the requirements of Appendix FM of the  Immigration  Rules  and  is
         entitled to succeed in this appeal.  While I  accept  that  at  the
         date of his application the [SSHD's]  decision  was  in  accordance
         with the Immigration Rules, plainly as the sponsor has attained the
         age of 18 years and in view of the [claimant's] further grounds  of
         appeal pursuant to the Section 120 notice,  the  [SSHD's]  decision
         now is no longer in accordance with  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
         [claimant's] statement of additional  grounds  was  served  on  the
         respondent on 9 January 2014.  The hearing of this appeal was on 17
         January 2014.  Therefore the [claimant] submitted his statement  of
         additional grounds in good time, permitting the [SSHD] to  consider
         the same."

16. As the Secretary of State's decision was no longer in  accordance  with
    the law, the judge found that the claimant was also entitled to succeed
    under Article 8 of the ECHR as developed in the common law.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

17. On 17 May 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge McDade granted  permission  to
    appeal for the following reasons:

         "The grounds of application for permission to appeal assert,  inter
         alia, that the judge has not considered  the  requirement  that  in
         order to find in an appellant's favour under Article 8 there  needs
         to be compelling circumstances.  It is arguable these have not been
         addressed in the judge's determination.  There is an arguable error
         of law."

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

18. At the hearing before me, I received submissions from Ms Holmes and  Mr
    Wattoo as to whether the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  did,  or
    did not, contain  a  material  error  of  law.   Having  ruled  in  the
    Secretary of State's favour on this question (for reasons which are set
    out below), I invited submissions from  both  parties  as  to  how  the
    decision should be remade.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

19. In defence of the line taken by the judge, Mr  Wattoo  relies  on  four
    authorities.  In EA (Section  85(4)  explained)  Nigeria  [2007]  UKAIT
    00013, the Tribunal held that a decision on a matter under the Rules is
    a decision on the detailed eligibility of an individual by reference to
    the particular requirements of the Rule in question in the  context  of
    the application that that person has made (paragraph 6).  It  was  thus
    not open to an appellant to argue simply  that,  on  the  date  of  the
    hearing, he met the requirements of the Rules.  He could  only  succeed
    if he showed that the decision that was made was one which was  not  in
    accordance with the Rules.  Section 85(4) allowed him to show  that  by
    reference to evidence of matters postdating the decision itself, and it
    might well be that the effect of that was that  the  question  for  the
    Tribunal in an in-country  case  was  whether  the  decision  could  be
    justified as a correct one at the date of the hearing.   But  that  did
    not mean that  the  Tribunal  was  the  primary  decision  maker.   The
    Tribunal's task remained that  of  hearing  appeals  against  decisions
    actually made:

         "The correct interpretation of S85(4) is perhaps best indicated  by
         saying that the appellant cannot succeed by showing that  he  would
         be granted leave if he made an  application  on  the  date  of  the
         hearing: he can succeed only by showing that he  would  be  granted
         leave if he made, on the date of the hearing, the same  application
         as  that  which  resulted  in  the  decision  under  appeal.    The
         subsection does not permit an appellant to change  his  case  under
         the Immigration Rules for being allowed to  remain  in  the  United
         Kingdom.  (That is, of course, without prejudice to the  fact  that
         S84(1) may  allow  the  appeal  to  succeed  on  different  grounds
         entirely.)"

20. In AS (Afghanistan) [2009] EWCA Civ 1076 the majority of the  Court  of
    Appeal approved a "wider interpretation" of the scope of the  statutory
    "one-stop" procedure  governed  by  Section  120  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002; and Sullivan LJ observed in passing at
    paragraph [114] that the Tribunal's approach in EA was too restrictive.
     The AIT had not considered how Section 85(2) should be interpreted  so
    as to be coherent, and work  in  harmony  with  Sections  96  and  120,
    bearing in mind the statutory purpose underlying those provisions.

21. In AQ (Pakistan) [2011] EWCA Civ  833,  Pill  LJ,  giving  the  leading
    judgment of the court, held at paragraph [37] that Section 120 was  not
    intended, and  nor  did  it  have  the  effect,  of  allowing  a  fresh
    application to be made to the Tribunal  under  the  Rules,  relying  on
    events since the Secretary of State's decision.

22. Sullivan LJ agreed at paragraph [41].  He said that in AS the court was
    not concerned with decisions made by the respondent under  the  points-
    based system of determining applications for leave to remain.  In  such
    cases there is a "fixed historic timeline".  The effective operation of
    a points-based system required the points to be accumulated at the date
    of the Secretary of State's decision.

23. Lord Carnwath reviewed the law on  this  topic  in  Patel  &  Others  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 72 at paragraphs
    [34] onwards.

24. He observed at paragraph [42] that the broader approach of the majority
    in the Court of Appeal in AS seemed to have accorded with  the  reading
    of those responsible within the Home Office for advice  to  Immigration
    Officers.   The  Immigration  Directorate's  Instructions,  issued   in
    September 2006, noted it was not possible under Section 3C  to  make  a
    second application, but continued:

         "On the other hand, it is  possible  to  vary  the  grounds  of  an
         application already made, even by introducing something  completely
         new ... if an application is varied post-decision, it will be  open
         to the applicant to submit further  grounds  to  be  considered  at
         appeal ... once an application has been decided it ceases to be  an
         application and there is no longer any application  to  vary  under
         Section 3C(5).  So any new information will fall to be  dealt  with
         during the course of the appeal rather than as a variation  of  the
         original application."

25. Lord Carnwath concluded at paragraph [44] that although  the  arguments
    were finely balanced, he preferred the approach of the majority in AS.

26. In the light of these authorities, the judge was undoubtedly  right  to
    entertain the claimant's additional ground of appeal contained  in  his
    Section 120 notice of additional grounds.  But the judge erred  in  law
    in allowing the appeal under the Rules.  Appendix FM is a complete code
    (see inter alia MF in the Court of Appeal), and the claimant's original
    application for leave to remain on the basis of family  life  with  his
    new wife was always doomed to fail under Appendix FM. For  a  mandatory
    eligibility requirement was not met, namely that the partner should  be
    at least 18 years of age at the  date  of  application.   Although  the
    Section 120 notice of additional grounds was put  forward  as  a  fresh
    application, it could not be treated as such as it was made  after  the
    refusal decision.  It only had the status of an  additional  ground  of
    appeal.  So the Section 120 notice of additional grounds could  not  be
    relied upon as constituting compliance with the  requirement  that  the
    applicant's partner should at least be the age of 18 "at  the  date  of
    application".

27. At paragraph 20 of  his  determination,  the  judge  characterised  the
    Secretary of State's  stance  as  verging  on  the  perverse.   But  on
    analysis there was nothing perverse in the Secretary of State's stance.
     The claimant had applied for leave to remain  outside  the  Rules,  no
    doubt recognising that he could not bring himself within the  scope  of
    Appendix FM or Rule 276ADE.  In accordance  with  paragraphs  A277C  to
    A280 of the Rules,  the  Secretary  of  State  rightly  considered  and
    rejected the application under Appendix FM of the Rules,  before  going
    on  to  consider  whether  there  were  exceptional  circumstances  for
    granting the claimant relief outside the Rules.  The judge should  have
    adopted a similar approach, and asked himself the  questions  posed  by
    the Tribunal in Gulshan.

28. Accordingly, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was vitiated by  a
    material error of law such that it should be set aside and remade.



The Remaking of the Decision

29. The Chikwamba argument advanced by the claimant in his application  for
    leave to remain outside the Rules was extremely weak at the  time  that
    he raised it.  He had entered the United  Kingdom  relatively  recently
    for a temporary purpose; and he had got married to a  British  national
    spouse in circumstances where both of them must have known there was no
    guarantee that they would be able  to  carry  on  family  life  in  the
    country of their choice.  Moreover, prima facie it  was  not  harsh  to
    require the  appellant  to  return  to  Pakistan  to  apply  for  entry
    clearance as a partner, when the  eligibility  requirements  were  met.
    This was only going to involve a temporary separation.

30. However, with the passage of time the Chikwamba argument has inevitably
    gained greater traction.  The eligibility requirements are now  capable
    of being met, and the disruption and inconvenience  consequential  upon
    the claimant having to return now to Pakistan to regularise his  status
    would be significant.  Both the claimant and the sponsor  are  working,
    and it might take months for the  entry  clearance  application  to  be
    processed.

31. Faced with a stark choice between,  on  the  one  hand,  requiring  the
    claimant to return to Pakistan to seek  entry  clearance,  and  on  the
    other hand granting the claimant Article 8 relief, it is understandable
    that the judge below strongly inclined to  the  latter  course,  having
    concluded on the evidence submitted that the claimant would be bound to
    succeed in an entry clearance application.

32. However, the judge overlooked the existence of a middle way.   While  I
    am sympathetic to the Chikwamba argument, I do not  consider  that  the
    effect of the refusal decision is to require the claimant to return  to
    Pakistan in order to seek entry clearance.  The claimant has the option
    of making an  in-country  application  as  the  partner  of  a  British
    national which complies  with  the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM  and
    Appendix FM-SE.  Provided that he makes this application within 28 days
    of the date when his appeal rights are deemed to be exhausted, he  will
    not be treated as an overstayer.  Moreover,  Appendix  FM  specifically
    provides that he is eligible to make such an application.

Decision

The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the  claimant's  appeal
under the Rules and under Article 8 of the ECHR contained an error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision is set aside  and  the  following  decision  is
substituted: the claimant's appeal is dismissed on all grounds raised.

Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
