
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42062/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Vernon Street, Liverpool      |                             Date   |
|On 06 January 2017                     |promulgated :                       |
|                                       |On 11 January 2017                  |

                                   Before

                  The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey, President


                                   Between


                            MUHAMMAD NAEEM HABIB
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation

Appellant:    Mr R Ahmed, of Counsel, instructed by Greenahall Solicitors

Respondent:   Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                                  DECISION


 1. This is a slightly fuller version of  the  decision  which  I  gave  ex
    tempore at the conclusion of the hearing of this appeal.


 2. At the  outset,  it  is  convenient  to  rehearse  some  of  the  basic
    ingredients in the equation:

     a) The Appellant is a national of Pakistan, aged 29 years.


     b) He entered the United Kingdom in the capacity of spouse in  October
        2010.

     c) In December 2012 his solicitors applied on his behalf  for  limited
        leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of his marriage.



     d) This application was  refused  on  the  ground  that  it  was  non-
        compliant with paragraph 284 of the Immigration Rules, in that  the
        source of the Appellant's proferred English language competence was
        not a test provider  approved  by  the  Secretary  of  State.   The
        refusal decision is dated 02 October 2013.

     e) By its decision  dated  27  March  2014,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        ("FtT") dismissed the Appellant's appeal.

     f) By its decision promulgated on 23 June 2014, the Upper Tribunal set
        aside the decision of the FtT.

     g) Regrettably, a delay of over two years then ensued.

     h) Case management directions were given by an Upper Tribunal Judge on
        24 November 2016.

 3. The legal framework of this appeal is simply stated.  The Appellant  is
    unable to satisfy the relevant  leave  to  remain  requirement  of  the
    Immigration  Rules,  on  account  of  the   deficiency   noted   above.
    Furthermore, the Appellant's case does not satisfy the Article  8  ECHR
    regime established within the Rules.  Thus the Appellant is  driven  to
    make  the  case  that,  outwith  the  said   regime,   his   compelling
    circumstances dictate that the appeal be allowed on the basis that  the
    impugned decision of the Secretary of State infringes the rights of the
    Appellant and his spouse under Article 8 ECHR.  That the governing test
    is compelling circumstances has been confirmed recently by the Court of
    Appeal in Rhuppiah v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 803.


 4.  A  decision  to  subject  any  appeal  to  the  test  of   "compelling
    circumstances" proceeds, logically, on the basis that the first four of
    the five stages in the "Razgar" template have all been overcome.  While
    I shall assume this in favour of the Appellant, having  regard  to  the
    progress of his appeal and the presentation of the parties' submissions
    bilaterally, it is by no means clear that interference with his  family
    life has been established, taking into account the paucity of  all  the
    evidence assembled.

 5. While this was a remaking hearing, no evidence  was  adduced  from  the
    Appellant and no evidence over and above that previously assembled  was
    provided.  This circumstance gave rise to a submission by Mr McVeety on
    behalf of the Secretary of State that  there  is  no  evidence  of  any
    insurmountable obstacle preventing the continuation of marriage life in
    the Appellant's country of origin.  This submission was not contested.

 6. On behalf of the Appellant, Mr Ahmed drew attention  to  the  following
    matters: the Appellant's lawful presence in  the  United  Kingdom;  the
    sole reason for the refusal of his application under the Rules and  the
    nature of his non-compliance; the comments favourable to the  Appellant
    in the error of law decision of the Upper Tribunal,  in  particular  at
    [23] and [25]; and the further passage of time since the error  of  law
    decision was promulgated. I take all these factors into account.

 7. In my judgement, the standout feature of the Appellant's is that it  is
    ordinary and unremarkable.  At its zenith, it attracts a certain degree
    of sympathy.  But it falls manifestly short of overcoming the  exacting
    threshold of compelling circumstances.  It is a  paradigm  illustration
    of the kind of case which is doomed to failure on the current state  of
    the law.

 8. Finally, while noting that the  argument  based  on  the  Secretary  of
    State's IDI found some favour at the error of law stage, this  was  not
    advanced at all at the remaking hearing.   I  find  this  unsurprising.
    The inconclusive consideration which this discrete  issue  received  in
    the error of law judgment, does not advance the  Appellant's  case  for
    the reasons proffered in [13] - [14] of the decision of the FtT,  which
    I consider unassailable.




Decision

 9. I dismiss the appeal and affirm the decision of the FtT.








                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                      Date:  06 January 2017
