
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42874/2014
                                                               IA/42883/2014
                                                               IA/42885/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9th November 2015                 |On 11th November 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between


                   MR. MAHENDRAKUMAR PRAVINBHAI MACHHI (1)
                  MRS. DHARMISHTA MAHENDRAKUMAR MACHHI (2)
                     MISS JILL MAHENDRAKUMAR MACHHI (3)
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. D Sellwood of Counsel instructed by Rashid &
                    Rashid Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms. A Fijiwala: Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a decision and reasons by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Amin promulgated on 13th May 2015  in  which  she  dismissed  the
    appeals against the decisions made by the Secretary of  State  on  13th
    October 2014 to refuse to vary leave to  remain  in  the  UK  on  human
    rights grounds.

Background

 2. The immigration history of the appellants is uncontroversial.  They are
    all Indian nationals.  Mr Mahendrakumar Machhi arrived  in  the  UK  on
    29th September 2007 with leave to enter as a student valid  until  31st
    October 2008.  He was subsequently granted extensions of stay in the UK
    until 30th August 2014.  His wife, the second appellant arrived in  the
    UK on 31st March 2008 with leave to enter as a student dependant  until
    31st October 2008.  In line with the  first  appellant,  her  leave  to
    remain in the UK was extended until 30th August 2014.  On  14th  August
    2014, the first and second appellants applied for leave  to  remain  in
    the UK on account of their family and private life  with  their  child,
    the third appellant, who was born in the UK on 13th August 2012.

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Amin heard evidence from the first appellant.
    The evidence is set out at paragraphs [8] to [16] of the  decision  and
    it serves no purpose to recite that evidence in full, in this decision.
     Suffice it to say, as noted in paragraph  [10]  of  the  decision,  Mr
    Machhi relied  on  his  family's  serious  medical  conditions  as  the
    backdrop for his claim that there  are  exceptional  circumstances  and
    insurmountable obstacles, such that the removal of the family from  the
    UK would be  a  disproportionate  interference  with  their  Article  8
    rights.

 4. The findings of First-tier Tribunal Judge Amin are to be found  between
    paragraphs [22] to [51] of the decision.

The Grounds of Appeal

 5. The appellants' sought permission to appeal on five  grounds  that  are
    set out in the 'Grounds of Application for Permission to  Appeal'  that
    was attached to the First Tier Tribunal Application for  Permission  to
    Appeal to the Upper Tribunal (Form IAFT-4).

 6. In considering the application for  permission  to  appeal,  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Brunnen, correctly in my view, considered the first  and
    third  grounds  to  be  unarguable,  described  the  second  ground  as
    incomprehensible  and  the  fifth  ground,  as  entirely  misconceived.
    Permission to appeal was however  granted  in  respect  of  the  fourth
    ground.  In so doing, he noted;
         "6.  Ground 4 submits that the Judge failed  properly  to  consider
         the best interests of  the  Third  Appellant.  The  Judge  directed
         himself correctly as to ZH (Tanzania) but it is  arguable  that  he
         then failed to consider where  the  best  interests  of  the  Third
         Appellant lay  and  to  treat  her  best  interests  as  a  primary
         consideration."

 7. The matter comes before me to consider whether or not the  decision  of
    the Tribunal involved the making of a material error of law, and if the
    decision is set aside, to re-make the decision.

The hearing before me on 11th November 2015

 8. It was agreed by the parties that the sole ground upon which permission
    to appeal has been granted, is the fourth ground  relied  upon  by  the
    appellants.  That  is,  the  Judge  failed  to  properly  consider  the
    principle  that  a  child's  best  interests  shall   be   'a   primary
    consideration' in making decisions concerning children.

 9. On behalf of the respondent, Ms Fijiwala handed to  me  copies  of  the
    decisions of the Upper Tribunal in Azimi-Moayed -v-  SSHD  [2013]  UKUT
    00197 and the Court of Appeal in EV (Philippinnes) -v- SSHD [2014] EWCA
    Civ 874.

10. On behalf of the appellants', Mr Sellwood points to paragraph  [23]  of
    the decision and submits that the Judge accepted that the threshold for
    engaging Article  8  is  a  low  one  and  that  the  "..Appellant  has
    established a private and family life in the UK having been in  the  UK
    since 2001."  In fact,  the  first  appellant  arrived  in  the  UK  in
    September 2007.  Mr Sellwood submits that the failure to  give  anxious
    scrutiny to the best interests of the third appellant in particular, is
    partly demonstrated by the last sentence at paragraph [23]:
         "He has seven children (all British Citizens) that he claims he has
         a close relationship with all of them."

    The first and second appellants have only one child  who  is  now  aged
    three, who lives with them, and who is not a British Citizen.

11. Mr Sellwood submits that at paragraph [25]  the  Judge  refers  to  the
    leading decision of ZH (Tanzania) -v- SSHD [2011] UKSC 4 and notes that
    she is required to consider the best interests of the children here  as
    a primary consideration.  She notes at paragraph [26] that "the correct
    approach is to treat the [sic]  bests  interests  of  the  child  as  a
    starting point and then to go on to assess whether those interests  are
    outweighed by the  strength  of  other  considerations."   Mr  Sellwood
    submits that although the Judge  appears  to  have  correctly  directed
    herself, what is then set  out  at  paragraphs  [27]  to  [32]  of  the
    decision, focuses upon the first and second appellants rather than  the
    best interests of the third appellant and the Judge fails to  make  any
    findings as to what is in the best interests of  the  third  appellant.
    Furthermore, he submits, there is no reference to the best interests of
    the third appellant in the  proportionality  assessment  at  paragraphs
    [42] to [49] of the  decision.

12. Mr Sellwood submits that the Judge has failed to have any regard to the
    decisions of the Upper Tribunal in Azimi-Moayed -v-  SSHD  [2013]  UKUT
    00197 and the Court of Appeal in EV (Philippinnes) -v- SSHD [2014] EWCA
    Civ 874, and has  failed  to  apply  the  guidance  provided  in  those
    decisions.

13. Mr Sellwood submits that I should find that the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Amin discloses a material  error  of  law,  and  that  I
    should adjourn the  remaking  of  the  decision  to  another  day.   Mr
    Sellwood submits that since the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal,
    the third appellant has been seen  (on  16th  September  2015)  in  the
    neonatal clinic  at  St  George's  University  Hospital  and  has  been
    referred to the  'Bayley  Screening  Clinic'  for  consideration  of  a
    'Bayley assessment'. Most recently on  3rd  November  2015,  the  third
    appellant  has  undergone  examination  by  the  Paediatric   Audiology
    Services of St George's Healthcare NHS Trust and a  hearing  assessment
    found that the third appellant has normal hearing sensitivity  in  both
    ears.  She does not require any further audiology appointments.

14. In reply, Ms Fijiwala relied upon the Rule 24 response dated 5th August
    2015, filed by the respondent.  She submits that it is plain  from  the
    matters set out at paragraphs [24] to [26] of  the  decision  that  the
    Judge directed herself correctly to  the  need  to  consider  the  best
    interests of the child as a primary consideration.  She submits that at
    paragraph [27] of the decision, the Judge  noted  that  the  first  and
    second appellants have one child, who was under  three  years  old  and
    lived with her parents.  The Judge noted that the  third  appellant  is
    not a British Citizen and the Judge accepted that the  third  appellant
    has in the past, suffered from health problems when she was  born.   Ms
    Fijiwala submits that at paragraph [28] the Judge noted that the  third
    appellant's current medical condition is very stable and  has  improved
    significantly.  The reasons for that finding are set out  at  paragraph
    [28].

15. Ms Fijiwala submits that although the Judge does not expressly refer to
    the decisions of the Upper Tribunal in  Azimi-Moayed  -v-  SSHD  [2013]
    UKUT 00197 and the Court of Appeal in EV (Philippinnes) -v- SSHD [2014]
    EWCA Civ 874, the principles set  out  in  those  decisions  have  been
    applied.

Decision as to 'Error of Law'

16. The issue in this appeal is confined to the application of s55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009  and  whether  it  is
    reasonable to expect the third appellant to return to  India  with  her
    parents.

17. It is as well at this stage to set out the  relevant  legal  framework.
    s55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  requires  the
    respondent to make arrangements for  ensuring  that  her  functions  in
    relation to immigration, asylum or nationality  are  discharged  having
    regard to the need to safeguard and promote the welfare of children who
    are in the UK.

18. In Azimi-Moayed & Others (decisions affecting children; onward appeals)
    [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC), the Upper Tribunal in considering the  case  law
    in relation to decisions affecting children stated;
         "13. It is not the case that the  best  interests  principle  means
         that it is automatically in  the  interests  of  any  child  to  be
         permitted to remain in the United  Kingdom,  irrespective  of  age,
         length of stay, family background or other circumstances. The  case
         law of the Upper Tribunal has identified the  following  principles
         to assist in  the  determination  of  appeals  where  children  are
         affected by the decisions:
             i)   As a starting point  it  is  in  the  best  interests  of
             children to be with both their parents and if both parents are
             being removed from the United Kingdom then the starting  point
             suggests that so should dependent children who  form  part  of
             their household unless there are reasons to the contrary.
             ii)  It is generally in the interests of children to have both
             stability and continuity of social and  educational  provision
             and the benefit of growing up in the  cultural  norms  of  the
             society to which they belong.
             iii) Lengthy residence in a country other than  the  state  of
             origin  can  lead  to  development  of  social  cultural   and
             educational ties that it would be inappropriate to disrupt, in
             the absence of compelling reason to the contrary. What amounts
             to lengthy residence is not clear cut  but  past  and  present
             policies have identified seven years as a relevant period.
             iv)  Apart from the terms of published policies and rules, the
             Tribunal notes that seven years from age four is likely to  be
             more significant to a child that  the  first  seven  years  of
             life. Very young children are focussed on their parents rather
             than their peers and are adaptable.
             v)   Short periods of  residence,  particularly  ones  without
             leave or the reasonable  expectation  of  leave  to  enter  or
             remain, while claims are promptly considered, are unlikely  to
             give rise to private life deserving of respect in the  absence
             of exceptional  factors.  In  any  event,  protection  of  the
             economic well being of society amply justifies removal in such
             cases."

19. In EV (Philippines) and  Others v   SSHD   [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874,  the
    appellants were a family from the  Philippines  whose  application  for
    indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom had been rejected. The
    First-tier Tribunal found that, although it was in the children's  best
    interests to continue their education  in  the  UK,  removal  would  be
    proportionate to the legitimate aim of immigration control.  The  Upper
    Tribunal upheld that decision. The Court of Appeal, in  dismissing  the
    family's appeal, issued guidance on how tribunals were to approach  the
    proportionality  exercise  where  it  had  concluded  that   continuing
    education in the UK would be in the best interests of the children:
         "32. There is a danger in this field of moving  from  looseness  of
         terms to semantics.  At the same time there could be said to  be  a
         tension between (a) treating the best interests of the child  as  a
         primary consideration which could be outweighed by others  provided
         that  no  other  consideration  was  treated  as  inherently   more
         significant; and (b) treating  the  child's  best  interests  as  a
         consideration which must rank higher than  any  other  which  could
         nevertheless be outweighed by others.  It is material, however,  to
         note that Lord Kerr, as he made  clear, was dealing  with a case of
         children who were  British  citizens  and  where  there  were  very
         powerful other factors - see [41] below -in favour of not  removing
         them ('the best interests of the child  clearly  favour  a  certain
         course'/ 'the outcome of cases such  as  the  present').   He  also
         agreed with the judgment of Lady Hale.  In  those  circumstance  we
         should, in my judgment, be guided  by  the  formulation  which  she
         adopted.
         33.  More important for present  purposes  is  to  know   how   the
         tribunal should approach the  proportionality exercise  if it   has
         determined that  the  best interests of the child  or children  are
         that  they  should  continue  with   their  education  in  England.
         Whether or not it is in the interests of a child to continue his or
         her education in England may depend on what assumptions  one  makes
         as to what happens to the parents.  There can be cases where it  is
         in the child's best interests to remain in  education  in  the  UK,
         even though one or both  parents  did  not  remain  here.   In  the
         present case,  however, I take the FTT's finding to  be   that   it
         was  in  the  best interests of  the  children  to  continue  their
         education in England with  both parents  living here.  That assumes
         that both parents are here.  But the best interests  of  the  child
         are to be determined  by  reference  to  the  child  alone  without
         reference to the immigration history or status of either parent.
         34.  In determining whether or not, in a case such  as the present,
         the need  for immigration control  outweighs the best interests  of
         the children, it is necessary  to determine the relative   strength
         of the factors which  make it in their  best  interests  to  remain
         here; and  also to take account  of  any  factors  that  point  the
         other way.
         35.  A decision as to what  is in the best  interests  of  children
         will depend on a number  of factors  such  as (a) their   age;  (b)
         the  length of time that  they have been  here; (c) how long   they
         have been  in  education;  (c)  what   stage  their  education  has
         reached;    (d)  to  what   extent   they   have   become distanced
         from  the  country to  which  it  is  proposed  that  they  return;
         (e) how  renewable their connection with it may  be;  (f)  to  what
         extent  they will have linguistic, medical  or other   difficulties
         in adapting to life in that  country;  and   (g)  the   extent   to
         which  the  course  proposed will   interfere  with   their  family
         life or their rights  (if they have any) as British citizens.
         36.  In a sense the tribunal is  concerned  with  how  emphatic  an
         answer falls to be given  to  the  question:  is  it  in  the  best
         interests of the child to remain? The longer  the  child  has  been
           here,   the   more  advanced  (or  critical)  the  stage  of  his
         education, the looser his ties with the country  in  question,  and
         the more  deleterious the consequences of his return,  the  greater
         the weight that falls into one side   of  the  scales.   If  it  is
         overwhelmingly in the child's best interests  that  he  should  not
         return, the need to maintain immigration control may well  not  tip
         the balance.   By contrast if it is in the child's  best  interests
         to remain, but only on balance  (with  some  factors  pointing  the
         other way), the result may be the opposite.
         37.  In the balance on the  other  side  there  falls  to  be taken
          into  account  the strong weight  to be given   to  the  need   to
         maintain immigration control in pursuit  of  the   economic   well-
         being of the  country  and   the  fact   that,  ex  hypothesi,  the
         applicants have  no entitlement to remain.  The immigration history
         of the parents may also be relevant e.g. if they  are  overstayers,
         or have acted deceitfully."

20. Having set out the legal framework, I  consider  the  decision  of  the
    Judge and whether the  appellant  has  established  that  the  decision
    discloses a material error of law, such that the decision should be set
    aside.

21. It is plainly unfortunate that at paragraph [23] of her  decision,  the
    Judge states that the first appellant has  established  a  private  and
    family life in the UK since 2001 and that the appellant "... has  seven
    children (all British Citizens) ...".  I have  carefully  read  through
    the decision  and  the  Judge  identifies  the  appellants'  and  their
    immigration history correctly at paragraphs [2] to [3 (there are  two)]
    of the decision.  At paragraphs [8] to [17]  the  judge  sets  out  the
    evidence that she heard about the family and their health.  I find that
    in reaching her decision, it is plain from paragraphs [27] to [48] that
    the judge reached her  decision  based  upon  a  consideration  of  the
    correct factual matrix recognising that the family unit consists of the
    first and second appellants  as  husband  and  wife,  and  their  young
    daughter, the third appellant.

22. I reject the submission  made  by  Mr  Sellwood  that  having  directed
    herself correctly at paragraphs [25] and [26] that she was required  to
    consider the best interests of the child as  a  primary  consideration,
    the Judge then failed to do so. At paragraphs [27] and [28], the  Judge
    was expressly considering the evidence regarding the  third  appellants
    health and made findings in relation that evidence;
         "27. It is the Appellant's case that the entire family suffers from
         serious medical conditions. The adult Appellants have one  daughter
         Jill Machii born on 30 August 2012.  She is under three  years  old
         and currently lives  with  her  parents.   She  is  not  a  British
         citizen, I accept that she has, in the past, suffered  from  health
         problems when she was born. These health difficulties are well  set
         out in Counsel's skeleton argument at paragraph 3.
         28.  However, I find that Jill's current medical condition is  very
         stable  and  has  improved   significantly.     Her   most   recent
         appointments relate to speech and language therapy (Al, p.273)  and
         an audiology appointment (Al, p.274). There is a report of from the
         speech and language therapy department (At, p.278) and  the  follow
         up actions are noted in  the  report.  The  latest  health  summary
         provided specifically for the purposes of this appeal  (Al,  p.280)
         provides a past history of the  child's  medical  difficulties  but
         goes on to state that the MRl scan and EEG investigations have been
         normal with a caveat that this not to say that she would  not  have
         problems in the future.   Her speech and behaviour referral therapy
         has started and in that respect it was difficult to provide a clear
         prognosis as this treatment had just commenced.

23. Unsurprisingly given her age, the evidence before the Judge  about  the
    third appellant was  limited.   The  Judge  correctly  notes  that  the
    Appellants have one daughter Jill Machii born on 30  August  2012,  who
    was at the time under three years old living  with  her  parents.   The
    Judge noted that she is not a British citizen, and accept  that  whilst
    the third appellant has, in the past,  suffered  from  health  problems
    when she was born her medical condition is very stable and has improved
    significantly.

24. The factors identified by  their  Lordships  at  paragraph  35  of  the
    judgment in EV (Philippines)  are  simply  a  non-exhaustive  range  of
    factors that might be relevant in a particular case.  Depending on  the
    factual matrix, some of the factors identified will have  no  relevance
    at all. In my judgment, a careful reading of paragraphs [27]  and  [28]
    of the decision makes it plain that the relevant matters considered  by
    the Judge are precisely the types of factors that their Lordships in EV
    (Philippines) identified as being relevant.  The judge  considered  the
    age of the third appellant, the  fact  that  she  is  living  with  her
    parents, she is not a British Citizen and that her health is stable and
    has improved significantly.  The third appellant is  not  in  education
    and so unsurprisingly, the Judge did not need to consider how long  she
    had been in education or what stage her education has reached.

25. As the Upper Tribunal held in Azimi-Moayed  &  others,  as  a  starting
    point it is in the best interests of children to  be  with  both  their
    parents and if both parents are being removed from the  United  Kingdom
    then the starting point suggests that so should dependent children  who
    form part of their household unless there are reasons to the  contrary.
    Furthermore, it is generally in the interests of children to have  both
    stability and continuity of social and educational  provision  and  the
    benefit of growing up in the cultural norms of  the  society  to  which
    they belong.  In my judgment, whilst the Judge does not expressly  make
    a finding that it is in the best interests of the  third  appellant  to
    remain living with her parents, that can properly be inferred from  the
    findings and conclusions set out in the decision.  In fact, there never
    appears to have been any question of the family being separated in  any
    way.

26. At to the proportionality assessment at paragraphs [42] to [49] of  her
    decision, where, as here, it is in the best interest of a child to live
    with and be brought up by his or her parents, then the child's  removal
    with his or her parents does not involve any separation of family life.
     The authorities establish that  absent  other  factors,  a  period  of
    substantial residence as a child may become a weighty consideration  in
    the balance of competing considerations.  In the course  of  such  time
    roots are put down, personal identities are developed, friendships  are
    formed and links are made with the community outside the  family  unit.
    The degree to which these elements  of  private  life  are  forged  and
    therefore the weight to be given to the passage  of  time  will  depend
    upon the facts in each case.  Beyond the health of the third appellant,
    the first and second appellants did not  rely  upon  other  factors  to
    establish that  it  would  be  disproportionate  to  expect  the  third
    appellant to return to India with them.

27. It is clear that neither parent in this appeal has the right to  remain
    in the UK independently of the third appellant and it is  against  that
    background that the Judge's Article 8 assessment is conducted. None  of
    the family is a British citizen. None of the family has  the  right  to
    remain in this country. If either one of the parents  is  removed,  the
    other has no independent right to  remain.  There  is  no  question  of
    separating either parent from the third appellant.

28. In my judgment it was open to the Judge,  having  considered  the  best
    interests of the third appellant as a primary consideration to  dismiss
    the appeal under Article 8 for the reasons set out in the decision  and
    there is no material error of law.

DECISION

29. The appeal is dismissed.

30. No anonymity direction is made. No application was made  for  anonymity
    before me and the First-tier Tribunal made no anonymity direction.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
