
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/42198/2014
     IA/42203/2014
     IA/42202/2014
     IA/42201/2014
     IA/42200/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 8 April 2016                           |On 27 April 2016                  |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mr Muhammad Ayaz
                                Mrs Asma Ayaz
                                    [U A]
                                    [M A]
                                    [A A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms J Victor-Mazeli, Counsel instructed by Reliance
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the respondents as the appellants and to the appellant
    (the Secretary of State for the Home Department) as the respondent  (as
    they  appeared  respectively  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal).   The
    appellants are a family, a father and mother and three children who are
    all  citizens  of  Pakistan.   On  8  October  2014,  the   appellants'
    applications to remain living in the United Kingdom were refused by the
    Secretary of State, who also made decisions to remove  the  appellants.
    The  appellants  appealed  against  that  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Maxwell) which, in a decision dated 16  September  2015
    allowed the appeal on the basis that the refusal  decisions  were  made
    otherwise than in accordance with the law and directed that the  matter
    be remitted to the respondent, who "should  grant  60  days'  leave  in
    order that the first appellant may have the  opportunity  to  submit  a
    fresh application for leave to remain as a Tier 4 Student supported  by
    a valid CAS issued by a Registered Sponsor."  The  Secretary  of  State
    now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I was assisted by Mr Whitwell, for the respondent,  who,  in  his  oral
    submissions to the Upper Tribunal, made it clear  that  there  was,  in
    essence, one ground of appeal.  The judge in this ETS case had referred
    to generic evidence and had found  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had
    failed to discharge the burden of proving that, on the particular facts
    of this case, the first appellant had used  deception  (a  proxy)  when
    undertaking an English language test by  a  recognised  provider,  ETS.
    The argument advanced by Mr Whitwell was that the judge had  failed  to
    make  proper  findings  on  a  material  item  of  evidence,  namely  a
    spreadsheet annexed to the statement upon which the  respondent  relied
    of a Mr Sartorius and which showed the appellant's name  together  with
    an assertion that his test result had been "invalid".  The  grounds  of
    appeal described this evidence as "specific evidence" which  identifies
    the appellant as an individual who had exercised deception.

 3. I brought to the attention of both representatives the  fact  that  the
    Upper Tribunal had, on 5 April 2016, promulgated the decision in SM and
    Ihsan Qadir (IA/31380/2014 and IA/36319/2014 - the  case  has  not  yet
    been reported, so has no neutral citation).

 4. I find that the appeal should be dismissed.  Had Judge Maxwell made  no
    reference whatever in his written decision to the spreadsheet then that
    may well have amounted to an error of law.  However, at  [11]  he  does
    refer to the evidence noting that  "as  a  result  of  [analysis  using
    software and recordings] the appellant's test was found to  be  invalid
    and therefore was a false representation."  Later  at  [17]  the  judge
    noted that  "the  voice  recognition  system  employed  is  capable  of
    invalidating certificates for multiple reasons some  of  which  do  not
    involve fraud or deception ... and the  evidence  before  me  does  not
    address this issue in relation to the appellant's case."  It  is  clear
    that the judge concluded that the "specific" evidence was  insufficient
    in this instance given that no attempt had been made by  the  Secretary
    of State to address the problems arising with that evidence as detailed
    in the evidence adduced by the appellant.  It follows that the  judge's
    conclusion that the  burden  of  proof  had  not  been  discharged  was
    available to him on the particular facts of this case and  he  did  not
    err in law by finding that the appeal should not have been refused  for
    the reasons given in the notices of refusal.

 5. The judge did not allow the appeal  outright.   Instead,  he  made  the
    direction which I  have  set  out  above.   Understandably,  the  first
    appellant has not done anything regarding new CAS or registered sponsor
    given that this appeal was pending.  For the avoidance of any doubt,  I
    stress that it is now for the Secretary of State to consider the matter
    further as directed by the First-tier Tribunal  and  to  write  to  the
    first appellant regarding the submission of a fresh application  giving
    the first appellant 60 days from the days of any letter sent to him  to
    submit a fresh application  supported  by  a  valid  CAS  issued  by  a
    registered sponsor.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 26 April 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

