
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/42063/2014
                                                               IA/42064/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower Birmingham|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7th December 2015                 |On 21st December 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     BOA
                                     SAA
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr N Ahmed of Counsel instructed by Peer & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a decision of  Judge  Tindal  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 15th January 2015.

 2. The Respondents before the Upper Tribunal were  the  Appellants  before
    the FTT.  I will refer to them as the Claimants.

 3. The Claimants are Nigerian citizens and are father and son.  The second
    Claimant was born in February 2004 making him 11 years of age.

 4. The Claimants applied for leave to remain in the UK  based  upon  their
    family and private lives.

 5. The applications were refused on 8th October  2014,  the  Secretary  of
    State having considered Appendix FM  and  paragraph  276ADE(1)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  The Secretary of State  also  considered  the  best
    interests of the second Claimant as a child, pursuant to section 55  of
    the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009, and  concluded  that
    the Claimants could not satisfy the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules, and it would  not  be  appropriate  to  grant  leave  to  remain
    pursuant to Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention on  Human  Rights
    (the 1950 Convention) outside the Immigration Rules.

 6. The appeals were heard together on 8th January  2015.   The  FTT  heard
    evidence from both Claimants, and the partner of  the  first  Claimant,
    who the second Claimant regarded as his mother, although  she  was  not
    his biological mother.  The FTT  found  that  both  appeals  turned  on
    whether it was reasonable to expect the second Claimant  to  leave  the
    UK.  This  was  accepted  to  be  correct  by  the  Presenting  Officer
    representing the Secretary of State before the FTT.

 7. The FTT found that the second Claimant had lived in the UK in excess of
    seven years before the application for leave to remain  was  made,  and
    found that it would not be reasonable to expect him to  leave  the  UK,
    and  therefore  his  appeal   was   allowed   pursuant   to   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv), and with reference to Article 8 outside the  Immigration
    Rules.  The first Claimant's appeal was dismissed under the Immigration
    Rules but allowed under Article 8 outside the Rules.

 8. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  In summary it was  contended  that  the  FTT  had  erred  in
    assessing reasonableness, by conflating this threshold with that of the
    best interests of the child, devoid of  an  assessment  of  the  public
    interest.  It was submitted that the FTT had failed  in  assessing  the
    second Claimant's best interests, to have regard to the public interest
    in maintaining effective immigration control.

 9. It was submitted that the assessment of reasonableness under  paragraph
    276ADE(1) was fundamentally flawed because the FTT had not engaged with
    the need to consider the public interest, and  this  had  infected  the
    decision to allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge White  of  the  FTT  for  the
    following reasons;

         "a.  The central issue  was  whether  it  would  be  reasonable  to
             require the second Appellant to leave the UK  (paragraph  15).
             Finding that it was unreasonable  (paragraph  20),  the  judge
             allowed the appeal of the first  Appellant  on  the  basis  of
             Article 8 outside the Rules  and  the  appeal  of  the  second
             Appellant under paragraph 276ADE and Article 8.

         b.   It is arguable that in allowing the  appeals  the  judge  gave
             insufficient consideration to the  precarious  nature  of  the
             Appellants' immigration status  and  the  public  interest  in
             immigration control and the economic welfare of the state."

11. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal to decide  whether  the  FTT  had  materially
    erred in law such that the decision must be set aside.

12. Following the grant of permission to appeal,  the  Claimants  lodged  a
    response dated 15th March 2015, pursuant to rule  24  of  The  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, contending in summary, that  the
    FTT decision disclosed no error of law and the grounds submitted by the
    Secretary of State were an attempt to re-argue the appeals.

Oral Submissions

13. Mr Mills submitted that if the FTT had considered  only  the  issue  of
    reasonableness and the best interests of the  child,  that  would  have
    been an error of law, but he accepted that that was  not  the  case  in
    these appeals.

14. Mr Mills observed that at paragraph  19  the  FTT  had  considered  the
    public interest  in  immigration  control  and  therefore  the  grounds
    submitted on behalf of the Secretary of State did not disclose an error
    of law, and Mr Mills accepted that the application of the Secretary  of
    State should be dismissed, and the decision of the FTT upheld.

15. Mr Ahmed agreed.

My Conclusions and Reasons

16. In my view Mr Mills was correct to concede that the  grounds  submitted
    on behalf of the Secretary of State do not disclose any error of law in
    the FTT decision.

17. The complaint that the FTT did not  consider  the  public  interest  is
    without merit.  The first Claimant had a very poor immigration  history
    and this was recognised and considered by the  FTT.   In  paragraph  19
    there is a reference to the poor immigration history of unlawful entry,
    applications made in false names, and long-term  overstaying.   In  the
    same paragraph the FTT recognised that the best interests of the second
    Claimant are not paramount, and those  best  interests  can  be  "over-
    ridden" by the interests of immigration control.  The FTT recorded that
    this was the only countervailing factor relied upon by the Secretary of
    State at the FTT hearing.  The FTT  also  recognised  that  the  second
    Claimant was  in  the  UK  unlawfully,  and  commented  that  this  was
    relevant, but unlike his father, it was not his fault  and  so  weighed
    less heavily in the balance.

18. The FTT recorded at paragraph 15, the submission made on behalf of  the
    Secretary of  State,  that  both  appeals  turned  on  whether  it  was
    reasonable to expect the second  Claimant  to  leave  the  UK,  and  in
    paragraph 20 the FTT recorded that this was the  agreed  issue  in  the
    appeals.

19. As now accepted on behalf of the Secretary of State, the  FTT  did  not
    omit  to  consider  the  public  interest  in   maintaining   effective
    immigration control, and made findings and conclusions that  were  open
    to it, on the evidence, and gave adequate and sustainable  reasons  for
    those findings and conclusions.

20. The FTT did not err in concluding that it would not  be  reasonable  to
    expect the second Claimant to leave the UK, and therefore  allowed  his
    appeal pursuant  to  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  and  with  reference  to
    Article 8 outside the Rules.

21. The FTT did not err in concluding that  once  that  decision  had  been
    made, the first Claimant's appeal could be allowed,  having  considered
    the factors set out in section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law such that  the  decision  must  be  set
aside.  I do not set aside the decision.  The appeal  of  the  Secretary  of
State is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an  anonymity  direction.   I  make  an
anonymity order of my own volition pursuant  to  rule  14  of  The  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  because  the  second  Claimant  is  a
child.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify the Claimants or any member of their  family.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 9th December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and  therefore  so  does  the
decision not to make a fee award.


Signed   Date 9th December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
