
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/42689/2014
                                                               IA/42684/2014
                                                               IA/42677/2014
                                                               IA/45398/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Heard on 6th December 2016           |On 3rd January 2017                  |
|Prepared on 23rd December 2016       |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                     MR MOHAMMAD JANNOO - 1st Appellant
                   MRS BIBI SHEHNAZ JANNOO - 2nd Appellant
                       MS UMMA JANNOO - 3rd Appellant
                  MS BIBI MUMYAHINA JANNOO - 4th Appellant
                         (Anonymity orders not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr W Rees of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW



The Appellants

 1. The 4 Appellants are all citizens of Mauritius. The first Appellant who
    I shall call Mr Jannoo was born on 2 December 1965. He is  the  husband
    of the 2nd Appellant who I shall call Mrs Jannoo and she was born on 22
    September 1973. The 3rd and 4th Appellants are the  couple's  children.
    The 3rd Appellant who I shall call Umme was born on  15  December  1996
    and is now 20 years old. The 4th Appellant who I shall  call  Bibi  was
    born on 4th of May 1992 and is thus Umme's older sister.  On  30th  May
    2012 the Appellants applied for leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom
    on the basis of their family and private  life  in  this  country.  The
    Respondent ultimately refused their  applications  by  decisions  dated
    10th October 2014 in the case of Mr and Mrs  Jannoo  and  Umme  and  24
    October 2014 in the case of Bibi.

 2. There followed somewhat protracted  appeal  proceedings  in  which  the
    appeals were first allowed on the basis that the Respondent's decisions
    were not in accordance with the law such that they remained outstanding
    before the  Respondent  to  take.  When  the  Respondent  retook  those
    decisions and again refused the  applications  the  subsequent  appeals
    were allowed at first instance but overturned in the Upper Tribunal and
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.  This  resulted
    in the appeal coming before Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  O'Garro
    sitting at Hatton Cross on 24th of June 2016. She dismissed the appeals
    of the 1st, 2nd and 4th Appellants but allowed Umme's appeal under  the
    Immigration  Rules.  This  decision  generated   cross   appeals.   The
    Respondent has appealed the decision to allow  Umme's  appeal  and  the
    1st, 2nd and 4th Appellants have appealed the decision to dismiss their
    respective appeals. Permission to appeal was granted to all parties  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Frankish on 11 November 2016.  I  have
    heard submissions on the cross appeals on the issue of error of law and
    give my decision  thereon  in  this  determination.  For  the  sake  of
    convenience, I have continued to refer to  the  parties  as  they  were
    designated at first instance.

 3. Mr Jannoo entered the United Kingdom on 19th June 2006 as a student. He
    was granted an extension of stay in that category until 31st  of  March
    2007. On 1st December 2006 he was joined by the other 3 members of  his
    family who had leave as visitors valid until 1st  of  June  2007.  They
    were granted extensions in due course in line with Mr Jannoo until 31st
    of March 2008. There were further extensions granting  leave  until  12
    July 2014. However, on 7th of July 2011 Mr Jannoo's leave as a  student
    was curtailed due to his sponsor's licence being revoked. His leave was
    then set to expire on 2nd of June 2012. The other members of his family
    had their leave curtailed in line with his. Before the  deadline  of  2
    June 2012 expired the Appellants applied on 30 May 2012  for  variation
    of their leave to remain. As at the date of  application  Umme  was  16
    years and 5 months old and had been in the United Kingdom for  5  years
    and 7 months. Bibi was 20 years old and had been in the United  Kingdom
    for the same amount of time as her younger sister Umme.

 4. The Respondent made decisions to refuse the  applications  on  12th  of
    July 2013 by which time new Immigration Rules had come into  force  (in
    July  2012)  which  meant  that  the  Respondent  had  to  decide   the
    Appellant's applications in line with the Immigration Rules in force at
    the date of decision. Unfortunately, the Tribunal first  hearing  these
    appeals wrongly decided on 18 July 2014 that as the  applications  were
    made before July 2012 the decisions should not have been made under the
    new rules. The effect of the First-tier's decision  at  that  time  was
    that the decisions were  still  before  the  Respondent  to  take.  The
    Respondent looked at the matters again in October 2014 and  made  fresh
    decisions which are the subject of these proceedings.

 5. The appeals against  the  October  2014  decisions  came  before  Judge
    Plumptre sitting at Hatton  Cross  on  13  May  2015  who  allowed  the
    Appellant's  appeals  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  but  under  the
    provisions of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 22002  finding
    that Umme was a qualifying child because she had  been  living  in  the
    United Kingdom for 7 years by the  date  of  refusal  and  it  was  not
    reasonable to expect her to return to Mauritius. As Umme's  parents  Mr
    and Mrs Jannoo had a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with
    Umme public interest considerations did not require them to  leave  the
    United Kingdom either. This decision was  overturned  by  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Monson sitting at Field House on 12th of  January  2016.
    He noted at paragraph 31 of his decision finding an error of  law  that
    paragraph 276 ADE (1) (iv) requires a qualifying child to have  accrued
    7 years residence in the United Kingdom  at  the  date  of  application
    which Umme had not accrued. That meant that the appeal had to be looked
    at outside the Immigration Rules in circumstances  where  what  was  in
    contemplation was the removal of the entire family to Mauritius. It was
    not a question of whether it was reasonable for Umme to go on  her  own
    to Mauritius leaving behind her  family.  As  a  result  the  balancing
    exercise had not been properly carried out and the matter was  remitted
    back to the First-tier and thus came before Judge O'Garro.

The Decision At First Instance

 6. At paragraph 48 of her determination Judge O'Garro indicated she  would
    consider the position of each Appellant individually. Mr Jannoo had  no
    close family members in Mauritius save for 2 sisters and he  had  lived
    in United Kingdom for 10 years by that time. He would still be familiar
    with Mauritian culture and society and could  quite  easily  assimilate
    back into that society. Mrs Jannoo had elderly parents and  2  siblings
    still living in Mauritius and there would be no  significant  obstacles
    to her reintegration there. She then turned to the case of Umme writing
    at paragraph 53  "at  the  date  of  the  reconsideration  of  [Umme's]
    application on 18th of July 2014 which I find has to  be  viewed  as  a
    fresh application, the Appellant would have been in the United  Kingdom
    more than 7 years which means I have to determine if it  is  reasonable
    for her to leave the United Kingdom at this  stage  of  her  life.  She
    would have been 17 years old and  at  that  age  she  would  have  been
    preparing for her GCE examinations".

 7. Judge O'Garro gave no authority for her decision that Umme's appeal had
    to be looked at under the Rules as at  18th  of  July  2014  (when  her
    appeal was allowed to a limited extent) as opposed to May 2012 when the
    application itself was made. This was unfortunate given  the  reference
    in Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson's decision to  the  correct  date
    for the assessment under the Immigration Rules as  being  the  date  of
    application. One further point which needs to  be  made  is  that  Bibi
    meanwhile had made an  application  on  form  FLR  (FP)  in  July  2014
    applying for further leave to remain on the basis of  10  years  lawful
    residence and/or dependency upon her parents, although she  was  22  at
    the time and if she had not made an application with the other  members
    of her family in May 2012 she would have had no leave since then.

 8. Judge O'Garro proceeded with her  consideration  of  Umme's  appeal  by
    finding that she was aged 17 years at what Judge O'Garro took to be the
    relevant date and very well settled in the educational system in United
    Kingdom. She would have been in the middle of  preparing  for  her  GCE
    examinations and it would not have been reasonable at that time  or  in
    her best interests for her to have left the United Kingdom to return to
    Mauritius where the education system would be alien to  her  and  where
    her skill in the language would have to be learned again. It  was  thus
    not reasonable for her to leave the United Kingdom.

 9. Turning to Bibi's appeal, at paragraph 57 the Judge  found  Bibi  would
    fall into the same position as her parents,  Mr  and  Mrs  Jannoo.  She
    could not show significant obstacles to reintegration  into  Mauritius.
    She had left there at age 14 and would  have  by  then  understood  the
    language and culture. Thus Mr and Mrs Jannoo and Bibi could not succeed
    under either Appendix FM or paragraph 276 ADE. The Judge  proceeded  to
    consider their circumstances under Article 8 (although there appears to
    be a typographical error in paragraph  58  referring  to  2  Appellants
    instead of 3). For this exercise the Judge had to look at matters as at
    the date of hearing and here she decided that Bibi was now an adult and
    had always lived with her parents. The other Appellants could not  rely
    on the fact that Umme was once a  qualifying  child.  Throughout  their
    time in the United Kingdom the Appellants' leave  had  been  precarious
    and little weight could be placed on whatever  private  life  they  had
    acquired. In relation to  the  potential  claim  for  10  years  lawful
    residence Judge O'Garro  stated  at  paragraph  73  that  although  the
    Appellant had been in the United Kingdom for at least  that  period  it
    was for the Respondent and not  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  make  an
    assessment as to whether the Appellant qualified for leave to remain on
    that basis. Judge O'Garro was only referring there to Mr Jannoo but Mrs
    Jannoo would also have had 10 years residence by reason  of  having  3C
    leave following the making of her application in May 2012.

10. The result of Judge O'Garro's decision was that Umme would be  able  to
    stay in this country while the other 3 Appellants would have to return.
    The Judge appreciated that Umme would want  her  parents  and  Bibi  to
    remain in the United Kingdom as they provided her with  both  financial
    and emotional support but Umme was now an adult and would  be  able  to
    live an independent life. Once Umme was granted leave to remain in  the
    United Kingdom she would be able to  work  here  or  go  on  to  higher
    education and could reside with one of the  close  family  members  she
    already had here such as an aunt. By contrast the other Appellants  had
    no right to be in United Kingdom and there was  no  evidence  why  they
    could not return to Mauritius. They were fit and healthy and would have
    no difficulty in finding employment  or  adjusting  to  life  in  their
    country of origin. Bibi was working as a nursery  nurse  and  would  be
    able to find  employment  as  well.  It  would  be  a  wrench  but  the
    Appellants had known that their immigration status was  precarious  and
    that someday they would have to leave the United Kingdom to  return  to
    Mauritius.

The Onward Appeals

11. As I have indicated both sides appealed the Judge's decision. The first
    in time to appeal were the 1st, 2nd and 4th Appellants who argued  that
    the breakup of the family unit by returning  them  to  Mauritius  while
    leaving Umme in the United Kingdom would  be  unduly  harsh.  The  ties
    which bound the family  members  could  not  be  replicated  by  remote
    contact between Umme and her parents. Umme wished to attend  university
    and was in need of her parents to  provide  her  with  further  support
    during her studies. The grounds contended that the  relevant  date  for
    assessing the claims should be the date  when  the  appeal  proceedings
    started at which point Umme was still under the age of 18. Referring to
    Bibi the grounds argued that she was fully integrated into  the  United
    Kingdom and would be an asset to  the  country  working  as  a  nursery
    nurse.

12. Four days later the Respondent appealed against the decision  to  allow
    Umme's appeal arguing that the Judge had  allowed  the  appeal  on  the
    basis she was pursuing her education in United Kingdom but one  had  to
    consider the Court of Appeal decision in EV (Philippines)  [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 874. The children's best interests were to be with their parents in
    a family unit.  This  would  have  continued  in  Mauritius.  Following
    another decision of the Court of Appeal in MA  (Pakistan)  [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 705 the court should not simply focus on the child but should  have
    regard to the wider public interest considerations.

13. Both applications for permission came before Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Frankish on 11th of November 2016. He  granted  permission  to
    all parties on two bases. The first was the Appellant's  argument  that
    Umme could not be expected to live with other family members whilst the
    3 Appellants  left.  The  second  was  that  arguably  there  had  been
    insufficient consideration of  the  reasonableness  test  contained  in
    paragraph 276 ADE as it could be reasonable to expect  Umme  to  pursue
    her higher education in Mauritius. Judge Frankish concluded his remarks
    with: "for justice to be done I allow the  applicant's  application  in
    order that there may be consideration of  the  family  as  a  whole  in
    accordance with EV".

14. The Respondent replied to the grant of permission  saying  it  was  not
    entirely clear why the application of the other  3  Appellants  against
    the decision to dismiss their appeals had been granted. There could  be
    no realistic prospect of those Appellant's succeeding under  the  ratio
    in EV as there were  no  British  citizens  involved  and  all  of  the
    Appellants were now adults.

The Hearing Before Me

15. For the Respondent, the Presenting Officer, who had settled the grounds
    of appeal and the rule 24 response, relied on both  documents.  It  was
    not clear why the Judge had allowed Umme's appeal as Umme could  always
    make an application to come back. For Article 8 purposes  this  was  an
    appeal of adults. One had to look at the  immigration  history  of  the
    family see MA Pakistan.

16. For the Appellants' counsel  argued  that  the  Judge  was  correct  in
    relation to Umme's appeal but wrong in law in relation to  the  others.
    The Judge had not properly considered the  factors  in  EV  Philippines
    which see it as a necessity to keep the family together. The Judge  had
    not applied the test in section 117 B (6) of the 2002 Act  that  if  it
    was not reasonable to expect Umme to relocate then the  parents  should
    not be expected to either. In MA Pakistan there had been  a  discussion
    on whether one should focus on the child alone when considering section
    117 B (6). Even if one did look  at  the  immigration  history  of  the
    parents  one  still  had  to  look  at  the   immigration   directorate
    instructions 11. 2. 4. There needed to  be  strong  reasons  to  refuse
    leave where there was a qualifying child.

17. It was helpful, counsel  argued,  to  go  through  the  EV  Philippines
    criteria. Umme was now 19 and had been here for over 10 years at  least
    9 of which was in education. At the moment she was in limbo. She  could
    not go to university because she had no visa. She had never  been  back
    to Mauritius since arriving here nor had  the  others.  She  could  not
    speak French and only knew an odd word or two of Creole. There  was  no
    readily  renewable  connection   with   Mauritius,   there   would   be
    difficulties in adapting. Her parents had not behaved deceitfully  they
    had had 3C leave. It was wrong  to  say  Umme  could  live  with  other
    members of the family and find work. If she  could  obtain  status  she
    could go to university. Bibi was a child when she arrived. This  was  a
    family that had more than normal emotional ties together. The Judge was
    right to say that Umme should be treated as if she was under 18.

18. In reply the Presenting Officer argued that EV could  not  benefit  the
    Appellant as Umme was 19 years old.  It  was  reasonable  to  expect  a
    child to go with his or her parents. Section 117 B (6) was not a stand-
    alone factor. In response counsel argued  that  the  determination  was
    unsafe. It had  not  considered  EV  properly.  At  the  conclusion  of
    submissions both parties indicated that if an error of  law  was  found
    the case should not be remitted back to the First-tier for rehearing as
    the case had now been going on for a very long  time  and  the  parties
    needed finality. If there was to be a rehearing further evidence  would
    be put in particularly a statement from Umme. I  indicated  that  if  I
    found a material error of law I would give directions for rehearing. If
    there were no material errors of law the  decision  at  first  instance
    would stand.

Findings On The Issue Of Error Of Law

19. When considering these appeals the first matter the Judge had  to  deal
    with was whether any or all of the Appellants could succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules. The Judge's decision was that the 3rd Appellant Umme
    could succeed under paragraph 276 ADE (iv). This provides that a  child
    applicant for leave to remain made on the grounds of private life  must
    at the date of  application  have  lived  continuously  in  the  United
    Kingdom for at least 7 years and it would not be reasonable  to  expect
    the applicant to leave the United Kingdom. The only applicant  to  whom
    this paragraph could have applied was Umme. Judge O'Garro decided  that
    it did apply to Umme because she took the date of application as  being
    18 July 2014 when the initial decisions of the Respondent were found to
    be not in accordance  with  the  law  and  so  outstanding  before  the
    Respondent to take. As I have indicated above there  was  no  authority
    for that proposition and in my view it was an error of law for Judge  O
    O'Garro to proceed on that basis. The correct basis was as outlined  by
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson that Umme's private life application
    under the rules had to be looked at, at the date of application  namely
    May 2012. As will be seen from the calculations above (see paragraph 3)
    Umme had not been in the United  Kingdom  for  7  years  at  that  date
    although she was under the age of 18. Bibi could not benefit from  that
    provision  because  she  was  over  the  age  of  18  at  the  date  of
    application.

20. The effect of this error at first instance was to skew  the  assessment
    of the reasonableness of expecting Umme to leave the United Kingdom  at
    the date of application. The test under the Rules did not arise. It was
    therefore a material error of law to find that Umme could  satisfy  the
    Immigration Rules. What was left  was  a  consideration  of  the  other
    Appellants' applications outside  the  Immigration  Rules  but  also  a
    consideration of Umme's case  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.  It  is
    understandable that Judge O O'Garro did not proceed to consider  Umme's
    case outside the Immigration Rules because she had found that Umme  met
    the rules. Unfortunately, because that was incorrect  it  was  then  an
    error for the Judge not to consider Umme's case outside the  rules.  It
    might be argued that in considering  the  reasonableness  of  expecting
    Umme to return to Mauritius the Judge had satisfied the test in section
    117B (6). It is correct  that  the  statutory  test  in  the  2002  Act
    replicates the test in the Immigration Rules save for one very  crucial
    difference. That crucial difference is that under the rules one has  to
    satisfy the reasonableness test at  the  date  of  application  whereas
    under the section one has to satisfy the  reasonableness  test  at  the
    date of hearing.

21. This caused a problem for Umme because of  the  length  of  time  which
    these proceedings have taken during the appeal stages. By the time  the
    matter came before Judge O'Garro Umme was no longer  a  child  and  the
    test of reasonableness under the section no longer applied.  Similarly,
    EV had  become  of  limited  relevance  to  the  case.  Instead  all  4
    Appellants had to argue their appeals  outside  the  Immigration  Rules
    both as to the family life  they  had  together  and  their  respective
    private lives. The 3 Appellants whose appeals were dismissed could  not
    pray in aid that they had in the case of Mr and Mrs  Jannoo  a  genuine
    and  parental  relationship  with  Umme  since  she  was  no  longer  a
    qualifying child. In effect the four Appellants would  be  returned  to
    Mauritius as adults who had spent 10 years in this country but who  for
    the reasons given by Judge O'Garro would be able to pick up the threads
    of their lives again in Mauritius. I do  not  consider  therefore  that
    Judge O O'Garro made any material error  of  law  in  relation  to  her
    dismissal of the 1st, 2nd and 4th Appellants' appeals.

22. She clearly did make an error of law in allowing  Umme's  appeal  under
    the Immigration Rules when they did not apply to Umme. What she did not
    do was consider whether Umme could  nevertheless  succeed  outside  the
    Immigration Rules given the particular differences in her case to those
    of the other Appellants. Those differences were that Umme's  connection
    with  Mauritius  was  much  weaker  than  the  other   3   particularly
    linguistically and that Umme was at a difficult stage in her education.
    I appreciate the argument that the Respondent makes that  there  is  no
    duty on the United Kingdom "to educate  the  world"  as  the  Court  of
    Appeal stated in EV but one has to look at these matters on a  case-by-
    case basis. Judge O'Garro had the benefit of hearing  the  parties  and
    receiving the evidence when making an assessment of the effect on  Umme
    of the disruption to her  education  by  requiring  her  to  return  to
    Mauritius in 2016. The test to have applied was whether there were very
    compelling circumstances such that  Umme's  appeal  should  be  allowed
    outside the Immigration Rules. It is not clear from  the  determination
    whether Judge O'Garro would have allowed the appeal on  that  basis  if
    she had gone on to  consider  Umme's  appeal  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules. Had she done so and adequately reasoned it the error in allowing
    the appeal under the rules would not  have  applied  but  it  does  not
    appear that Judge O O'Garro looked at the matter through the  prism  of
    the Immigration Rules since she did not look at Umme's  appeal  outside
    the rules at all.

23. I do not consider it appropriate at this stage to make a fresh decision
    allowing or dismissing Umme's appeal having found an error  of  law  in
    the decision to allow it. The reason  why  I  say  that  is  because  I
    consider Umme should be given a further opportunity to  lodge  evidence
    as  to  her  circumstances  to  see  whether   there   are   compelling
    circumstances such that her appeal should be allowed outside the rules.
    I appreciate that her argument in relation to family life is  bound  up
    with the arguments put forward by the other 3 Appellants. That is  that
    they are a close knit family unit who have been living together in this
    country for 10 years and who wish to continue to support  Umme  in  her
    further studies. Even if I accept that Judge O'Garro was wrong to  find
    that Umme could stay with another  relative  while  she  continued  her
    studies I do not consider that Judge O'Garro was wrong in  law  in  the
    conclusion she reached at paragraph 74 of her determination. It  is  in
    my view worth quoting:

         "I appreciate [Umme] will want her parents and siblings  to  remain
         in the United Kingdom with  her  as  they  provide  her  with  both
         financial and emotional support but she is now an  adult  and  will
         soon be able to live an  independent  life  especially  if  she  is
         thinking of higher education and university which she is likely  to
         receive a student loan to assist her financially while she studies.
         Once [Umme] is granted leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  she
         will be able to work or attend further/higher education, if that is
         her wish".

24.  If one looks at the situation as at 30 June 2016 the  date  of  hearing
    before Judge O'Garro the only basis on which the three other Appellants
    could have won their appeal was on the basis that they were  needed  to
    remain in this country because of the dependency upon them of Umme  but
    by then Umme was not a child she was at an age when it is by  no  means
    unusual for young people to leave home to study. Umme was familiar with
    this country having lived here for 10 years and studying away from  the
    family home would not be a compelling circumstance such that the  other
    Appellants appeals should be allowed. Whether therefore Umme eventually
    succeeds in her appeal or not (as I have indicated that may  depend  on
    further evidence and submissions) the three Appellants  cannot  succeed
    in their appeals since Umme is not a child and for the reasons given by
    Judge O O'Garro. I therefore set aside the first instance  decision  in
    relation to Umme, the 3rd Appellant's appeal and direct that the matter
    be reheard on the first available date after 42 days. I give permission
    to her to file and serve any further evidence upon which  she  proposes
    to rely by 4 pm on 27 January 2017. I dismiss the onward appeals of the
    1st, 2nd and 4th Appellants against the  decisions  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.     I make no anonymity orders as there is no  public  policy
    reason for so doing.



Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal in relation to  the  appeal  of
    the 3rd Appellant contained a material error of law and I have  set  it
    aside. I direct that that appeal be reheard on the first available date
    after 42 days.

    The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal in relation to the appeals  of
    the 1st, 2nd and 4th Appellants did not contain material errors of  law
    and I uphold the decisions to dismiss the appeals of those Appellants.


Signed this 23rd day of December 2016

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee awards were made in this case at first instance which I  consider  to
be the correct decision. I therefore make no fee award either.


Signed this 23rd day of December 2016

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
