
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42926/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 18th November 2014                           |On 27th November 2014      |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     s b
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Schwenk of Counsel instructed by Parkview
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant appeals against a determination of Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal A K Simpson promulgated on 2nd July 2014.

 2. The Appellant is a female citizen of Pakistan born  2nd  February  1973
    who had leave to remain in the United Kingdom as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student until 1st July 2012.  On 30th June 2012  she  applied  to  vary
    that leave to  enable  her  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    application was made outside the Immigration Rules on the basis of  her
    family and private life.

 3. The application was  refused  on  1st  October  2013.   The  Respondent
    accepted that the Appellant has a child who  was  born  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 25th October 2012, but contended that  the  Appellant  could
    not satisfy section EX.1 of Appendix FM because  the  child  is  not  a
    British citizen and had not resided in the United Kingdom for at  least
    seven years.  The Respondent  contended  that  the  Appellant  had  not
    satisfied paragraph 276ADE in relation to her private life,  and  there
    were no  exceptional  circumstances  that  warranted  consideration  of
    Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.  The Respondent's decision was
    that it would be appropriate for the Appellant and her child, to return
    together to Pakistan, the country of which they are both citizens.

 4. The Appellant lodged an appeal which was heard by  Judge  Simpson  (the
    judge) on 7th March 2014 and 7th May 2014.  Having heard evidence  from
    the Appellant and one other witness, the judge found that the Appellant
    had not given a truthful or reliable account, the judge noted that  the
    Appellant had raised as Grounds of Appeal, both asylum and humanitarian
    protection, but concluded that the Appellant had fabricated her  claim,
    and the appeal was dismissed on  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and
    human rights grounds.

 5. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    relying on three grounds which are summarised below.

 6. Ground 1 - It was pointed out that the judge had found the  witness  NA
    straightforward and truthful but had then gone on to  make  an  adverse
    finding that the father of the  child,  MA,  was  named  on  the  birth
    certificate and this was not done  accidentally  and  that  either  the
    father of the child had been present when the birth was registered,  or
    the Appellant had deliberately deceived the  registrar  into  believing
    that she was married.   It  was  submitted  that  these  findings  were
    contrary to the weight of the evidence provided by the Appellant and NA
    and the judge's finding and reasoning was contradictory and unsound.

 7. Ground 2 - The judge found in paragraph 13 of  the  determination  that
    the child was not borne out of wedlock, but it was submitted  that  the
    judge's reasoning was "based upon the judge's own stereotype of a woman
    fitting her ethnic and religious profile" and that such  reasoning  was
    highly prejudicial.  In addition the judge's finding in paragraph 13(c)
    that the Appellant's brother's friend  would  not  have  tolerated  her
    having a relationship without  being  married,  was  not  supported  by
    adequate reasoning.  It was contended that the judge's finding that she
    was not satisfied that the Appellant was  unmarried  although  she  may
    only have undergone a religious ceremony was based  on  conjecture  and
    that any such religious marriage may not have been recognised as  legal
    in the United Kingdom.

 8. Ground 3 - It was submitted that the judge had failed to  consider  the
    best interests  of  the  Appellant's  child,  whose  welfare  and  best
    interests were paramount.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Gibb and I set out below  paragraphs  2,  3  and  4  of  the  grant  of
    permission;

         "2.  The grounds, which were in time,  complained  that  the  judge
             erred in:

             (1)  her approach to the issue of whether  the  Appellant  had
                  been married to the baby's father  and  why/how  his  name
                  came to be on the birth certificate;

             (2)  her finding that the baby was  in  fact  legitimate,  and
                  that the father was the Appellant's first cousin; and

             (3)  not considering the best interests of the child.

         3.    The  third  ground  has  little  merit  see   [18]   of   the
             determination.  The first and second do raise arguable points,
             however.  It is  arguable  that  there  may  be  contradictory
             reasoning in both accepting the evidence of  the  witness  who
             explain getting the certificate, and then  concluding  that  a
             marriage certificate had been presented.  The issue of whether
             the adverse findings as to the marriage and the  first  cousin
             relationship were sufficiently evidence based, or may  instead
             have been speculative, is of central importance, and  deserves
             closer consideration.   It  is  unclear  whether  the  various
             adverse points were raised at the  hearing,  and  whether  the
             gov.uk website information [11] was  researched  independently
             by the judge: these may raise fairness issues.

         4.   The grounds are arguable."

10. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 contending in summary that the judge had not erred in law, and had
    produced a clearly reasoned  determination  rejecting  the  Appellant's
    account, and giving adequate reasons for not believing the Appellant.

11. Directions were subsequently issued making provision for there to be  a
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal  to  decide  whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal determination should be set aside.

The Appellant's Submissions

12. Mr Schwenk indicated that he did not pursue the third ground of  appeal
    but submitted that there  was  considerable  merit  in  the  first  two
    grounds.  The judge in paragraph 12 had found  the  witness  NA  to  be
    truthful, but had then gone on to find that either the  child's  father
    was present when the  Appellant  was  registering  the  birth,  or  the
    Appellant had deliberately deceived the registrar into  believing  that
    she was married, and neither of those scenarios could have occurred, if
    NA had given truthful evidence, as the judge found  that  he  had.   In
    effect it was submitted that the judge was finding the witness truthful
    but then disbelieving his evidence.

13. In relation to the second ground Mr Schwenk submitted that the findings
    made  by  the  judge  appeared  to  be  based  upon  stereotyping   and
    speculation and were not safe findings.  In relation to paragraph 13(c)
    the judge was assuming that the brother's  friend  referred  to  was  a
    Muslim of Pakistani heritage, but even if that was the case, there  was
    insufficient evidence to find that he  would  not  have  tolerated  the
    Appellant's claimed relationship outside marriage with MA.

14. In relation to paragraph 14 of the determination  in  which  the  judge
    refers to the possibility of a religious ceremony, Mr Schwenk submitted
    that this would not have been recognised under United Kingdom law,  and
    submitted that it was not clear whether any of the points found by  the
    judge, had been put to the Appellant to give  her  the  opportunity  to
    respond.

The Respondent's Submissions

15. Miss Johnstone relied upon the rule  24  response  and  submitted  that
    paragraph 12 should be  read  together  with  paragraph  13(d)  of  the
    determination.  Miss Johnstone submitted that it  was  clear  that  the
    judge was not making a finding that the child's father was present when
    the Appellant was registering the birth but was making a  finding  that
    the Appellant had submitted evidence to indicate that she  was  married
    to the child's father.

16. In relation to paragraph 13(a) and the judge's finding that it was  not
    credible that a woman  with  the  Appellant's  cultural  and  religious
    background would enter into a physical relationship with a stranger she
    met at the bus stop within one month of arriving in the United Kingdom,
    Miss Johnstone referred to  paragraph  4  of  the  Appellant's  witness
    statement in which she described a traditional  and  religious  family,
    and submitted that the judge was entitled to reach the finding that the
    Appellant's account was not credible.

17. Miss Johnstone contended that all relevant matters had been put to  the
    Appellant at the two hearings.  The initial hearing was adjourned part-
    heard to enable the Appellant to call NA  to  give  evidence,  and  for
    evidence to be obtained from the registrar as  to  the  procedure  that
    would be followed when a birth was registered.  The hearing resumed  on
    7 May 2014, and the Appellant submitted a witness  statement  from  NA,
    together with documentary evidence from Bolton Council setting out  the
    procedure for registering a birth.  Miss Johnstone explained  that  the
    gov.uk website information on registering a birth had been submitted by
    the Presenting Officer at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

The Appellant's Response

18. Mr Schwenk  accepted  that  paragraph  13(d)  to  an  extent  qualified
    paragraph 12 of the determination, but he nevertheless  submitted  that
    the conclusion reached by the judge still did not make  sense,  if  the
    witness evidence of NA was accepted.  That  witness  had  been  present
    when the birth  was  registered  and  had  made  no  reference  to  the
    production of a marriage certificate.

19. Mr Schwenk accepted that the evidence in relation to the procedure  for
    registering births had been before the judge and confirmed that he  was
    not suggesting that the judge had undertaken her own research.

20. In relation to the credibility of  the  Appellant  forming  a  physical
    relationship so soon after arriving in the United Kingdom with a person
    she met at a  bus  stop,  Mr  Schwenk  pointed  out  that  her  witness
    statement indicated that her family were traditional, but this did  not
    mean that she held the same views.

21. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

22. I will deal firstly with the third  ground  of  appeal  which  was  not
    pursued by Mr Schwenk.   In  my  view  this  was  an  entirely  correct
    approach.  The author of  the  ground  erred  in  contending  the  best
    interests of a child are paramount, as that is clearly  not  the  case,
    and in any event the judge considered the best interests of  the  child
    in paragraph 18 of the determination.

23. I will also at this stage deal with comments made by the judge granting
    permission as to fairness.  I am satisfied, and  Mr  Schwenk  accepted,
    that the judge had not  independently  researched  information  on  the
    gov.uk website as to registering births.  I am satisfied that this  was
    submitted by the Presenting Officer at the first hearing.   I  am  also
    satisfied that no relevant adverse points  were  raised  by  the  judge
    after the hearing.

24. This appeal has been dismissed because the judge did  not  believe  the
    Appellant,  and  found  that  she  had  fabricated  her  account.   The
    challenge to the findings made by the judge is not made on  grounds  of
    perversity, and I do not find that the judge has  made  findings  which
    are either perverse or irrational.

25. The judge in paragraph 12 found the witness NA  to  be  straightforward
    and truthful, but I  agree  that  this  paragraph  should  be  read  in
    conjunction with paragraph 13(d), and in any event, in paragraph 12 the
    judge specifically rejected the suggestion that  the  child's  father's
    name was "accidentally" included on the birth certificate.

26. The judge had the benefit of listening to oral evidence, and in my view
    is best placed to  decide  what  weight  should  be  attached  to  that
    evidence.  The Record of Proceedings confirms that  the  Appellant  was
    asked what happened when she registered the birth of her child and  was
    asked to account for the fact that the child's father was named on  the
    birth certificate even though he had not attended with her to  register
    the birth.  The  Appellant  was  also  asked  why  a  medical  document
    contained at page 61 of the Appellant's bundle,  recorded  the  child's
    father as being her first cousin.  These  were  therefore  issues  that
    were raised with the Appellant and she had the opportunity to respond.

27. The Appellant confirmed  that  the  child's  father  had  attended  the
    medical appointment with her on 30th  May  2012  but  did  not  in  her
    evidence adequately explain why he was  recorded  as  being  her  first
    cousin, as her evidence was that he was not related to her.

28. A primary finding made by the judge was  that  the  Appellant  was  not
    credible in claiming that her child was born without her being  married
    to the father.  The judge gave four reasons for finding  the  Appellant
    not credible, and three of these reasons are challenged in  the  second
    ground of appeal.

29. I will firstly deal with the first ground, which is the claim  that  in
    referring to the witness, the  judge  made  contradictory  and  unsound
    findings contrary to the weight of the evidence.  I find  no  error  of
    law.  The judge did not make a finding that the father was present when
    the birth was registered and therefore accepted the witness's  evidence
    on this point.  The judge  specifically  found  that  the  witness  was
    unlikely to have lied on this issue and her conclusion is contained  in
    paragraph 13(d) which is;

         "Consequently, it is more likely  than  not  that  the  couple  are
         already  married  and  that  the  Appellant  was  able  to  provide
         satisfactory  evidence   of   that   marriage   i.e.   a   marriage
         certificate;"

30. In my view the judge was entitled to reach this finding, which does not
    contradict the evidence given by the witness NA.  His evidence that the
    father did not attend was accepted.  His  evidence,  according  to  the
    Record of Proceedings, was that although he was present he did not  say
    that he was the father of the child and he was  not  asked  this.   The
    Record of Proceedings indicates that his evidence  confirmed  that  the
    Appellant produced documentation  to  the  registrar.   The  Record  of
    Proceedings does not indicate whether the witness was aware of what the
    documentation was.  The witness could  not  recall  how  the  Appellant
    described MA, for example as the child's father or as her husband.

31. I therefore conclude that the judge considered the  evidence,  did  not
    make contradictory findings that amount to an error of law, but made  a
    finding that the Appellant was not unmarried, which finding was open to
    her to make on the evidence.

32. I  now  consider  ground  2  which  relates  to  paragraph  13  of  the
    determination.  It is not suggested that the judge  applied  the  wrong
    burden  or  standard  of  proof.   It  is  clear  that  in  considering
    credibility, the judge has to make findings on the evidence,  and  give
    adequate reasons for those findings.  The burden of  proof  is  on  the
    Appellant.

33. The judge was entitled to find the Appellant's  account  not  credible.
    The judge has taken into account the Appellant's cultural and religious
    background, and the judge does not have to accept an assertion made  by
    an Appellant at face value.

34. The Appellant in her witness statement described  coming  from  a  very
    traditional and religious family, and did not adduce any evidence  that
    she had ever previously entered into a  physical  relationship  with  a
    stranger, within such a short period of time as she claimed happened in
    this case.  I note that the Appellant was 41 years of age at  the  date
    of hearing before the judge.  I find no error of law in the  judge  not
    accepting the Appellant's account of that relationship.

35. The judge went on in paragraph 13(b) to consider  whether  the  child's
    father is in fact the Appellant's first cousin.   There  is  no  direct
    challenge to this part of the determination.  The judge was entitled to
    find the midwife  who  prepared  the  medical  notes  would  only  have
    described the father of the child as a first cousin  if  she  had  been
    told this information.  The Appellant confirmed that both she  and  the
    child's father attended that medical appointment.

36. I do find the  judge  erred  in  finding  at  paragraph  13(c)  of  the
    determination when she concludes that the Appellant would not have been
    able to hide the relationship from her brother's friend with  whom  she
    was staying, and that such a relationship would  not  be  tolerated  by
    that friend.  There appears to me to be insufficient evidence  for  the
    judge to reach that conclusion.  There is no mention  of  this  in  the
    Appellant's witness statement, but I note that in her oral evidence she
    said that when she first came  to  the  United  Kingdom  she  initially
    stayed with her brother's friend but  she  then  moved.   As  there  is
    insufficient evidence to sustain this finding, I conclude that this  is
    an error, but in view of the other findings, it is not material.

37. The judge accepted that there was no evidence before the Tribunal  that
    the Appellant was married, but  was  entitled,  having  considered  the
    evidence as a whole, to conclude that the  Appellant  and  the  child's
    father were in fact related, and her account of meeting a stranger at a
    bus stop and thereafter forming a relationship was a  fabrication,  but
    that some evidence was provided to the registrar to prove that she  and
    the child's father were married, which is why the father  is  named  in
    the birth certificate.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.  The appeal is dismissed.



Anonymity

An anonymity direction  was  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   This  is
maintained by the Upper Tribunal because the Appellant's child is a minor.



Signed        Date: 24th November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.



Signed        Date: 24th November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
