
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42531/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 30 October 2014                         |On 5 November 2014             |
|                                           |                               |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                      Mrs Lelibeth Arcilla Cruickshank
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Yeo, Counsel instructed by Lawrence Lupin
    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, a citizen of the Philippines born on 26 September  1976,
    appeals, with permission, against a decision of Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal Hanbury, who in a determination promulgated  on  4  July  2014
    dismissed her appeal against a decision of the Secretary  of  State  to
    refuse her leave to remain as  the  spouse  of  a  person  present  and
    settled in Britain.

2.   In the notice of refusal dated 2 October 2013 it was pointed  out  that
    the appellant had entered Britain as a visitor and  that  she  did  not
    satisfy the language requirement.  It was accepted that  the  appellant
    was married to Mr Roger Cruickshank  with  whom  she  had  lived  since
    September 2011 and whom she had married on 5 April 2012.

3.   It was considered by the Secretary of State that  the  appellant  could
    not meet the requirements of the Rules  with  regards  to  family  life
    under Article 8 of the  ECHR  and  that  no  exceptional  circumstances
    existed for considering her case outside the Immigration Rules.  It was
    not accepted that the  sponsor  would  not  be  able  to  have  medical
    treatment he might require in the Philippines.

4.   At the hearing the appellant and  her  husband  gave  evidence  stating
    that they had been attacked whilst in the Philippines and  it  was  the
    appellant's evidence that foreigners were not well-treated in the  area
    of the Philippines from which she came.  The sponsor  stated  that  his
    health was not good and that he had been told  that  he  might  require
    open-heart surgery but that he was doing well at the present time.   He
    did not wish to be parted from his new wife.

5.   In paragraphs 13 onwards of the determination the  judge  set  out  his
    conclusions.  He noted the  argument  being  forward  that  there  were
    insurmountable obstacles to the appellant and  the  sponsor  continuing
    their family life outside Britain because of the attack which they  had
    suffered and the  threats  they  had  received.   He  referred  to  the
    judgment of Mr Justice Turner in Zhang [2013] EWHC  891  (Admin)  which
    dealt with the issue of whether or not an applicant for leave to remain
    ought to return to his own country to  apply  for  entry  clearance  as
    opposed to being allowed to "switch" immigration status from within the
    jurisdiction.  He considered  that  the  decision  in  Zhang  could  be
    distinguished.  He accepted that the sponsor  and  the  appellant  were
    exercising private and family life in Britain but said that as  far  as
    the appellant's private life was concerned she  had  been  here  for  a
    relatively short period and she had no children here.  He accepted that
    an incident had occurred in the Philippines but said that  it  was  "an
    incident of theft, such as occurs in many  parts  of  the  world".   He
    accepted that what made it more serious was that that  was  accompanied
    by threats to kill but stated that he did not find it to be established
    that the appellant and the sponsor could not live in  another  part  of
    the Philippines where they would not be known to  the  assailants.   He
    stated that he acknowledged that that would cause  them  some  hardship
    but it would not be an  "insurmountable  obstacle"  to  Mr  Cruickshank
    returning to the Philippines with his wife should they wish to do so.

6.   He therefore concluded that there were no insurmountable  obstacles  to
    the appellant and the sponsor  continuing  their  family  life  in  the
    Philippines and taking  into  account  that  the  appellant  could  not
    qualify under the  Immigration  Rules  he  went  on  to  make  positive
    findings of fact.  He stated:

         "The appellant is not only married to a British  national  but  has
         formed ties with the community in the relatively short period  that
         she has been here.  Many testimonials have been produced by friends
         and members of the church where she worships.  There  is  no  doubt
         the appellant and her husband are a loving couple who  would  adapt
         to married life in the UK.  Mr Cruickshank told the  Tribunal  that
         he has a stable income from his employment.  Additionally there are
         health benefits to them from having a stable family life.   He  has
         had heart problems and they undoubtedly have not been  improved  by
         having to travel to the Philippines where he would not be  able  to
         see his existing specialists and the healthcare system may  not  be
         as good."

7.   The judge added that it was a matter for the appellant and her  husband
    to decide how to structure their lives in the future and whether or not
    Mr Cruickshank would decide to return with this wife to the Philippines
    or simply wait for her to make an application from the  Philippines  to
    join him in the UK as his spouse.  He stated that  this  did  not  fall
    within any exceptional category of case and that the Immigration  Rules
    were drafted to ensure a firm and fair system of  immigration  control.
    Respect for those Rules was important.

8.   At paragraph 20 he said:

         "I find there to be no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  parties
         living in the Philippines if they desire it.  I do not consider the
         period of separation to be material  if  it  is  decided  that  the
         appellant will simply apply for entry clearance from  abroad.   She
         has a good immigration history, is  presumably  secure  financially
         from her husband and has family members in the Philippines to  whom
         she can turn.  Clearly, the appellant and her husband can  stay  in
         touch regularly, indeed, Mr Cruickshank may  feel  he  is  able  to
         visit her if the period of absence is extended."

9.    He  therefore  concluded  that  the  respondent's  decision   was   in
    accordance with the Immigration Rules and that the decision was  not  a
    breach of the appellant's Article 8 rights.

10.  The appellant appealed stating that the judge erred in  asking  whether
    the potentially temporary separation was reasonable.   It  was  claimed
    that that was not a relevant question under  EX.1.   Moreover,  it  was
    claimed that the judge had wrongly applied  an  asylum-style  "internal
    relocation" reasonableness test which is not appropriate for a  British
    citizen expected to relocate abroad  to  a  foreign  country.   It  was
    claimed that the judge had failed to take into account  the  subjective
    consideration of the appellant's and sponsor's fears of a repeat of the
    violent attack which they had suffered.  It was claimed that the  judge
    had failed to give any proper consideration to whether the  case  could
    or should succeed outside the Immigration Rules and that he  had  given
    no lawful reasons for  distinguishing  Chikwamba  [2008]  UKHL  40  and
    Zhang.

11.  Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Davidge on 4 September 2014.

12.  At the hearing of the  appeal  before  me  Mr  Yeo  accepted  that  the
    appellant could not meet the requirements  of  the  Rules  relating  to
    marriage applications  as  the  appellant  had  entered  Britain  as  a
    visitor.  He stated, however, that the position was that the  sponsor's
    income was well in excess of the income requirements and  further  that
    the appellant has obtained the necessary English  language  certificate
    since the date of hearing.  He argued that  it  was  not  necessary  or
    proportionate for the appellant to go back to the Philippines  to  make
    an application.  He referred to the circumstances which had caused  the
    appellant and her husband to leave their home in  the  Philippines  and
    return to Britain.  He asked me to find that it was  not  proportionate
    to expect them to return to the Philippines while the appellant made an
    application to return to Britain.

13.  He asked me to  find  that  this  was  not  a  case  of  the  appellant
    attempting to "jump the queue" nor indeed had she ever been in  Britain
    without  leave  to  remain.   He  referred  to   the   sponsor   having
    grandchildren here and the  difficulties  the  sponsor  would  have  in
    returning to live in the Philippines.  He emphasised that  he  was  not
    arguing that this was a "near miss" case but arguing that the  decision
    was disproportionate.

14.  In reply Mr Nath stated that the conclusions of the  judge  were  fully
    open to him.  This was a balanced determination  where  the  judge  had
    given adequate reasons for his conclusions and  that  he  had  made  no
    error of law in the determination.

Discussion

15.  At the date of hearing the appellant could not  meet  the  requirements
    of the Rules because she had entered Britain as a visitor and  moreover
    she did not have the necessary certificate of proficiency  in  English.
    The question was therefore whether or  not  there  were  insurmountable
    obstacles to the appellant living in the Philippines  or  returning  to
    make an application for leave to enter as a spouse  there.   The  judge
    found that there were not.

16.  Although Mr Yeo asked me to find that the judge had applied a  test  of
    internal relocation which was only suitable in  an  asylum  appeal  the
    reality is  that  the  appellant  and  her  husband  did  live  in  the
    Philippines for two years and they were only unsettled by the  incident
    which occurred shortly before they  left.   There  does  not  seem  any
    reason why they could not choose  to  live  in  a  safer  neighbourhood
    should they wish.  However, the reality is that  it  appears  that  the
    appellant would be likely to make an  application  in  the  Philippines
    which would be successful.

17.  Surprisingly, Mr Yeo was unable to tell me  how  long  the  application
    would take if it were to be made in the Philippines.  I note  that  the
    appellant's mother and her son, who was aged 14  at  the  date  of  the
    application, live in the Philippines.  I do not consider that it  would
    cause undue hardship for her to make an application to enter Britain as
    a spouse from there. It is her own country where she  has  family.  The
    Judge was correct to state that the sponsor could visit  her  there  if
    the application took any  length  of  time  but  there  is  nothing  to
    indicate that a properly made  application  could  not  be  dealt  with
    quickly.

18.    Moreover, I consider that the Judge was  correct  to  point  out  the
    necessity of ensuring fair and firm  immigration  control:   those  who
    enter Britain as visitors are  effectively  asserting  that  they  will
    return to their own countries at the end of  the  visit  and  there  is
    nothing  untoward  about  expecting  them  to  do  so.  There  are   no
    exceptional factors in this case which mean that the rules  should  not
    be followed.  The facts in Zhang were  properly  distinguished  by  the
    Judge - the appellant in that case had lived and worked in Britain with
    leave to do so for many years. Moreover, the  facts  in  Chikwamba  are
    easily distinguished:  The appellant in that case had married here at a
    time when there were no removals to Zimbabwe and it was  accepted  that
    Zimbabwe was inhospitable, particularly towards those who  had  claimed
    asylum abroad. She had a child here  who  could  note  be  expected  to
    travel with her - this  appellant  has  a  child  in  the  Philippines.
    Chikwamba is certainly not authority for stating that the rules  should
    not be applied or respected: of particular relevance is paragraph 34 of
    the speech of Lord Brown of Eaton-under -Heywood where he stated:

        "I do not accept Mr Fordham's submission that a section  65  appeal
        can never be dismissed  on  the  basis  that  the  appellant  ought
        properly to leave the country to apply for entry clearance  abroad.
        As Ms Carss-Fisk QC points out, that is not to deny  the  appellant
        his or her right to an in-country right of  appeal  but  rather  to
        dispose of it in a manner intended to promote immigration control."

18.  In all I consider that the conclusions of the judge were fully open  to
    him on the evidence before him and that he made no error of law in  his
    decision.

19.  I therefore find that his decision dismissing this appeal shall  stand.








Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy           3 November 2014

