
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/42669/2013
                                                               IA/42670/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28 July 2014                               |On 18 August 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                                Mr Yan Kit Ko
                           Mrs Brenda Su Phin Sek
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms R Moffatt, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1.  This  is  an  appeal  brought  by  Mr  Ko  and  Mrs  Sek  against  the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hawden-Beal  promulgated  on
    12 May 2014 which refused their Article 8 ECHR appeals.

 2. Ms Moffatt and Ms Everett put their cases to me clearly and  succinctly
    and I was grateful to them both for their assistance.

 3. It was common ground before me that Judge Hawden-Beal erred in applying
    the new Immigration Rules in  her  consideration  of  Article  8.   The
    application made by the appellants predated 9 July 2012 and, therefore,
    following the case of Edgehill  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2014] EWCA Civ 402, the respondent conceded in the Rule  24
    letter that an error arose.

 4. However, the respondent did not concede that this meant that a material
    error arose.   The  respondent's  position  was  that  the  appellants'
    situation was akin to that of  appellant  HB  in  Edgehill  as  a  full
    Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 and Huang [2007]  UKHL  11  assessment  of  their
    circumstances under Article 8 could still not have led  to  the  appeal
    being allowed.

 5. It was maintained for the appellants that an error of  law  must  arise
    where a "new" Article 8  assessment  is  conducted  in  line  with  the
    current case law, reference being made in particular to Gulshan  [2013]
    UKUT 640.  A "Gulshan" assessment increased the importance to be placed
    on the public interest, on a failure to meet the Immigration Rules  and
    created a higher "exceptionality" or "compelling  circumstances"  test.
    Where that was so, a material error inevitably arose if, as  here,  the
    appellants were entitled to "old" pre-9/7/12 Article 8 assessment.

 6. Further, submitted Ms Moffatt, it must be the case  that  there  was  a
    likelihood  of  an  Immigration  Judge  finding  in  favour  of   these
    appellants  in  a  full  Razgar  assessment.   There  were  significant
    features in their case.  Although it was accepted that they had not had
    leave to remain since 2004 the  couple  had  acted  in  good  faith  in
    reliance on what lawyers had told them about  their  right  to  British
    nationality where the husband was a British overseas  citizen  who  had
    renounced his Malaysian nationality.  They had clearly been entitled to
    hold such a belief where the  first  appellant's  brother  was  granted
    British citizenship in similar circumstances.

 7. There was a further  material  issue  in  that  the  first  appellant's
    private life, established since 2001, had not been  assessed  by  Judge
    Hawden-Beal.  The failure to assess that period of 13 years'  residence
    had to be a material matter.

 8. It was maintained for the appellants that these matters, in addition to
    the accepted difficulties  that  they  would  face  in  re-establishing
    themselves in Malaysia where the husband  was  no  longer  a  Malaysian
    citizen, were more than capable of  showing  that  the  Article  appeal
    could be allowed.

 9. I gave careful thought to the submissions for the appellants, conscious
    of the importance of this matter for them and accepting, as I do,  that
    they were not seeking to circumvent the Immigration Rules at  any  time
    and were genuine in their  belief  that  the  first  appellant  had  an
    opportunity to obtain British citizenship.

10. It remains the case that I did not find that it could be argued that  a
    full  "old"  or  Razgar  Article  8  assessment  would  have  made  any
    difference to the outcome of this appeal.

11. The  second  appellant  is  still  a  Malaysian  national.   The  first
    appellant can return with her as a spouse or use  other  provisions  of
    Malaysian immigration law to return.

12. I accept the evidence of the second  appellant  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that she would have to work to support the family initially as
    her husband, whilst he remained a non-Malaysian  national,  would  find
    difficulty in doing so.

13. The second appellant's evidence, set out at [18]  of  the  decision  of
    Judge Hawden-Beal, was also  that  her  parents  and  siblings  are  in
    Malaysia and that she speaks to them on  the  telephone.   Her  parents
    manage financially.  She also gave evidence that the first  appellant's
    family remain in Malaysia.  It is  therefore  not  the  case  that  the
    second appellant would be  entirely  responsible  for  all  aspects  of
    supporting the family.  Both appellants have  a  network  of  immediate
    family members in Malaysia from whom  they  can  expect  some  support.
    Further, both appellants have worked in the UK and have work experience
    and skills that could be put to use on their return in Malaysia, albeit
    the first appellant may have to wait some time to be able to do so.

14. I accept that it would take some time for the first appellant to regain
    his Malaysian nationality.  I accept that both appellants have been  in
    the UK for a significant amount of time, the first appellant since 2001
    and the second appellant since 2002. They are entitled  to  have  those
    periods of residence weighed in their favour as, although much of  that
    time was spent here illegally, I have accepted above that this was  not
    because they deliberately sought to evade or manipulate the immigration
    system but because they were pursuing what  they  thought  was  a  good
    claim for the first appellant to be granted British citizenship.

15. It remains the case that both appellants lived far longer  and  by  far
    the majority of their lives in Malaysia, the first appellant  until  he
    was 23 and the second appellant until she was 24.  The second appellant
    also gave evidence that she had worked in  administration  in  Malaysia
    prior to coming to the UK. As above, they have family  networks  there.
    They can be expected to establish private lives at least the equivalent
    of those they have in the UK relatively quickly  on  return,  the  only
    potential problem being the initial difficulty of the  first  appellant
    in finding work.

16. I can see why the appellants may well feel aggrieved that  having  been
    told  that  the  first  appellant  would  be  able  to  obtain  British
    citizenship by lawyers, in the end he was not able to do  so  and  they
    are now expected to return to Malaysia. Their feeling of unfairness can
    only be increased by the fact that the appellants' brother  did  manage
    to obtain British citizenship at an earlier time.  Be that as  it  may,
    and quite rightly not argued by Ms Moffatt, the appellants did not have
    a legitimate expectation of British citizenship at any time.  They were
    only ever here  with  limited  leave,  at  best.  Those  matters,  when
    combined with their much  longer  and  more  established  histories  in
    Malaysia and their families being there, made it clear to me that there
    was no likelihood that their Article 8 appeal,  when  assessed  on  any
    basis or against any legal matrix, could have succeeded.   I  therefore
    did not find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal disclosed  an
    error on a point of law.



Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
    point of law and shall stand.

Signed:[pic]                        Date: 18 August 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
