
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42948/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 17th December 2014                           |On 8th January 2015        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                          mr MOMODOU MALICK WILLIAM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Cole, Counsel, instructed by Westkin Associates
For the Respondent:    Miss J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Gambia who application  to be allowed to
    remain here under Article 8 ECHR was dismissed in  a  determination  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Kaler promulgated  on  26th  September  2014.
    Grounds of application were made. Permission to appeal was  granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Osborne who noted :-

         "The judge appears to have put considerable weight  upon  the  fact
         that there was no evidence from the children nor were they  present
         at the hearing.  This was despite the fact that this  was  contrary
         to the Appellant's own evidence and a  letter  from  his  estranged
         wife (but with whom he continues to live) which points to it  being
         in the interests of the welfare of the children for the  father  to
         remain - this is recorded at paragraph 17 of the determination."

 2. Thus the matter came before me on the above date.

 3. It is fair to say that much of the grounds of application contend  that
    the Appellant received a lack of proper legal advice  from  those  then
    acting for him resulting in the fact that his children did  not  attend
    the hearing or provide any written evidence for the judge to  consider.
    As it transpires there are emails from his former solicitors  disputing
    this but as I pointed out to the  parties  the  issue  of  whether  the
    solicitors dealt with the matter appropriately is not  one  for  me  to
    determine.  The issue for the Tribunal is to ascertain whether  or  not
    the judge made an error in law.

 4. For the Appellant Mr Cole relied on  his  skeleton  argument.   It  was
    important to note that the Appellant's application  for  further  leave
    was made in 2010 and was granted until  30th  September  2012  after  a
    successful appeal.  The appeal was granted on Article 8  based  on  the
    relationship between the applicant and his children and at  the  First-
    tier Tribunal  both  parties  agreed  that  this  determination  was  a
    starting point in the judge's consideration following Devaseelan [2002]
    UKIAT 00702.

 5. The first ground of application was  that  the  judge's  findings  that
    there  had  been  a  deterioration  in  the  relationship  between  the
    applicant and his children, in the absence of evidence on  this  point,
    amounted to an error in law.  This finding was despite the  applicant's
    own evidence and a letter from his estranged wife which pointed towards
    it being in the interest of the welfare of the children for the  father
    to remain.  The judge's conclusions  were  further  undermined  by  her
    finding that the parties, namely both parents and children still  lived
    at the same address.  There was no evidence from the  applicant's  wife
    to the effect that his relationship with his children had deteriorated.
     In all the circumstances the judge's finding that  there  had  been  a
    fundamental change in the relationship between  the  two  children  and
    their father with whom they live, in  the  absence  of  live  evidence,
    amounted to an error in law. Furthermore, it amounted to a  failure  to
    give proper reasons  given  the  documentary  evidence  of  a  parental
    relationship submitted with the application.

 6. It was also said that in terms of section 117B  of  the  2002  Act  the
    judge did not consider section 117B(6) which stated  that  someone  who
    was not liable to deportation the public interest did not  require  the
    person's removal  where  that  person  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with a qualifying  child  and  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the  United  Kingdom.   Further
    grounds are put forward.

 7. Before me Mr Cole amplified on his submissions.  The starting point was
    that there had been a strong relationship with the children in 2010. It
    was important to note that they still lived at the same address.  There
    was a note from  the  school  that  there  was  no  evidence  that  the
    Appellant did not care  for  the  children.  This  was  very  much  the
    evidence given by the Appellant.

 8. In all the circumstances I was asked to  set  the  decision  aside  and
    remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. For the Home Office Miss Isherwood said  that  there  was  no  material
    error in law. The problem for the judge was a lack of evidence.  It was
    the Appellant's responsibility to ensure that  his  witnesses  attended
    the Tribunal.  The judge was correct to say that she did not  have  any
    up-to-date  evidence  from  the  Appellant's   children   as   to   the
    relationship with their father (paragraph 17).  She noted that  neither
    child attended the hearing and there was no current statement from them
    (paragraph 18).  She had gone on to consider the best interests of  the
    child as a primary consideration.  I was invited to find that there was
    no error in law and that the decision should stand.

Conclusions

10. The starting point for the judge was the  previous  determination  from
    Judge Cockerill who found that the Appellant enjoyed family  life  with
    his children and that he enjoyed a close  and  warm  relationship  with
    them and  provided  a  great  deal  of  practical  support  with  their
    education. The judge noted that there was a lacuna in the  evidence  in
    that neither of the children attended the Tribunal or  offered  written
    evidence about their relationship with their father.

11. However it seems to me it was important for the judge to  look  at  the
    whole circumstances of the family and I have concluded that she did not
    do so.  She found that the relationship  the  Appellant  had  with  his
    children was not as close now as it had been in 2010  but  as  Mr  Cole
    pointed out, there was no evidence which justified such a finding.   It
    goes against the findings made in 2010 and it  goes  against  what  the
    Appellant says in his statement at paragraph 16 when  he  indicates  he
    has a strong bond with his children.  If the judge was going to make  a
    finding that the bond with the children was not  as  close  as  it  had
    been, then she was bound to take  into  account  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant which stated to the contrary and not to take account of  that
    evidence amounts to a material error in law.  If any inference  was  to
    be taken from the fact that the family was still living together  then,
    allied to the supportive letter from the Appellant's wife, it seems  to
    me that a reasonable  inference  was  that  the  Appellant  did  indeed
    continue to have a strong bond with his children.

12. The failure by the judge to properly consider the evidence  before  her
    amounted to a material error in law. As a result it is necessary to set
    the decision aside  and  for  this  appeal  to  be  heard  afresh.  The
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal is therefore set aside in  its
    entirety.  No findings of the First-tier Tribunal are to stand.   Under
    section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice Statement  7.2  the
    nature and extent of judicial fact finding necessary for  the  decision
    to be remade is such that it is appropriate to remit the  case  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

13. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

14. I set aside the decision.

15. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.






Signed                              Date 6th January 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald


