
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/42685/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 15 December 2015                  |On 28 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

                                ABDUL GHAFFAR
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     RESPONDENT FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr s Tariq, West London Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is an appeal brought by the Appellant  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Judge  Woodcraft  dated  3  July  2015.  The  Appellant  had
    appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated 14  October  2014
    refusing to issue him with a residence card, under Regulation 17(1)  of
    The Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006  ('the  EEA
    Regs').   The Appellant had sought such a residence card on  the  basis
    of his marriage to Miss Slater, his wife, who is an Irish national.

2.    The application for a residence card was refused  but  the  Respondent
    agreed to reconsider that application, resulting in an  interview  with
    the Respondent on 9 September 2014 at  which  the  Appellant  and  Miss
    Slater were both interviewed separately.

3.    In the decision letter of 14 October 2014  the  Respondent  held  that
    the  marriage  between  the  Appellant  and  Miss  Slater  was  one  of
    convenience. The letter contains a table containing  165  questions  in
    typed form, indicating the question asked and  the  response  given  by
    both the sponsor and the Appellant.

4.    The Respondent asserted, having highlighted a number  of  the  answers
    set out in that table, that on the basis of discrepancies disclosed  in
    those answers the Appellant's application was  to  be  refused  on  the
    basis that his marriage was one of convenience.

5.    A notice of appeal was filed against that  decision,  that  notice  of
    appeal being completed by West London Solicitors on  23  October  2014.
    That firm of solicitors continues to act for the Appellant up until the
    present time.

6.    The appeal was first listed for hearing before a Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal on 14 May 2015.  On that occasion Mr  Tariq  who  appears
    before me today appeared before the judge.  I quote from  paragraph  10
    of the later determination of 3 July of  Judge  Woodcraft  as  to  what
    happened on that occasion.

         "10.     On 5 February 2015 the Tribunal sent  notice  out  to  the
             Appellant and his solicitors that the appeal would be heard on
             Thursday 14 May 2015.  On that date the matter  was  adjourned
             because of a concern as to whether the Respondent had supplied
             a complete transcript of the interviews with the Appellant and
             sponsor (in fact it appeared that the Respondent had done that
             with the refusal letter).  The Tribunal was also informed that
             the Sponsor had left the United Kingdom on 7 May 2015, it  was
             said because there was a family crisis as the sponsor's mother
             was ill.  Evidence to confirm would be  provided  at  a  later
             stage should it be required.   It  was  anticipated  that  the
             sponsor would return to the United Kingdom  within  ten  days.
             The judge adjourned  the  hearing  with  directions  that  the
             Respondent was to file  and  serve  the  interview  notes  and
             comments plus the full transcript of the interviews  with  the
             Appellant and his spouse ('if one exists')  by  4  June  2015.
             There was no Appellant's bundle  and  no  statement  from  the
             Appellant or sponsor.  The judge  further  directed  that  the
             Appellant was to file and serve his bundle no later than seven
             days before the next hearing."

7.    I have seen the directions, sent out on 28 May, to that  effect.   The
    Respondent in fact provided the Appellant with a copy of the  interview
    comments on 15 May; I have seen a fax from Feltham Presenting  Officers
    Unit to West London Solicitors  of  that  date  providing  a  two  page
    document entitled "Interview summary sheet".  The  direction  had  also
    required the Respondent provide to the Appellant a full  transcript  of
    the marriage interview. On the 4 June 2015 a further fax  was  provided
    to those acting for the Appellant, with a transcript.

8.    I pause to  note  that  when  considering  the  original  Respondent's
    bundle in this matter there are a number of annexes marked A-L  in  the
    bundle. That bundle was prepared on 17 December 2014 and which Mr Tariq
    confirms to me today was received by his firm  in  December  2014.   At
    Annex G of that bundle there appears an  interview  record  sheet.  The
    interview record sheet which was faxed to West London Solicitors  on  4
    June 2015 is the same record sheet which appears  at  Annex  G  of  the
    Respondent's bundle which had been in the  possession  of  West  London
    Solicitors since December 2014.  I also note that the  decision  letter
    itself dated 14 October 2014 sets out the same 165 questions  in  their
    entirety compared with the interview record sheet at  Annex  G  of  the
    Respondent's bundle which again West London Solicitors had had in their
    possession since December 2014.

9.    The matter was relisted for hearing before Judge Woodcraft  at  Hatton
    Cross Hearing Centre on 19 June 2015.  The judge records as follows  as
    regards the procedure before him on that occasion.

         "11.     Subsequently on 15 June 2015  the  Tribunal  received  the
             Appellant's bundle which I have summarised above.  As a result
             of the adjournment the matter came before me on 19  June  2015
             (just over five weeks later) when there was no  representation
             on the part of the Respondent.  The Appellant's representative
             produced statements of the Appellant and two individuals,  Mrs
             McGary and Mrs Ruth and a statement of the  sponsor  dated  16
             June 2015 declared before a solicitor at a firm called Trayers
             & Company.  These were not in the Appellant's bundle.

         12.      Application was made by the Appellant's solicitor  for  an
             adjournment of the hearing on the grounds that the sponsor had
             still not returned from Ireland, the very brief statement from
             the sponsor said that the sponsor's mother was terminally  ill
             and she was  unfortunately  unable  to  attend  the  Tribunal.
             There was no medical evidence  supplied  in  support  of  this
             (despite the submission on the earlier occasion that  evidence
             in confirmation of the sponsor's absence would  be  provided).
             The Appellant's solicitor was unable to help me with  why  the
             statement of the sponsor had not been taken  earlier  than  16
             June 2015 and why it did not deal with the sponsor's  comments
             on the  claimed  discrepancies  between  the  answers  of  the
             Appellant and sponsor.  This was despite the fact that all 165
             questions had been supplied with the refusal letter which  had
             been in the Respondent's bundle which  had  been  in  December
             2014."

10.   Judge Woodcraft considered his position and decided as follows:

         "13.     I considered the application for  an  adjournment  in  the
             light of the Tribunal's jurisprudence that the test of whether
             to adjourn or not is one of fairness.  This was not the  first
             application for an adjournment of this case on  the  basis  of
             the Appellant's absence. It had  been  said  before  that  she
             would be absent for seven to ten days and that was  over  five
             weeks ago. At the very latest an explanation should have  been
             proffered as to why the sponsor's presence was still  required
             in Ireland over a month after she had returned there and  some
             information  should  have  been   proffered  as  to  what  the
             mother's  condition  was.   When  I  queried  this  with   the
             Appellant's solicitor he replied that he did not know. In  the
             absence of such evidence I did not consider that it  was  fair
             and reasonable to adjourn the case any further  and  indicated
             that the matter would proceed which it did."

11.   What the judge then did was to  proceed  to  hear  evidence  from  the
    Appellant personally, noting that  the  Appellant's  witness  statement
    dated 18 June 2015 was one page only and did not  address  the  claimed
    discrepancies within the interview of 9 September 2014.  The judge came
    to the conclusion that there were significant discrepancies between the
    answers of the Appellant and the sponsor and that the sponsor  had  not
    been present in order to assist the  Appellant  in  responding  to  the
    concerns of the Respondent.  The judge held that there was no  adequate
    reason for the sponsor to be absent from the hearing  and  consequently
    upheld the decision of the Respondent that  the  marriage  was  one  of
    convenience and held that the Appellant was not entitled to  be  issued
    with  a residence card.

12.   The decision of the judge has been appealed by West London  Solicitors
    in grounds of  appeal  dated  16  July  2015.   In  those  grounds  the
    principal complaint is that the judge proceeded unfairly in failing  to
    adjourn the appeal on 19  June  2015.   The  grounds  assert  that  the
    preparation of the appeal had been inhibited by the late disclosure  by
    the Respondent of the interview comments on 15  May  2015  and  by  the
    interview record sheet on 4 June 2015.  The grounds  also  assert  that
    there had been an adequate reason advanced by the sponsor for her  non-
    attendance at the hearing.

13.   I find that, notwithstanding the decision of the judge on 15 May  2015
    to adjourn the hearing, the Appellant's representatives had been  in  a
    position to commence preparation of this appeal  since  December  2014.
    They had in their possession at that time a copy at  Annexe  G  of  the
    Respondent's bundle of the 165  question  interview,  the  entirety  of
    which was also transposed into the decision letter itself.

14.   It has been argued before the Tribunal today  that  certain  questions
    in that interview transcript gave rise to the suggestion that there may
    have been another separate interview transcript which  the  Appellant's
    representative would need  in  order  to  adequately  prepare  for  the
    hearing. Examples of such questions were said to  include  question  8,
    which asked "Do you have any family living  in  Ireland  or  any  other
    countries?"  The answer recorded for the spouse is "In Ireland  mother,
    father, two brothers and four sisters." The  answer  recorded  for  the
    Appellant is "her father, mother, 2 brothers and 4 sisters."

15.   Another example of a question  said  to  suggest  that  there  may  be
    another transcript not yet disclosed was question 9, which asked  "What
    do your parents do for a living?" The answer recorded for  the  sponsor
    was "Ma is a housewife and da works for  the  council.  He  cleans  the
    houses and stuff like that." The answer recorded for the Appellant  was
    "Her father is like works for council - I have never seen him  but  she
    told me that he works for the council. Not sure about her mother."

16.   Question 14 was also brought to my attention  which  asked  "Who  paid
    for you to come to England?"  The answer recorded for the  sponsor  was
    "Myself. I was on social welfare over there." The answer  recorded  for
    the Appellant was "Her  parents  or  something  like  that.   We  never
    discuss."

17.   On behalf of the Appellant Mr Tariq suggests that  if  the  very  same
    question had been posed to each individual then the Appellant would not
    have replied to those questions giving details of his wife's parents or
    details as to the reason why his wife had come to England.   Rather  if
    the identical question had been posed to both of  them  then  he  would
    have spoken of his own parents and of the reasons why he  had  come  to
    England. That, it  was  argued,  suggested  that  there  may  be  other
    questions put, but not yet disclosed.

18.   I reject that proposition on the basis that  it  is  manifestly  clear
    from questions 8, 9 and 14 that it must have been  the  case  that  the
    question was altered at the relevant points and that the Appellant  was
    asked about his wife's parents and his wife's  reasons  for  coming  to
    England.   There  is  no  justification  that  I  can  see  for  anyone
    reasonably suspecting that a separate transcript was likely to exist.

19.   I am conscious of the fact that the judge did adjourn  the  matter  on
    15 May and gave directions that a full transcript be provided but I  am
    also conscious of the fact that the way that that direction was phrased
    was as follows:

         "Directions

         1. The Respondent  to  file  and  serve  the  interview  notes  and
             comments plus the full transcript of the  interview  with  the
             Appellant and his spouse (if one exists) by 4 June 2015.

         2. The Appellant to file and serve his bundle by no  later  than  7
             days before the next hearing."

20.   There was of course the other reason recorded by the judge on  15  May
    before the adjournment which was the absence from the United Kingdom of
    the Appellant's wife.  It seems to me that the necessity of obtaining a
    full transcript of the interview (if one existed) was not  the  primary
    reason for the adjournment of the appeal on 15 May  2015.   Rather  the
    adjournment took place because of the desire to  obtain  any  interview
    comments and to facilitate the attendance at court of  the  Appellant's
    wife.

21.   I conclude therefore that the Appellant's  representatives  could  and
    should have commenced their preparation of this appeal  long  ago.  The
    Appellant's suggestion that he was not in a position  to  commence  his
    preparation for the appeal prior to receiving the interview comments on
    15 May 2015 is totally unpersuasive.

22.   I therefore agree with Judge Woodcraft in his observations that  there
    seemed to  be  little  reason  for  the  absence  of  detailed  witness
    statements from either the Appellant or his wife, prepared long ago and
    in good time for the hearing of 19 June 2015, irrespective of the  fact
    that the Appellant's wife had travelled  to  Ireland  to  be  with  her
    mother shortly before the hearing of 15 May 2015.

23.   The state of the evidence contained in the witness  statements  before
    Judge Woodcraft was still lacking, particularly from the Appellant.  It
    seems to me that there was no adequate reason offered  as  to  why  the
    Appellant himself, who remained present in the  United  Kingdom,  could
    not have given instructions to  those  representing  him,  and  that  a
    detailed witness statement from the Appellant addressing  the  concerns
    of the Respondent could not have been prepared in good time before  the
    hearing of 19 June 2015.

24.   I find that the decision of the judge to proceed with the  hearing  on
    19 June 2015 was not procedurally unfair  and  does  not  disclose  any
    material  error  of  law.   There  is  no  challenge,  aside  from  the
    procedural challenge,  as  to  the  reasoning  of  the  judge  and  his
    conclusion that the marriage between the Appellant and the sponsor  was
    one of convenience.

Notice of Decision

25.   I therefore find that the making of the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal dated 3 July 2015 did not include the making of  any  material
    error of law.  I uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  I
    dismiss the Appellant's appeal.


Signed:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan

Dated: 27.1.16
