
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42783/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                      |             Decision & Reasons      |
|                                         |Promulgated                          |
|On 18th November 2015                    |             On 11th December 2015   |
|                                         |                                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY

                                   Between

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                            Mr steven nana nimako
                       (anonymity direction Not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr V Onipede


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer to the Appellant in this appeal to the Upper Tribunal  as
    the Secretary of State and the Respondent  as  the  Claimant.   On  3rd
    October 2014 the Secretary of State took a decision refusing  to  issue
    the Claimant with a residence card as  confirmation  of  his  right  to
    reside in the United Kingdom.  In a determination promulgated  on  26th
    February 2015, the First-tier Tribunal allowed  the  Claimant's  appeal
    against that decision.  Thereafter, the Secretary of State was  granted
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal and, after a  hearing  which
    took place on 15th October 2015, I set aside the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal.  The  reasons  for  my  doing  so  are  contained  in  a
    determination promulgated on 28th  October  2015  but,  essentially,  I
    concluded that the First-tier Tribunal had failed to consider a  number
    of material matters which it was obliged to  consider  before  deciding
    whether or not the requirements of Regulation  10  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006, as amended,  had  been  met.
    Accordingly, the appeal came before me by  way  of  what  is  sometimes
    referred to as a continuance hearing, so that the decision could be re-
    made.  At that hearing I heard oral  evidence  from  the  Claimant  and
    received oral submissions from both representatives.

 2. The Claimant's account was to the effect that he  had  validly  married
    one Centia Julceleia Cardosa Pereira De Miranda (Ms Miranda), by way of
    a customary proxy marriage in 2007.   Ms  Miranda  was  said  to  be  a
    Portuguese national who had been exercising treaty rights  in  the  UK.
    His initial application for a residence card, based  upon  the  claimed
    marriage, was successful and one was issued  to  him  which  was  valid
    until 22nd January 2014.  On 16th January 2014 he applied for a further
    residence card on the basis of retained rights as a former spouse.   He
    said, pursuant to that application, that he and  Ms  Miranda  were  now
    divorced but he claimed  to  meet  the  requirements  contained  within
    Regulation 10.

 3. The Respondent's position was that, although she had previously  issued
    a residence card (as noted above), there  had  not,  in  fact,  been  a
    marriage at all.  She relied, for the  purposes  of  the  remaking  the
    decision, upon  a  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Turquet) promulgated on 24th January 2013, but to  which  the  Claimant
    himself was not a party, indicating that  Ms  Miranda  had  never  been
    married to the Claimant and had,  in  fact,  validly  married  a  third
    person.  Further, there was no evidence  to  suggest  that  even  if  a
    marriage had taken place in Ghana it was  recognised  under  Portuguese
    law.  It had also been said that the Claimant had failed to  show  that
    Ms Miranda was a qualified person on the  termination  of  the  claimed
    marriage.

 4. It is fair to say that the major point of argument before  me  revolved
    around the question  of  whether  there  had  been  a  customary  proxy
    marriage between the two persons  at  all.   I  have  concluded,  after
    carefully considering all of the documentation which  has  been  placed
    before  me,  the  oral  evidence  and  the  submissions  of   the   two
    representatives, that the Claimant has failed to  show  that  any  such
    marriage ever took place.

 5. The Claimant, in this context, has consistently  said  that  there  was
    such a marriage.  I give him some credit for his consistency as to that
    central issue.  He has relied upon some documentary evidence  which  he
    says shows that such a marriage did take place in Ghana and that  there
    was a subsequent customary divorce which, again, took place  in  Ghana.
    I have had regard to those documents and have considered whether I  can
    place reliance upon them in light of what has been  stated  in  Tanveer
    Ahmed 2002 UKIAT 439.  I have also taken into account the fact that the
    Claimant has produced some documentation said to relate to  Ms  Miranda
    albeit that she told Judge Turquet that some of  her  ID  documentation
    had, at one point, been lost or stolen.

 6. I set out my reasons for my adverse credibility conclusion below.

 7. The Claimant gave oral evidence to the effect that he first entered the
    UK as a visitor.  He told me that he had then returned  to  Ghana.   He
    told me that he had then come back to the UK as a working holidaymaker.
     However, he accepted that after his leave as  a  working  holidaymaker
    had expired, he subsequently overstayed.  When asked why he had done so
    he said that it was because he had, by then, commenced his relationship
    with Ms Miranda and did not wish to leave her.

 8. It is clear to me that the Claimant, on the basis of his own  evidence,
    took a deliberate decision to remain in the UK unlawfully  rather  than
    to return to his home country and make any application to return  which
    might  have  been  appropriate.   That  is  an  indication  and  indeed
    acceptance of past dishonesty on  his  part.   It  does  not  mean,  of
    itself, that he is seeking  to  mislead  about  other  matters  but  it
    certainly indicates that he is capable of dishonesty.

 9. The Claimant was asked, in cross-examination before me, as to why if he
    and Ms Miranda had been  in  a  genuine  relationship  which  had  been
    conducted in the UK, they had not simply married in the UK rather  than
    having a customary proxy marriage in Ghana.   He  made  it  clear  that
    neither of them had, in fact, travelled to Ghana but said that they had
    been "represented by family".  He said that they had not married in the
    UK because "we believed in customary marriages in  Ghana".   I  do  not
    find that to be an adequate explanation.  Ms Miranda, on the Claimant's
    own evidence, is not a  national  of  Ghana.   She  had  been  born  in
    Mozambique and even according to the  Claimant  "has  no  relatives  in
    Ghana" though he did add that she has a cousin who is married to a  man
    from Ghana.  He said that Ms  Miranda  had  been  "just  interested  in
    getting married" and was not concerned as to where the  marriage  would
    take place.  I have to say I find that  evidence  to  be  unconvincing.
    The Claimant was not able to properly explain why Ms Miranda might have
    wanted a customary proxy marriage in Ghana given her lack  of  ties  to
    that country and its  traditions  and  customs  and  did  not  properly
    explain why there had not been a marriage in the  UK  or,  perhaps,  in
    Portugal.

10. The Claimant has provided very little by way of background detail about
    the  commencement  of  the  relationship,  its  development   and   its
    subsequent  break  up.   He  was  well  aware  of  the  fact  that  the
    genuineness of the claimed relationship  was  in  issue  when  he  gave
    evidence before me.  Nevertheless, he did not  provide  any  additional
    witness statement for the purposes  of  the  final  hearing  before  me
    dealing with the detail of such matters, he provided only a very  brief
    witness statement for the purposes of his appeal before the  First-tier
    Tribunal and he did not provide any  significant  detailed  information
    about such matters  in  his  evidence-in-chief.   It  would  have  been
    reasonable to expect more detail and, in light of that, I  do  conclude
    that the lack of detail is a matter which causes some further damage to
    his credibility.

11. Further, the Claimant has provided very little evidence to suggest that
    he and Ms Miranda did ever live together.  His claim is that  they  did
    so, after the marriage, until a time in 2011 when the relationship  got
    into difficulties.  The only documentation  he  did  provide,  for  the
    purposes of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, was  a  written
    tenancy agreement naming both of  them.   I  do  not  think  that  that
    document, in isolation, carries much force in demonstrating  that  they
    did ever live together or have a genuine  relationship.   Further,  one
    would have expected some other documentation evidencing cohabitation to
    have been available and to have been produced.  That might have been in
    the form of, for example, joint bank statements or joint utility bills.
     No documentation of that sort  has  been  provided.   The  failure  to
    provide further documentation as to cohabitation points to the two  not
    having cohabited.

12. Finally, there is the determination of Judge Turquet.  Mr Richards  did
    not contend, bearing in mind that the Claimant was not a party  to  the
    proceedings, that I was bound by the findings and conclusions  set  out
    in that determination which were to the  effect  that  Ms  Miranda  had
    never been in a relationship with or married to the Claimant.  However,
    he did stress that it was apparent, from  the  determination,  that  Ms
    Miranda had been prepared to give evidence to him, and subject  herself
    to cross-examination, about all of that.  He urged me  to  accord  some
    weight to her preparedness to do so.  I agree it is appropriate  to  do
    that and it seems  to  me  that  this  is,  therefore,  another  factor
    weighing against the Claimant with respect to the  credibility  of  his
    claims.

13. I have born in mind the points made in  the  Claimant's  favour  by  Mr
    Onipede.  However, much of that amounted to assertion that the Claimant
    had been "very credible" and that  Ms  Miranda  is  "a  very  dishonest
    person".  Those assertions, of themselves, do  not  take  matters  very
    much further in my view.  Mr Onipede made the point that it was  up  to
    the parties where they chose to marry and  that  it  should  not  count
    against them that they had decided to have a customary  proxy  marriage
    in Ghana.  I accept Mr Onipede's point as far as it goes that a  couple
    are free to marry howsoever they wish.  My point of concern, though, is
    that  there  has  been  no  proper  explanation,  against  the  factual
    background set out above, as to why the  couple  would  choose  to  and
    particularly why Ms Miranda would choose  to  have  a  customary  proxy
    marriage in Ghana when, from  her  point  of  view,  there  were  other
    obvious alternatives such as a marriage in the UK or in  Portugal.   Mr
    Onipede said that the Claimant had been able to provide some employment
    documentation which appeared to relate to Ms Miranda and, indeed, there
    are some wage slips and form P60s.  However, there is no evidence  from
    HMRC regarding her claimed employment as said to be evidenced by  those
    documents and I am not able to rely upon the documents provided by  the
    Claimant, in light of Tanveer Ahmed, bearing in mind my general view as
    to his credibility.

14. In light of all of the above, therefore, I have reached a conclusion to
    the effect that the Claimant has failed to show he has  had  a  genuine
    relationship with or any form of marriage to Ms Miranda.  I  accept  Mr
    Richard's submissions in that regard.  Clearly, in  the  face  of  that
    conclusion, the Claimant has failed to show that he can  bring  himself
    within the 2006 Regulations.

15. In remaking the decision, therefore, I dismiss  the  Claimant's  appeal
    against the decision of 3rd  October  2014  refusing  to  issue  him  a
    residence card as confirmation of his right to  reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

Conclusions

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside.

In remaking the  decision  I  dismiss  the  Claimant's  appeal  against  the
Secretary of State's decision of 3rd October 2014.

I make no anonymity direction.



Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the Claimant's appeal I make no fee award.



Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway
