
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
IA/42136/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 26 November 2014                      |On 3 December 2014        |
|                                         |                          |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL



                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MS MORIOM KHATUN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms E Greenwood, Counsel
      (instructed by Nicholas Solicitors )


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant (the Secretary of State) appealed with  permission
           granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Colyer on 16  October  2014
           against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Beach who
           had allowed the Respondent's appeal on Article  8  ECHR  grounds
           only against the Appellant's decisions dated 7  August  2013  to
           refuse to grant the Respondent leave to remain  as  a  dependant
           relative and to remove her.  The determination  was  promulgated
           on 3 September 2014.


      2.    The Respondent is a national of Bangladesh, born on  10  January
           1946.  She had entered the United Kingdom as  a  visitor  on  18
           January 2011, with leave to enter valid until 18 July 2011.   On
           16 June 2011 the Respondent made  her  application  for  further
           leave to remain, which was refused.  There was no  appeal.   The
           Respondent made further representations on 12 July 2012.


      3.    Judge Beach found that the Respondent was  unable  to  meet  the
           requirements of Appendix FM (i.e., section EC-DR)  or  paragraph
           276ADE.  The judge held that there was insufficient evidence  to
           show that the medical treatment the Respondent received  in  the
           United Kingdom was not available in Bangladesh.  The judge found
           that return to Bangladesh  would  not  result  in  a  breach  of
           Article  3  ECHR.   The  judge  expressed  concern   about   the
           reliability of the evidence offered on the Respondent's  behalf.
           The judge found  that  the  situation  in  Bangladesh  had  been
           exaggerated.   The  judge  described  the  appeal   as   "finely
           balanced" and concluded that there was a real risk that  removal
           would affect the Respondent's existing depression to the  extent
           of interfering with her physical and moral integrity,  amounting
           to a breach of Article 8 ECHR.


      4.    Permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  as  sought  by  the
           Appellant was granted by Judge Colyer because he considered that
           it was arguable that the judge had failed to apply sections 117A-
           D of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  when
           considering  the  public   interest   in   the   proportionality
           assessment.  Permission was also been sought as to  the  judge's
           reasoning generally.  That was not expressly refused.


      5.    Standard directions were made by the Upper Tribunal,  indicating
           that the appeal would be reheard immediately in the event that a
           material error of law were found.    Despite that direction,  no
           interpreter had been booked so that a rehearing that  day  would
           have created obvious difficulties.






      Submissions - error of law


      6.    Mr Bramble for the Secretary of State relied on the  grounds  of
           onwards appeal and submitted that this was a clear case of legal
           error in relation to the Article 8 ECHR claim, as the  grant  of
           permission to appeal  indicated.   Section  117B  had  not  been
           considered  at  all.   No  exceptional  circumstances  had  been
           identified by the judge.  Insufficient weight had been given  to
           the public interest and to the Immigration Rules when conducting
           the proportionality assessment.  Key authorities  had  not  been
           followed, e.g., Haleemudeen [2014] EWCA Civ 558.  In particular,
           the judge had not taken into account  the  requirements  of  EC-
           ECDR, in  the  long  terms  care  and  financial  aspects.   Her
           findings were confused. The determination should  be  set  aside
           and remade at a fresh hearing.


      7.    Miss Greenwood for the Respondent accepted that  the  judge  had
           not mentioned section 117B.  Nevertheless, in reality the  judge
           had taken into account the relevant statutory factors  into  the
           balancing  exercise.   English  language  was  not   significant
           because the Respondent was 68 years of age.  There  was  nothing
           explicit about finances but there had been evidence  before  the
           judge about the sponsors' finances and from  that  it  could  be
           shown there would be no burden on public  funds.   Private  life
           had not been relevant because the Respondent had based her  case
           on her family life.  The precariousness of  her  existing  leave
           had not been important.  The fact that there had been  found  to
           be exaggerated evidence was not of itself fatal to the case,  as
           the judge had taken it into account in  reaching  her  decision.
           There were proper findings about the Respondent's  physical  and
           moral integrity.  The determination should stand.


      8.    There was nothing which Mr Bramble wished to add.




      The error of law finding


      9.    At the conclusion of submissions, the tribunal indicated that it
           found that the judge had fallen into material error of law, such
           that the determination would be set  aside.   It  would  not  be
           possible to preserve any findings of fact and the  appeal  would
           have to be reheard before another judge.  The tribunal  reserved
           its determination which now follows.


       10.  The tribunal considers that there were a number of problems with
           the determination.  It is, of course, not the judge's fault that
           sections 117A-D of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
           2002 were introduced  by  the  government  with  little  advance
           warning on 28 July 2014.  The appeal was heard on 18 July  2014,
           before  the  legislative  changes,  but  under  the  Asylum  and
           Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (as amended) as then
           in force, the tribunal's decision was not made until set out  in
           writing in a determination as required by those  rules:  see  SK
           (Sri Lanka) [2008] EWCA Civ 495.   Judge  Beach's  determination
           was not promulgated until 3 September 2014,  so  the  judge  was
           required by law to give express consideration to section 117B in
           particular when considering the Article 8 ECHR claim.  The judge
           ought to  have  shown  that  by  such  reference  that  she  had
           adequately weighed the relevant public interest  considerations,
           one of which was finance of which no mention in any sufficiently
           clear form was made in the determination.


      11.   More importantly,  however,  the  judge  failed  to  make  clear
           findings of fact in her determination.  The judge  was  critical
           of key elements of the evidence but exactly  what  was  accepted
           and what was rejected was far from plain.   It was important for
           the tribunal to find exactly what the  situation  in  Bangladesh
           was, but [48] of  the  determination  failed  to  set  out  firm
           conclusions. The circumstances in which the  Respondent  applied
           for further leave to remain  as  a  dependant  relative,  months
           after entering  as  a  visitor  with  a  declared  intention  of
           returning to Bangladesh, were mentioned by the judge at [49] but
           her finding - doubtless justified  -  that  the  Respondent  had
           always intended  to  remain  needed  to  be  factored  into  the
           credibility  assessment,  as   well   as   the   proportionality
           assessment.


      12.   The tribunal accordingly sets aside the determination.


      13.   As noted above, no interpreter had been booked for the  hearing.
           In the tribunal's view it was necessary for further evidence  to
           be called.  It was not possible  to  work  from  the  inadequate
           findings which had been made.   There was no alternative but  to
           return  the  appeal  for  a  fresh  hearing  in  the  First-tier
           Tribunal.  No findings are preserved.


      14.   There was no application for  an  anonymity  direction  and  the
           tribunal sees no need for one.


      DECISION


      The making of the previous decision involved the making  of  an  error
on    a point of law.  The tribunal allows the onwards appeal to  the  Upper
Tribunal, sets aside the original decision and  directs  that  the  original
appeal should be heard again before  a  differently  constituted  First-tier
Tribunal.


      Signed                                 Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell






