
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42780/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 22 July 2014                                 |On 1 August 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

                                  RUTH RAI
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Duncan of Counsel instructed by NC Brothers &
                    Co., solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nepal born on  14  January  1978.   On  7
    February 2011 she arrived with leave to enter as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student migrant, expiring on 28 September 2012.   While  the  Appellant
    had been in the United Kingdom with leave as a student her parents  had
    arrived on 2 March 2012  with  entry  clearance  for  settlement.   The
    Appellant's elder sister is in the United States  of  America  and  her
    younger brother remains in Nepal.

 2. On September 2012, before expiry of her student  leave,  the  Appellant
    applied for indefinite leave to remain as the adult  dependant  of  her
    father, a former member of the Brigade of Gurkhas.

The Decision and Appeal

 3. On 10 October 2013 the Respondent refused the Appellant's  application.
    In the reasons letter of the same date  she  referred  to  chapter  15,
    Section 2A of the Immigration Directorate Instructions (the IDI) and in
    particular paragraph 13.2 containing the instruction  to  case  workers
    that dependents over the age of 18  of  HM  Forces  members  (including
    Gurkhas) who are not otherwise covered in this guidance would  normally
    need to qualify for  settlement  under  a  specific  provision  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  Applications from over aged dependents  of  serving
    members of the forces would normally be approved if the  applicant  was
    part of the family unit.

 4. The Respondent therefore refused the application under paragraph 322(1)
    of the Immigration Rules because the Appellant  was  seeking  leave  to
    remain for a purpose not  covered  by  the  Rules.   She  also  made  a
    decision to remove the Appellant to Nepal by way  of  directions  under
    Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 5. The Respondent noted the Appellant had come to the  United  Kingdom  to
    obtain  a  post-graduate  qualification  in  Health  and  Social   Care
    Management. She acknowledged the  Appellant  had  been  funded  by  her
    father but concluded the Appellant was fit, had lived independently and
    could return to Nepal where, if necessary, she could be  maintained  by
    her parents from the United Kingdom.

 6. The IDI had been prepared having regard to recent case  law  which  had
    acknowledged the historic injustice worked on the Gurkhas who had  been
    unable to settle in the United Kingdom with their families before 1997.

 7. The Respondent considered any claim  which  the  Appellant  might  have
    under  Article  8  of  the  European  Convention  as  embodied  in  the
    Immigration Rules and found that she did not meet the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE and Appendix FM.  She did not fall within the scope of
    any of the Respondent's relevant policies and  could  return  to  Nepal
    where she had social, cultural and family ties  and  could  easily  re-
    adapt.

 8. The reasons letter did not make any reference to  any  claim  that  the
    State's obligations to respect the Appellant's private and family  life
    under Article 8 of the  European  Convention  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules were engaged.

 9. On 17 October 2013 the Appellant lodged notice of appeal under  section
    82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended.  The
    grounds were that the Respondent  had  failed  properly  to  apply  the
    relevant discretionary policy and that the decision was unlawful  under
    Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998,  being  incompatible  with  the
    rights of the Appellant protected by European Convention.  The  grounds
    referred to and quoted from the judgments in UG (Nepal)  and  Others  v
    ECO [2012] EWCA Civ 58 and Gurung and Others v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ  8.



The First-tier Tribunal's Determination

10. By a determination promulgated on 14 May 2014 Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Hawden-Beal dismissed the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

11. On 3  June  2014  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Landes  granted
    permission to appeal on the grounds that it was arguable the Judge  had
    failed to consider the mutual  dependency  of  the  Appellant  and  her
    parents and not just the dependency of the Appellant's parents upon the
    Appellant. Additionally, the Judge in her treatment of the claim  under
    Article 8 had arguably not given sufficient consideration to the impact
    of the historic injustice worked on those who had served in the Brigade
    of Gurkhas and had not given adequate reasons for concluding there  was
    no evidence the Appellant's father would have  settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom on or shortly after his discharge  in  1982.   The  Appellant's
    father had so stated in  his  witness  statement  and  had  given  oral
    testimony about it.  It appears the original grounds of appeal and  the
    grounds for permission to appeal are the same.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

12. The Appellant and her parents attended.  Mr Duncan  submitted  for  the
    Appellant that the Judge had  failed  to  have  proper  regard  to  the
    historic injustice worked against the Gurkhas and to have  incorporated
    it  as  a  factor  to  be  considered  in   her   assessment   of   the
    proportionality of the Respondent's decision to  any  lawful  objective
    under Article 8(2). Mr Duncan submitted the  determination  in  Ghising
    and Others [2013] UKUT 00567  (IAC)  was  in  itself  good  grounds  to
    consider the Appellant's claim under Article 8 outside the  Immigration
    Rules, although he did not refer to any particular  paragraphs  of  the
    determination.  It may be that  he  had  in  mind  paragraph  60  which
    states:

         Once this point is grasped, it can immediately be appreciated  that
         there may be cases  where  Appellants  in  Gurkha  cases  will  not
         succeed, even though their family life engages Article 8(1) and the
         evidence shows they would have come  to  the  United  Kingdom  with
         their father, but for the injustice that prevented the latter  from
         settling here  on  completion  of  his  military  service.  If  the
         Respondent can point to matters over and above the 'public interest
         in maintaining of a firm immigration policy', which argue in favour
         of removal or the refusal of leave to enter, these  must  be  given
         appropriate weight in the balance in the Respondent's favour. Thus,
         a bad immigration history and/or criminal behaviour  may  still  be
         sufficient  to  outweigh  the  powerful  factors  bearing  on   the
         Appellant's side. Being an adult child of a UK settled  Gurkha  ex-
         serviceman is, therefore, not a 'trump card', in the sense that not
         every application by such a person will inevitably succeed. But, if
         the Respondent is relying only upon the public  interest  described
         by the Court of Appeal at paragraph 41 of Gurung, then  the  weight
         to be given to the  historic  injustice  will  normally  require  a
         decision in the Appellant's favour.

13. The Appellant's father at paragraphs 4 and 5 of his  witness  statement
    before the Judge had stated he would have settled in the United Kingdom
    after discharge if he had been permitted so to do.  This claim had  not
    been challenged  before  the  Judge  and  remained  unchallenged.   The
    mechanism for former Gurkhas to settle in the United  Kingdom  had  not
    been in place when the Appellant's father had been discharged from  the
    Brigade of Gurkhas.

14. Mr Duncan expressed the view that the last part of paragraph 19 of  the
    Judge's determination dealing with the possibility that in  the  future
    the Appellant's parents may require assistance from social services and
    that the Appellant as a nurse would be in a position to reduce any call
    on social services  was  itself  an  argument  for  the  Respondent  to
    consider the grant of leave outside the Immigration Rules.

15. Turning to the question of emotional ties  and  dependency,  Mr  Duncan
    referred to the grounds of appeal and  paragraph  2  of  the  grant  of
    permission to appeal.   The Judge had looked at the need or likely need
    of the Appellant's parents to turn to the  Appellant.  At  the  hearing
    before the Judge there had been no  challenge  to  the  claimed  mutual
    dependency between the Appellant who relied on financial  support  from
    her  parents  and  their  continuing  love  and  affection  in  a  home
    environment on the one hand  and  on  the  other  her  role  as  carer,
    interpreter and general facilitator, all of which  manifested  stronger
    than normal emotional ties between the Appellant and her parents.

16. The Appellant's father had two younger brothers in the  United  Kingdom
    in Swindon and in London referred to at paragraph  21  of  the  Judge's
    determination.  There was evidence before the Judge that  contact  with
    them was limited and whether they could provide care and affection  for
    the Appellant's parents was not explored at the hearing.   The  Judge's
    conclusions at paragraph 21 were inadequately  evidenced.   I  remarked
    that this last point was not one of the grounds for appeal.

Submissions for the Respondent

17. Ms Everett submitted the Judge had been  entitled  to  find  there  was
    insufficient evidence to support the claim of more than usual emotional
    ties between the Appellant and her parents. She argued  the  dependency
    of the  Appellant  was  one  of  convenience  and,  further,  financial
    dependency alone was insufficient to meet  the  relevant  requirements.
    Consequently the Judge had not considered the  claim  under  Article  8
    outside the Immigration Rules because she had found the  Appellant  had
    not shown that there was any family life so as to engage Article 8.

18. She accepted the Appellant's father  would  have  come  to  the  United
    Kingdom on discharge if it had been possible because his claim to  that
    effect had not been challenged.  In that respect paragraph  20  of  the
    Judge's determination was factually in error.

19. The Respondent had to accept that the Judge had failed to  address  the
    issue of the historic injustice but Ms Everett submitted  that  in  the
    event this had not been necessary because the Judge had not found  that
    the Appellant's family  life  was  sufficient  to  engage  the  State's
    obligations under Article 8.

20. The comments in the last part of  paragraph  19  of  the  determination
    about  the  prospective  use  of  social  services  were  neutral.   In
    response, Mr Duncan simply submitted that the point about the last part
    of paragraph 19 of the  determination  was  that  it  went  to  exclude
    adverse  factors  which  might  otherwise  have  counted  against   the
    Appellant when considering the other factors in the balancing  exercise
    to assess the proportionality of the decision under Article 8.

Error of Law Finding

21. I have considered the submissions made for each of  the  Appellant  and
    the Respondent in the context of the papers in the Tribunal file.  I am
    satisfied the Judge made an error of law  in  failing  to  address  the
    issue of the historic injustice worked upon the Gurkhas.  The  evidence
    clearly is that there is family life  between  the  Appellant  and  her
    parents.  The threshold for the establishment of family  life  is  low:
    see VW (Uganda) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 5 and AG (Eritrea) v SSHD [2007]
    EWCA Civ 801. In that event, it was incumbent upon the Judge to proceed
    with the five step process endorsed by R (oao)  Razgar  v  SSHD  [2004]
    UKHL 27 and to assess whether the interference with  that  family  life
    which might be caused by the Appellant's removal would be  sufficiently
    grave to engage the State's obligations  to  respect  the  private  and
    family lives of the Appellant and her parents.

22. The parties agreed there was no challenge to the factual basis found by
    the Judge save as already has been mentioned.  They considered the  re-
    hearing could take place immediately on the basis of submissions  only.
    I indicated that I had a number of questions I would want to put to the
    Appellant about her brother.  The parties had no objection.

23. My questions of the Appellant upon which neither representative had any
    point arising elicited the information that  the  Appellant's  brother,
    born in 1981, lived in a small town in Nepal in the  family  home,  was
    unemployed and single and had no dependants..  He lived on the proceeds
    of a pension which his father had in Nepal.





The Substantive Re-Hearing: Appellant's Submissions

24. Mr Duncan submitted this was a  single  issue  appeal  focused  on  the
    Appellant's claim under Article 8 of the European Convention.  Case law
    on Gurkha  family  re-unions  was  settled.  The  Respondent's  various
    policies at different times had  now  been  consolidated  and  required
    there to be exceptional circumstances. The  policy  was  discretionary.
    The reasons letter showed the Respondent had considered the policy  and
    found there  were  no  exceptional  circumstances  and  therefore  that
    decision was not challengeable.

25. Turning to  the  claim  under  Article  8,  he  referred  back  to  the
    submissions he had made to show there  was  an  error  of  law  in  the
    Judge's determination.  He referred to the judgment in  R  (oao  Gurung
    and Others) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 8 and the determination  in  Ghising
    and Others (Gurkhas/BOCs: historic  wrong:  weight  [2013]  UKUT  00567
    (IAC).  He referred generically to the historic wrong worked  upon  the
    Gurkhas and that the Respondent had not challenged the evidence of  the
    Appellant's father that had  he  been  able  upon  discharge  from  the
    Brigade of Gurkhas he would have settled in the United Kingdom with his
    family.  The Respondent had not identified any matters over  and  above
    the "public interest in maintaining a firm immigration policy" to argue
    in favour of a refusal of leave to  enter:  see  paragraph  60  of  the
    determination in Ghising and Others [2013] UKUT 00567 (IAC).

26. The  next  question  the  Tribunal  had  to  address  was  whether  the
    relationship between the  Appellant  and  her  parents  in  the  United
    Kingdom went beyond normal emotional ties  of  the  type  described  in
    Kugathas v IAT [2003] EWCA Civ 31.  The evidence  showed  there  was  a
    mutual  emotional  dependency  described  in  the  statements  of   the
    Appellant and her father as well as the solicitor's letter accompanying
    the Appellant's application for further leave.  The Appellant  provided
    care for her parents and particularly her  father,  who  suffered  from
    sleep apnoea as well as interpreting and other general  caring  duties.
    The relationship had to be considered in the context of the nature  and
    expectations of Nepalese culture.  The Appellant's father had  rendered
    notable service to the  United  Kingdom  by  reason  of  his  long  and
    exemplary service with the Brigade of Gurkhas.  The  appeal  should  be
    allowed.

Submissions for the Respondent

27. Ms Everett relied on the submissions she had made  to  argue  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal's determination did not contain an  error  of  law.
    She continued  that  the  evidence  did  not  show  the  Appellant  had
    emotional ties with her parents beyond normal  emotional  ties  of  the
    type described in Kugathas.  The Appellant was now aged about  35,  had
    qualified as a nurse and had  obtained  a  post-qualification  diploma.
    She had lived independently of her parents and indeed  they  had  lived
    independently of her for a time.  Her present financial dependency upon
    her parents was insufficient to establish a sound claim  under  Article
    8.   She had originally come to the United Kingdom before  her  parents
    to obtain further qualifications to improve her  employment  prospects.
    The appeal should be dismissed.

Standard and Burden of Proof

28. The standard of proof is the civil standard; that is on the balance  of
    probabilities.  Evidence of matters subsequent to the date of  decision
    under appeal may be taken into account.  Generally speaking, the burden
    of proof is on the Appellant subject to the  limitations  suggested  by
    the comments of Sedley LJ in Patel and Others v  ECO  -  Mumbai  [2010]
    EWCA Civ 17 that the effect of  the  acknowledgement  of  the  historic
    wrong is to some extent to reverse  the  usual  balance  of  Article  8
    issues.  Given the development and clarification of  the  jurisprudence
    since Patel, it is unlikely that any adjustment of the burden is likely
    in this case to make any difference to either party.  The fact  of  the
    historic wrong is simply another factor to be  placed  in  the  balance
    when assessing the proportionality of the Respondent's decision.

Applicable Law to the Claim under Article 8 outside the Rules

29. MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] is acknowledged  to  be  a  current  leading
    judgment in the jurisprudence relating to Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention in English law.  It focuses on the application of Article  8
    both within the Immigration  Rules  and  outwith  the  Rules  in  cases
    involving  the  deportation  of  foreign  non-EEA  national  criminals.
    Paragraph 398 of the Rules which relates to deportation uses the phrase
    'exceptional circumstances'.  At paragraphs 39 and 40 the Master of the
    Rolls said:-

         (Counsel) has made it clear on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State
         that  the  new  Rules  do  not  herald   a   restoration   of   the
         exceptionality test.  We agree.  ...The Rules expressly contemplate
         a weighing of the public interest  in  deportation  against  'other
         factors'.  In our view, this must  be  a  reference  to  all  other
         factors which  are  relevant  to  proportionality  and  entails  an
         implicit requirement that they are to be taken into account.

         ...It is necessary to focus on the statement that it will  only  be
         'in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the   public   interest   in
         deportation will be outweighed by other factors'.  ...Great  weight
         should be  given  to  the  public  interest  in  deporting  foreign
         criminals....  It is only exceptionally that such foreign criminals
         will succeed in showing that their rights under Article 8(1)  trump
         the public interest in their deportation.

    At paragraph 41, the Master of the Rolls referred to the judgment in  R
    (Nagre v SSHD [2013]  EWHC  720  (Admin).   He  pointed  out  that  the
    significance of the cases cited in Nagre was in the repeated use by the
    European  Courts  of  Human   Rights   of   the   phrase   'exceptional
    circumstances.

30. I take it he was referring to paragraph 40 of the  judgment  in  Nagre.
    With one exception each of the ECtHR cases in the  long  list  is  from
    jurisdictions other than the United  Kingdom  where  the  domestic  law
    within the margin of appreciation of contracting states may and in some
    cases does (for example Norway and Denmark) provide that the  test  for
    engaging rights protected by the European Convention is more  stringent
    than the test of reasonableness established by Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL
    11.  MF (Nigeria) makes the point that in assessing the proportionality
    of a deportation decision it will only be in exceptional  circumstances
    that the public interest will be outweighed by other factors.  But this
    is not a deportation case.

31. At paragraph 128 of R (oao MM and Others) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 985 in
    the leading judgment Aikens LJ in the course of a lengthy discussion of
    the relationship of the jurisprudence on Article 8 in  the  context  of
    the Immigration Rules and Strasbourg case-law said:-

        ....  Nagre does not add anything  to  the  debate,  save  for  the
        statement that if a particular person is outside the rule  then  he
        has to demonstrate, as a preliminary to a consideration outside the
        rule, that he has an arguable case that there may be  good  grounds
        for granting leave to remain outside the rules. I cannot  see  much
        utility in  imposing  this  further,  intermediary,  test.  If  the
        applicant cannot satisfy the rule, then there either is or there is
        not a further Article 8 claim.  .....

    and at paragraph 134:-

        ......  if the relevant group of IRs is not such a "complete  code"
        then the proportionality test will be more at large, albeit  guided
        by the Huang tests and UK and Strasbourg case law.

32. The test of exceptional circumstances is different  from  the  approach
    referred to in the Section of Chapter 8 of the Immigration  Directorate
    Instructions on family members dealing with Appendix FM.   Section  1.0
    Introduction provides:-

         This  guidance  reflects  the  two-stage  approach  to  considering
         applications under the family and private life Rules in Appendix FM
         and paragraph 276ADE-DH.  First, caseworkers must consider  whether
         the applicant meets the requirements of the Rules, and if they  do,
         leave under the rules should be granted.  If the applicant does not
         meet the requirements of the Rules, the caseworker must move on  to
         a second stage: whether, based on an overall consideration  of  the
         facts of the case, there are exceptional circumstances  which  mean
         refusal of the application  would  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh
         consequences for the individual or their family such  that  refusal
         would not be proportionate under Article  8.   If  there  are  such
         exceptional  circumstances,  leave  outside  the  Rules  should  be
         granted.  If not, the application should be refused.


         This two-stage approach has been endorsed by the High Court in  the
         Judicial Review in Nagre.  In the judgment Sales J finds  that  our
         regime of Rules coupled with the  Secretary  of  State's  published
         policy on  exceptional  circumstances  '...fully  accommodates  the
         requirements of Article 8' [paragraph 36]  and  '...there  is  full
         coverage of an individual's rights under Article 8 in all cases  by
         a combination of the new Rules and (so far  as  may  be  necessary)
         under the Secretary of State's residual discretion to  grant  leave
         to remain outside the Rules' [paragraph 35].  ...

    The test described in MF (Nigeria) is different  from  the  Immigration
    Directorate Instructions which is not part of the Rules: see paragraphs
    64 and 106 of the judgment in R (Alvi) v SSHD [2012] UKSC 33.

33. Further, at paragraph 54 of Patel and others v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72 Lord
    Carnwath approved the approach to Article 8 described in Huang and that
    the Rules are no more than the starting point for the consideration  of
    Article 8.

34. Indeed, the suggested logic that a test of exceptional circumstances or
    compassionate  factors  referred  to  in  the  Immigration  Directorate
    Instructions has  to  be  engaged  before  a  less  stringent  test  of
    "reasonableness" under Article 8 outside the Rules can  be  engaged  is
    difficult to follow.

35. With this in mind, I adopt  the  approach  to  appeals  on  grounds  of
    Article 8 in accordance with jurisprudence which comes from  Strasbourg
    and from Huang and  subsequent  judgments,  which  were  summarised  at
    paragraphs 7-12 of EB (Kosovo) v SSHD [2008] UKHL  41.   The  Appellant
    has established a private and family life in the United Kingdom.  Given
    the circumstances her proposed removal would be an interference of such
    gravity that it would engage the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under
    Article 8 of the European Convention to respect her private and  family
    life  in  the  United  Kingdom.  There  was  no  suggestion  that   any
    interference would be otherwise than in accordance with the law and for
    the legitimate public end necessary in  a  democratic  society  of  the
    interests of the economic well-being of  the  country  referred  to  in
    Article 8(2) which  includes  the  maintenance  of  proper  immigration
    control (see Shahzad (Article 8:  legitimate  aim)  [2014]  UKUT  00085
    (IAC)).

36. In assessing the proportionality of the decision under  review  in  the
    case of Gurkha veteran family reunion cases it  is  also  necessary  to
    have regard to the Military Covenant: see paragraph 72 of R (oao  Limbu
    and Others) v  SSHD  and  Others  [2008]  EWHC  2261  (Admin)  and  the
    acknowledged historic injustice suffered by the Gurkhas: see paragraphs
    2 and 27 of R (oao Gurung and Others) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 8.

37. The facts are as set out in the  First-tier  Tribunal's  determination.
    The Respondent has not challenged that the  witness  statement  of  the
    Appellant's father that he would have settled  in  the  United  Kingdom
    with the family on retirement from the Brigade of Gurkhas  had  he  had
    the  opportunity;  thereby  accepting  the  nexus  with  the   historic
    injustice referred to in paragraphs 15 and 41 of Patel and Others v ECO-
    Mumbai.

38. The Respondent has not identified any adverse information of a  serious
    nature about the Appellant of the type referred to in paragraph 40 of R
    (oao Gurung and Others).  The assessment of the proportionality of  the
    decision under appeal has to be made bearing in mind what the Court  of
    Appeal said at paragraph 43 of R (oao Gurung and Others):

         We have referred to the reasons given at paras 83 and 84 of the  UT
         determination  in  Rana  for  the  conclusion  that  the   historic
         injustice suffered by the Gurkhas carries substantially less weight
         than the injustice suffered by BOCs. But as we have seen at para 28
         above, the UT also supported their conclusion as to the  weight  to
         be given to the historic injustice by the reasons  given  at  paras
         112 to 119 of  their  determination.  We  confess  to  having  some
         difficulty in following the reasoning at paras 117 to  119  and  in
         seeing, in particular, why the fact that an adult  dependant  child
         may be permitted to  settle  here  in  "exceptional  circumstances"
         leads to the conclusion that the weight to be given to the historic
         injustice in conducting the  article  8(2)  balancing  exercise  is
         limited.  The  flexibility  of  the   'exceptional   circumstances'
         criterion is such that it does not require the  historic  injustice
         to be taken into account at all. It certainly  does  not  prescribe
         the weight to be given to the injustice, if  indeed  it  is  to  be
         taken into account. The requirement  to  take  the  injustice  into
         account in striking a fair balance between the article  8(1)  right
         and the public interest in maintaining a firm immigration policy is
         inherent in article 8(2) itself, and it is ultimately for the court
         to strike that balance. This requirement does not derive  from  the
         fact that the policy permits an adult  dependant  child  to  settle
         here in exceptional  circumstances.  Accordingly,  we  reject  this
         additional reason given by the UT for holding that the weight to be
         given to the historic injustice is limited.

    It is accepted that there is a mutual emotional dependency between  the
    Appellant and her parents. There was no challenge to the claim that the
    Appellant was and  had  always  been  financially  dependent  upon  her
    father.  The weight to be attached to the family life of the  Appellant
    and her parents is limited in the light of what the Upper Tribunal said
    at paragraphs 47 and 48 of Ghising and Others [2013] UKUT 00567:-

         We reject (the) submission that, whatever the nature and quality of
         family life, the Appellants had a right to enjoy it, and  therefore
         Article 8(1) was inevitably engaged. That this proposition  is  not
         correct can be seen from paragraph 14 of  Patel,  where  Sedley  LJ
         said:

             You can set out to compensate for a historical wrong, but  you
             cannot reverse the passage of time.  Many  of  these  children
             have now grown up and embarked on lives of  their  own.  Where
             this has happened, the bonds which constitute family life will
             no longer be there, and art. 8 will have no purchase.

        But as Sedley LJ immediately went on to say 'what may constitute an
        extant  family  life  falls  well   short   of   what   constitutes
        dependency'. In this regard, we note the  useful  analysis  by  the
        Tribunal in Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha policy)  [2012]
        UKUT 00160 (IAC) (at paragraphs 50 to 62) of the case law on family
        life between parents and adult children, culminating in the finding
        that:

              62. The different outcomes in cases with superficially similar
                  features emphasises to us that  the  issue  under  Article
                  8(1) is highly fact-sensitive.  In  our  judgment,  rather
                  than  applying  a  blanket  rule  with  regard  to   adult
                  children, each case should be analysed on its  own  facts,
                  to decide whether or not family life  exists,  within  the
                  meaning of Article 8(1).

    The Court of Appeal endorsed the approach  of  paragraph  46  of  R(oao
    Gurung and Others).

39. In this case, the Appellant came to study in the United Kingdom  before
    her parents arrived.  The evidence  is  that  subsequently  her  father
    learned about the availability of entry clearance  for  settlement  and
    came with his wife to settle.  The reasons why the  Appellant  came  to
    the United Kingdom were to study and improve her job opportunities.  It
    was not suggested that this was in any way a ploy to enable her parents
    to come to  the  United  Kingdom  and  indeed  they  came,  with  entry
    clearance granted in their own right as an ex-Gurkha and his wife.   No
    adverse inference therefore from the timing should be made.

40. Looking at the matter in the round, considerable weight is to be  given
    to the effect of the historic wrong  and  the  measures  taken  by  the
    legislature and executive to make compensation  for  that  wrong.   The
    Appellant lives with her parents as a part of  a  single  family  unit.
    There was no challenge to the evidence about the extent of the care and
    support she gives to her parents, partly out of  love,  partly  out  of
    filial duty and partly out of respect for her native  Nepalese  culture
    and traditions.  The Respondent did not refer to any  adverse  factors.
    Consequently, I find the decision to refuse further  leave  and  remove
    the Appellant is disproportionate to any of the  legitimate  objectives
    identified in Article 8(2) of the European Convention and the appeal is
    allowed on the human rights grounds.

DECISION

    The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contained  errors  of  law
    and save as to the facts found, is set aside.  The  following  decision
    is substituted:-

    The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

     No anonymity direction is made.

Signed/Official  Crest                                                  Date
31. vii. 2014


Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

TO THE RESPONDENT: FEE AWARD

The appeal has been allowed and I have therefore considered whether to  make
a fee award.  The decision  under  appeal  was  made  at  a  time  when  the
understanding of the law in relation to Article 8  outside  the  Immigration
Rules was subject to consideration by the Upper Tribunal and  the  Court  of
Appeal and in all the circumstances I do  not  consider  it  appropriate  to
make any fee award.

Signed/Official Crest                                                   Date
31. vii. 2014

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
