
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Ia/42733/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 7 December 2015                   |On 13 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER


                                   Between

                          mr joy dushainthan xavier
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SecretARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Jamila Hassan, Counsel, instructed by Jacobs and
Co.
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willcocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is not subject to an  anonymity  order  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.  Neither  party
    has invited me to make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI  2008/2698)  and  I
    have not done so.

 2. The appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Barker) dismissing the appellant's  appeal  against  a  decision
    taken on 6 October 2014 to refuse the appellant's  application  for  an
    EEA residence card.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born in 1987. The  EEA  sponsor
    is his aunt who is a citizen of Sweden (since 1990)  exercising  treaty
    rights in the UK. The appellant entered the UK in 2009 as a student and
    plans to become a chartered accountant, having  graduated  from  Anglia
    Ruskin University.

 4.  The  Secretary  of  State  accepted  the  respondent's  identity   and
    nationality but concluded that he had  not  provided  any  evidence  of
    dependency upon the EEA sponsor prior to his arrival in the  UK.  There
    were numerous bank transfer receipts and cheques but no  evidence  that
    the appellant had received the funds and the majority of  the  receipts
    were remitted by MTC who was not the EEA sponsor, thus  not  evidencing
    that the appellant was dependent upon the EEA  sponsor.  The  appellant
    entered the UK as a student rather than a dependent of an EEA  national
    and did not state that he was dependent on  the  EEA  sponsor  when  he
    applied for his student visa.

The Appeal

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an  oral
    hearing at Hatton Cross on  7  May  2015.  He  was  represented  by  Ms
    Jegarajah, Counsel. The First-tier Tribunal found that some  money  had
    been sent to Sri Lanka over a long period of time but  money  continued
    to be sent in similar amounts after the appellant came to the  UK.  Any
    support sent was for the family and not specifically for the appellant.
    The judge was not satisfied that there was continuous support  for  the
    appellant personally over the period or that the appellant and the  EEA
    sponsor were members of the same household prior  to  her  leaving  Sri
    Lanka in 1990. The judge did accept that the appellant  was  living  in
    the same household as the EEA sponsor as at the date  of  hearing.  The
    appellant did not meet the definition  of  an  extended  family  member
    under  regulation  8  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the
    basis that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law. The judge erred in
    law by requiring evidence that the money was personally received by the
    appellant when he was a minor until 2005. The simple fact was that  the
    family had been supported by the EEA sponsor for  many  years  and  the
    appellant was part of the family.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Landes on
    17 August 2015. It was arguable that the judge did  not  give  adequate
    reasons or that it was irrational to  reject  the  application  on  the
    basis that the money had been sent to  the  appellant's  family  rather
    than to the appellant personally. The judge made no findings on whether
    the money sent to Sri Lanka was needed in order to meet  the  essential
    needs of the family including the appellant.

 8. In a rule 24 response dated 28 August  2015  the  respondent  submitted
    that the only evidence that the money was sent for the benefit  of  the
    appellant was the oral evidence of the EEA sponsor and the judge  found
    that the parties were not living together before the EEA  sponsor  left
    Sri Lanka. The findings were not perverse or  unreasoned.  The  grounds
    amounted to no more than a disagreement with valid findings made by the
    judge.

 9. Thus, the appeal came before me

Discussion

10. Ms Hassan submitted that the judge had accepted that the appellant  was
    part of the EEA sponsor's household in the UK and that  money  went  to
    Sri Lanka. The money  was  used  for  rent  and  living  expenses.  The
    appellant clearly benefited from the money transfers. He did  not  have
    to be the personal recipient of the funds. There were now new documents
    to prove that the EEA sponsor was a member of the same  household  from
    1984 to 1990. The judge failed to give the EEA sponsor  an  opportunity
    to explain the circumstances. The sponsor lived in the UK from 2003 and
    sent money through agencies and people  going  to  Sri  Lanka,  thereby
    saving costs.

11. Ms Willcocks-Briscoe submitted that  the  judge  referred  to  specific
    periods in paragraph 28  of  the  decision;  the  judge  only  accepted
    evidence of remittances in the 1990s and 2000. The judge did not accept
    the documents about the relevant period of  financial  dependence.  The
    money was being sent to various individuals including  the  appellant's
    brother but not specifically for the appellant. It is not  the  judge's
    role to cross-examine witnesses and to elicit evidence.  Ms  Willcocks-
    Briscoe accepted that the judge did not use the term "essential  living
    needs".

12. I reject any criticism of the judge on the basis that the  EEA  sponsor
    was not given adequate opportunity to present evidence or that there is
    any requirement for the judge to elicit evidence from  witnesses  where
    the appellant is represented by Counsel. It is also fair  to  say  that
    that the decision is comprehensive  in  many  aspects.  However,  I  am
    satisfied that the judge has materially erred in law  for  the  reasons
    set out below.

13. The judge accepted at paragraph 28 of the decision that money had  been
    sent to the appellant's family but rejected the accuracy of a  schedule
    submitted by the appellant. The judge accepted  at  paragraph  29  that
    some money had been sent to Sri Lanka over the years and that was  over
    a long period of time. The judge then found that any support sent would
    appear to be for the family and not specifically for the  appellant  or
    that there was continuous support personally for the  appellant.  Taken
    as a whole, I find that the judge's findings in relation to money  sent
    to Sri Lanka are wholly unclear and there is no finding as  to  whether
    the money sent was for the essential  needs  of  the  appellant.  As  a
    matter of common sense, if the family were  dependent  upon  the  money
    sent by the EEA sponsor then so was the appellant.

14. Dependency was considered by the Upper Tribunal  in  Reyes  (EEA  Regs:
    dependency) [2013] UKUT 00314 (IAC).  At  paragraph  19;  the  test  of
    dependency is a purely factual test. Questions of dependency  must  not
    be reduced to a bare calculation of financial dependency but should  be
    construed broadly to involve a holistic  examination  of  a  number  of
    factors, including financial, physical and social conditions so  as  to
    establish whether there is dependence that is  genuine.  The  essential
    focus has to be on the nature of  the  relationship  concerned  and  on
    whether it is one characterised by a situation of dependence  based  on
    an examination of all of the factual circumstances, bearing in mind the
    underlying need to maintain unity of the family. There is a need for  a
    wide-ranging fact-specific approach.

15. Applying those principles to this appeal,  I  find  that  there  is  an
    absence of clear findings of fact regarding  dependency.  There  is  no
    requirement for the funds to be remitted to the  appellant  personally.
    There must be a holistic examination  of  relevant  factors,  including
    whether the funds were sent to meet the essential needs of the  family,
    the appellant being a minor family member. I find that  the  judge  has
    failed to adequately assess dependency and has imposed an inappropriate
    additional  hurdle;  namely  the  requirement  for  the  funds  to   be
    personally remitted to the appellant.

16. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal under the EEA Regulations involved the making of an error of law
    and its decision cannot stand.

Decision

17. Both representatives invited me to order a rehearing in the  First-tier
    Tribunal if I set aside the judge's decision. Bearing in mind paragraph
    7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statements I  consider  that  an
    appropriate course of action. I find that the errors of law infect  the
    decision as a whole and therefore the re-hearing will be de  novo  with
    all issues to be considered again by the First-tier Tribunal.

18. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    order the appeal to be heard again in the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined de novo by a judge other than the previous First-tier judge.
    Any further evidence regarding membership of the household in Sri Lanka
    must be submitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed   [pic]    Date 12 January 2016

Judge Archer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
