
[pic]
IAC-AH-pc-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42169/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24th April 2015                   |On 21st July 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                              Mr Manjeet Singh
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Hashmi, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen  of  India  born  on  5th  July  1986.   The
    Appellant's immigration history was that he had applied  for  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom in 2004 based on a  contention  of  a  ten
    year family and private life in the UK.  That application  was  refused
    and on 5th August 2014 the Appellant made a fresh application seeking a
    residence card as a confirmation of a right to reside in the UK.   That
    application was refused by the Secretary of State by way of  Notice  of
    Refusal dated 10th October 2014.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Colyer sitting at Nottingham on 16th January 2015.  In  a
    determination promulgated on 22nd January the  Appellant's  appeal  was
    allowed under the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006.

 3. On 29th January 2015 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds of Appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal.  The Grounds of Appeal noted  that  the  judge  had
    concluded that the Appellant was entitled to permanent residence  under
    Regulation 15(1)(b) of the 2006 Regulations.  They pointed out that  in
    order for the Appellant to benefit from Regulation  (1)  the  Appellant
    would have had to have resided in the  UK  with  the  EEA  national  in
    accordance with the Regulations for a continuous period of five  years.
    Given that the Appellant had only met the EEA national in  August  2013
    it was submitted that the judge had erred in finding that the Appellant
    was entitled to permanent residence.  Further at paragraph 44 the judge
    had found that the Appellant's wife  had  been  exercising  her  treaty
    rights in the United Kingdom for at least five years.  The grounds note
    that whilst the judge referred to evidence that  the  Appellant's  wife
    was in work there was no reference to any evidence that established the
    Appellant's  wife  had  been  exercising  her  treaty  rights  for  the
    requisite period.

 4. On 2nd March 2013 First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes  granted  permission
    to appeal, those grounds noted that even on his own case the  Appellant
    did not meet the requirements of Regulation 15(1)(b) on the basis  that
    he had not known the Sponsor for more than two years and certainly  not
    five years.  Nor was the evidence before  the  Tribunal  sufficient  to
    allow the judge to find that the  Sponsor  was  entitled  to  permanent
    residence under Regulation 15(1)(a) and that even if the Sponsor was  a
    "qualified person" at the date of the hearing,  arguably  the  furthest
    the judge could properly go would be to make that finding and leave the
    question of the exercise of the discretion under  Regulation  17(4)  to
    the Respondent.  The exercise  of  that  discretion  would  still  have
    permitted the Respondent to revisit the true  nature  of  the  couple's
    relationship.

 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  Although this is an appeal by the Secretary
    of State for the benefit  of  continuity  within  the  proceedings  the
    Secretary of State is referred to in this decision  as  the  Respondent
    and Mr Singh as the Appellant.  The Appellant appears by his instructed
    Counsel Ms Hashmi.  The Secretary of State appears by her  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer Ms Everett.

Submissions/Discussion

 6. Ms Everett relies on the Grounds of Appeal and submits that the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge has given insufficient  reasons  for  his  findings
    that Sponsor had exercised treaty rights for the requisite period.  She
    points out that the Appellant only met the Sponsor in August  2013  and
    therefore the Appellant cannot succeed under the Immigration  Rules  as
    they have not been together for the  minimum  required  period  of  two
    years.  Ms Everett is very critical of paragraph 44  of  the  decision,
    this being the conclusion that the Appellant's wife has been exercising
    her treaty rights in the United Kingdom for at  least  five  years  and
    considers that the evidence provided referred to  at  paragraph  25  is
    completely insufficient.   Ms  Everett  refers  me  to  the  wage  slip
    evidence produced before the First-tier Tribunal.

 7. Ms Hashmi asked me to preserve the findings of fact made at  paragraphs
    16, 18, 22 and 24 of the First-tier Judge's  determination  and  points
    out that if the matter is remitted to the First-tier for rehearing then
    by the time it comes to be reheard the parties will have been  together
    for two years.

 8. It is pointed out by Ms Everett that she is not  on  the  Secretary  of
    State's behalf attacking the credibility findings and accepts that  the
    Appellant's partner Ivanka Dimitrova is exercising  her  treaty  rights
    and  that  her  marriage  to  the  Appellant  is  not  a  marriage   of
    convenience.  She consequently accepts under the 2006 Regulations  that
    the Appellant will be entitled to  a  residence  document  but  not  to
    permanent residence.

The Law

 9.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

10. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

11. The concession made in this matter by  Ms  Everett  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State is most helpful, however there is  an  insufficiency
    of reasons given by the First-tier Tribunal Judge  and  the  judge  has
    made a wrong conclusion which is effectively conceded by Ms Hashmi that
    the  Appellant  can  benefit  from  Regulation  15(1)   of   the   2006
    Regulations.   Further  the  evidence  provided  in  the  bundle  shows
    abundantly clearly that the Appellant's spouse has not been  exercising
    her treaty rights for the period of five  years  and  indeed  there  is
    clear documentary evidence stating that she arrived  from  Bulgaria  in
    2013.  Such information is to be found  on  her  family  and  obstetric
    history within the Appellant's original bundle.  In such  circumstances
    there is clearly a material error of law but due to the concession made
    quite properly by Ms Everett the correct approach is to find a material
    error of law, to set aside the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge and to remake the decision allowing the Appellant to  be  granted
    not permanent residence but a five year residence card pursuant to  the
    2006 EEA Regulations.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of  law
and is set aside.  The decision is remade allowing  the  Appellant's  appeal
under the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  to  the
extent the Appellant is entitled to a five year residence card.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
