
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42640/2014

                                                               IA/42645/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th September 2016                       |On 5th October 2016           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER

                                   Between

                             mr majid rafiq (1)
                             mr umer junaid (2)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr P Richardson, Counsel instructed by MA Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants and each of them are citizens of Pakistan whose dates of
    birth are respectively recorded as 1st  December  1979  and  29th  July
    1985.

 2. On or about 13th August 2014 the Appellants and each  of  them  made  a
    combined application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom as  Tier
    1 (Entrepreneur)  Migrants  under  the  Points  Based  System  and  for
    Biometric Residence Permits.

 3. On 7th October 2014 decisions were made to refuse the applications.

 4. The applications were refused having regard to Table 4 of Appendix A to
    the Immigration Rules at (d) which sets out the requirements under  the
    Rules and which required certain specified  documents  as  set  out  in
    Paragraph 41 - SD(e) of Appendix A. One of the  requirements  was  that
    there should be one or more of  certain  specified  documents  covering
    (either together or individually) a continuous period commencing before
    11th July 2014 up to no earlier than three months before  the  date  of
    the application:

         "Advertising  or   marketing,   including   printouts   of   online
         advertising, that has been published locally or nationally, showing
         the applicants name (and the name of the  business  if  applicable)
         together with the business  activity  or,  where  his  business  is
         trading online, confirmation of his ownership of the domain name of
         the business's website...

         and

         (iv) one or more of the following documents showing trading,  which
         must cover (either together or individually)  a  continuous  period
         commencing before 11th July 2014 up to no earlier than three months
         before the date of his application:

               1) one or more contracts for service. If a contract is not an
                  original, the applicant must sign each page. Each contract
                  must show:

                   a) The applicants name and the name of the business,

                   b) the service provided by the applicant's;

                   c) the name of the other party or  parties  involved  in
                      the contract and  their  contact  details,  including
                      their full address, postal code and, where  available
                      landline phone number and any email address; and

                   d) the duration of the contract; or

               2) One or more original letters from United Kingdom regulated
                  financial institutions with  which  the  applicant  has  a
                  business bank account, on the institutions with which  the
                  applicant  has   a   business   bank   account,   on   the
                  institution's  headed  paper,  confirming  the  dates  the
                  business was trading during the period referred to at (iv)
                  above;"

 5. The refusals focused on a 'Gum Tree' advertisement  provided  with  the
    application which was said not to be acceptable because it was  printed
    on 12th August 2014  stating  that  it  had  been  posted  eleven  days
    previously which would have meant an end date to the  advertisement  of
    1st  August  2014.  In  those  circumstances  the  Secretary  of  State
    contended that the evidence did not demonstrate that the  business  had
    been trading before 11th July 2014  and  did  not  cover  a  continuous
    period of training commencing before 11th July 2014 up  to  no  earlier
    than three months before the date of the application.

 6. Additionally evidence submitted by the Appellant's in relation to their
    company Stable Consultants Limited from Metro Bank was said not  to  be
    acceptable because it did not  cover  a  continuous  period  commencing
    before 11th July 2014, up to no earlier than three  months  before  the
    date of the application.

 7. Those were the two issues which fell for consideration  in  the  appeal
    which was then lodged and heard by Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Swinnerton sitting at Hatton Cross on 15th January 2016.

 8.  The  advertisement  itself  on  'Gum  Tree'  is  produced  within  the
    Respondent's bundle. The heading to the printout is Stable  Consultants
    Limited. It is not in dispute that that is the company associated  with
    the Appellants. At the top  left-hand  corner  of  the  document  there
    appears: "8/12/2014". Below that  there  is  some  description  of  the
    company and a map as to where it might be found together  with  contact
    details with the names of each  of  the  Appellants  given.  Below  the
    address, two thirds of the way down  the  page  there  is  a  reference
    number for the advertisement which then reads "Posted 11 days  ago  ...
    posting ads since June 2014".

 9. In relation to the bank material, the Appellants produced a letter from
    Metro Bank dated 12th August 2014, a copy  of  which  is  produced  and
    makes reference to "New Accounts".

10. Judge  Swinnerton,  without,  it  has  to  be  said  a  great  deal  of
    consideration of the documentation dismissed the appeals.

11. By Notice dated 18th February 2016 the Appellants and each of them made
    application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal. Quite apart
    from the insufficiency of findings of  fact  which  form  part  of  the
    grounds  and  the  reasons  for  permission  being  granted  by   Judge
    Hollingworth on 20th July 2016 it was also argued in  the  grounds  and
    before me that  the  Gum  Tree  advertisement  did  in  fact  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules stating as it did  "Posting  ads  since  June
    2014" and therefore necessarily prior to 11th July 2014 and  that  even
    if the  banking  letter  was  inadequate,  given  the  requirements  in
    Paragraph 41-SD are expressed in the alternative,  the  Appellants  met
    the requirements of the Rule by the provision of  a  business  contract
    which it was submitted had been provided to the Secretary of State with
    the application with reliance placed upon the application form  at  G27
    which reads:

          "You must provide one or more documents showing trading (this must
          cover  (either  together  or  individually)  a  continuous  period
          commencing before 11th July 2014  up  to  no  earlier  than  three
          months before the  date  of  your  application).  Please  tick  to
          confirm what is supplied"

12. The box that is available reads "One or more  contracts  supplied"  and
    that is marked with a cross consistent with the rest of the application
    in which crosses have been placed to indicate what has it is contended,
    has been provided.

13. The business contract said to have been provided with  the  application
    appears in the Appellants' bundle as a contract entered into by  Stable
    Consultants (UK) Limited  and  Career  Advisory  Service  Limited.  The
    document is dated 12th June 2014. Mr Colman's submissions  to  me  were
    that the advertisement from Gum Tree, without more, met the requirement
    of the Immigration Rule and the bank details were not required  because
    the Rules had been met  in  the  alternative  by  the  provision  of  a
    contract. Further if the Secretary of State was at all concerned by the
    documentation provided then she should have  had  regard  to  Paragraph
    245AA of the Immigration  Rules  which  sets  out  the  policy  of  the
    Secretary  of  State  in  relation  to  documents  not  submitted  with
    applications the Rule provides as follows:

           a)   where part 6A or any appendices  referred  to  in  part  6A
              state that specified documents must be  provided,  the  Entry
              Clearance Officer, Immigration Officer or  the  Secretary  of
              State will only consider documents that have  been  submitted
              with  the  application,  and  they  will  consider  documents
              submitted after the application  where  they  are  submit  in
              accordance with sub-Paragraph (b).

                   b)   If the applicant has submitted specified  documents
                      in which:

               i) some of the documents in a sequence have been omitted (for
                  example, if one bank statement from a series is missing);

              ii) A document is in the  wrong  format  (for  example,  if  a
                  letter is not on letterhead paper as specified); or

             iii) A document is a copy and not an original document; or

                       iv) A document does not contain all of the  specified
                           information;

             The  Entry  Clearance  Officer,  Immigration  Officer  or  the
             Secretary  of  State  may  contact  the   applicant   or   his
             representative in writing and request  the  correct  document.
             The requested  documents  must  be  received  at  the  address
             specified in the request within 7 working days of the date  of
             the request.

         (c)  Documents will not be requested where a specified has not been
             submitted (for example  an  English  Language  Certificate  is
             missing), or where the Entry  Clearance  Officer,  Immigration
             Officer or the Secretary of State  does  not  anticipate  that
             addressing the omission or error referred to in  sub-Paragraph
             (b) will lead to a  grant  because  the  application  will  be
             refused for other reasons..."

14. Mr Richardson  reminded  me  of  the  Guidance  in  the  case  of  Ukus
    (Discretion: when reviewable) [2012] UKUT 00307. That provides:

          1) If a decision-maker in the purported exercise of a  discretion
             vested in him noted his function and what was required  to  be
             done when fulfilling it and then proceeded to reach a decision
             on that basis, the decision is a lawful one and  the  Tribunal
             cannot intervene in the absence of a statutory power to decide
             that the discretion should  have  been  exercised  differently
             (see Section 86(3)(b)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
             Asylum Act 2002).

          2) Where the decision-maker has failed to exercise  a  discretion
             vested in  him,  the  Tribunal's  jurisdiction  on  appeal  is
             limited to a decision that the failure  renders  the  decision
             "not in accordance with the law" (Section  86(3)(a)).  Because
             the discretion is vested in  the  executive,  the  appropriate
             course will be for the Tribunal to require the  decision-maker
             to complete his task by reaching  a  lawful  decision  on  the
             outstanding application, along the lines set out in  SSHD  -v-
             Abdi [1996] Imm AR 148. In such a case, it makes no difference
             whether there is such a statutory power  as  is  mentioned  in
             paragraph 1 above.

          3) If the decision-maker has lawfully  exercised  his  discretion
             and the Tribunal has such a statutory power, the Tribunal must
             either;

                    i) uphold the decision-maker's decision (if the Tribunal
                       is un-persuaded that the decision-maker's should have
                       been exercised differently); or

                   ii) reach a different decision in the exercise of its own
                       discretion.

15. Mr Richardson's submission therefore was that this is a case  in  which
    it was open to the Secretary of State to exercise a discretion but  she
    did not do so and in those circumstances the matter at the  very  least
    ought to be remitted to the Secretary of State  in  order  for  her  to
    complete the task in accordance with (2) in Ukus.

16. Still further as evidence of the failure of the Judge to make  findings
    based upon the available evidence, the Appellants had submitted witness
    statements which were before the Judge making reference to  a  business
    agreement/contract with Career Advisory Services Limited. The Judge had
    made no finding as to whether or not she accepted that  assertion  but,
    without more appears to have regurgitated the refusal letter.

17. Of further importance in this case was that  at  paragraph  22  of  the
    decision of Judge Swinnerton it was recorded that the contract  between
    Stable  Consultants  and  Career  Advisory  Service  Limited  was   not
    submitted with the application as if such was a concession. Mr  Coleman
    made clear that that was not how  the  matter  was  presented  at  all.
    Clearly what appears in the decision is inconsistent with  the  witness
    statements, it is also clear from the Judge's notes that reference  was
    made to the contract with a note referring to Counsel handing  out  the
    Guidance in relation to contracts. I note also  in  the  Judge's  notes
    reference to the Guidance in  Mandalia  (Appellant)  -v-  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department (Respondent) [2015] UKSC 29.

18. In the case of Mandalia, the question  before  the  Supreme  Court  was
    whether the Agency had acted  unlawfully  in  refusing  visa  extension
    application without first inviting Mr Mandalia to supply a further bank
    statement in accordance with  the  Guidance  set  out  in  the  process
    instruction. The Supreme Court unanimously allowed Mr Mandalia's appeal
    and quashed the refusal of his visa extension application.

19. It is perfectly clear in my judgment that there has been  a  total  and
    singular failure on the part of the Judge  to  make  a  finding  as  to
    whether or not the contract between Stable Consultants Ltd  and  Career
    Advisory Service was in fact lodged with the application. At  the  very
    best what appears at paragraph 22 is ambiguous but given that  findings
    of fact and reasons appear later in the Decision and Reasons, and  come
    after the submissions, I am strongly inclined  to  the  view  that  the
    Judge simply made no finding. There is consequently in my  judgment  an
    error of law.

20. The next matter for consideration however is whether  it  is  material.
    Were the Tribunal to have found that the  contract  had  in  fact  been
    supplied with the application (it was common ground before me that  the
    bank letter did not meet the  requirements  of  the  Rules)  ought  the
    Secretary of State either to have accepted  the  advertisement  without
    more or in the  alternative  ought  she  to  have  considered  her  own
    flexibility policy and called for an earlier advertisement?

21. Mr Whitwell for the Secretary of State invited me to find in any  event
    that the contract which it was said had in fact been submitted with the
    application had not been sent. Firstly he had no record of it but  more
    particularly the application form itself at section 7 where there is  a
    summary sheet has nothing more than "other doc" and then the  number  7
    being the number of other documents submitted. The  significance  of  a
    finding which I was invited to make, that the contract was not sent was
    that under C(b) absent the contract there was no need for the Secretary
    of  State  to  consider  evidential  flexibility  in  relation  to  the
    advertisement because the absence of the contract and the  bank  letter
    not meeting the requirements of the Rule  would  have  meant  that  the
    application would have been refused for other reasons.

22. It is of course for the Appellants to prove their case  on  balance  of
    probabilities. Given that a finding on whether or not the contract  was
    supplied with the application informs the extent to which the Secretary
    of State was required to consider evidential flexibility,  clearly  the
    error is material and I so find.

23. Having found a material error of law it is necessary for me  to  remake
    the decision; remit to the First-tier Tribunal,  if  necessary;  or  in
    this case in the  remaking  having  regard  to  Ukas  have  the  matter
    remitted to the Secretary of State in order that she  should  call  for
    any further evidence relating to the advertisement.

24. Whilst the burden of  proof  is  upon  the  Appellants,  to  the  civil
    standard, and notwithstanding there being little evidence, there is  in
    my judgment sufficient evidence taken from the application form at  G27
    together with the witness statements of the Appellants to like  effect,
    for me to find that contracts were supplied as contended. It  is  clear
    from G20 of the application form that the  contracts  being  spoken  of
    appear to be contracts with  potential  clients  so  that  at  G27,  on
    balance the Appellants were indicating that they  were  supplying  that
    type  of  contract.  What  appears  in  the  summary  of  documents  is
    corroborative. I therefore find that on balance of  probabilities  that
    the contract, which  did  meet  the  requirements  of  the  Rules,  was
    supplied.

25. The question then is whether the Secretary of State should have  called
    for any further advertisements. Mr Richardson was for  saying  that  it
    was clear on the face of the advertisement that it  must  at  the  very
    least have been one of a sequence. If as on the face  of  the  document
    the company, Stable Consultants Limited had been posting "ads" (which I
    take  to  mean  advertisements  since  June  2014)  then  even  if  the
    advertisement relied upon was insufficient, it was submitted that there
    must have been earlier ones. Further the  date  which  appears  on  the
    document 12th August 2014 did not, it was submitted, relate to the date
    upon which the document was in fact posted but was the date upon  which
    it was printed out.

26. I cannot make a finding without more as to what the  date  at  the  top
    left-hand corner of the document means. There is  no  scope  for  post-
    decision evidence  but  it  was  not  necessarily  the  case  that  the
    advertisement was posted only eleven days prior to  12th  August  2014.
    What has happened in my judgment is that the focus of the Secretary  of
    State upon the bank statement, which clearly did not meet the Rule, and
    her interpretation of the advertisement taken together mean that it was
    not felt necessary to invite further evidence. I come to the view  that
    although it is possible that posting  advertisements  since  June  2014
    could mean advertisements in relation to the company or otherwise,  the
    real flaw here is that it does not appear that the Secretary  of  State
    has  given  any  thought  at  all  to  the  possibility  of  evidential
    flexibility  in  circumstances  in  which  in  my  judgment  sufficient
    questions arose out of the advertisement for her to have done so.

27. I, for my part, cannot make a finding  whether  or  not  there  was  an
    advertisement placed before the material date but clearly the Gum  Tree
    advert, expressed as it is, points to a line of enquiry  sufficient  to
    fall within 245AA(b)(i).

28. In those circumstances I find that this matter needs to be remitted  to
    the Secretary of State to complete her enquiries which will start  with
    consideration as to whether or not  to  exercise  her  discretion  with
    respect to the Gum Tree advert and should she so decide then invite the
    Appellants to produce the evidence from Gum Tree showing that there was
    in fact an earlier advert. If of course the Appellants cannot meet that
    requirement then all of this will have been for nought.

Decision

29. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal is remade such that the matter is remitted to the Secretary of
    State in accordance with the Guidance in Ukas in  order  that  she  can
    consider whether or not to invite the Appellants to provide the missing
    advertisement or otherwise sufficient evidence to demonstrate that  the
    advertisement itself produced was published prior to the required date.
    In the alternative it is possible that the document  does  not  contain
    all of the specified information in that it is not clear when  in  fact
    the advertisement was published. The Secretary of State has  taken  the
    date 8/12/14 as the date upon which it was published but I do not  find
    that that is necessarily established from the document it may  just  as
    well be the consequence of a screenshot or the date upon which  it  was
    printed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date 6th October 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker
