
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP/KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/42677/2014
                                                               IA/42684/2014
                                                               IA/42689/2014
                                                               IA/45398/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 January 2016                   |On 26 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       miss umme shifa khuzaima jannoo
                        mrs bibi shehnaz begum jannoo
                           mr mohammad ally jannoo
                         miss bibi mumtahina jannoo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                        Respondent/Claimants


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E. Savage, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Mr W. Rees, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Plumptre sitting at Hatton  Cross  on
    13 May 2015) allowing on  Article  8  grounds  the  claimants'  appeals
    against the decision of the Secretary of State to refuse to grant  them
    discretionary leave to remain as a family who had been living in the UK
    since  2006.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity
    direction, and I do not consider that  the  claimants  required  to  be
    accorded anonymity for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The background to this case is that the claimants are all nationals  of
    Mauritius.  The  second  and  third  claimants  are  husband  and  wife
    respectively.  The first claimant was born on 15 December 1996, and the
    fourth claimant was born 4 May 1992.  As  the  first  claimant  is  the
    principal claimant, for reasons which will become clear in due  course,
    I shall hereafter refer to her simply as the claimant, save  where  the
    context otherwise requires.

 3. The claimant's father entered the United Kingdom in 2006 as a  visitor.
    On 1 October 2006  he  applied  for  leave  to  remain  as  a  student.
    Following his grant of student leave on 27 November 2006, his wife  and
    two children came from Mauritius to join him  here.   They  entered  as
    visitors on or about 1 December 2006, and later obtained limited  leave
    to remain as his dependants. The father's last grant of  limited  leave
    to remain as a student ran until 12 July 2014.  But on 7 July 2011  his
    Tier 4 Sponsor licence  was  revoked,  and  his  leave  to  remain  was
    curtailed so as to expire on 2 June 2012.

 4. On 30 May 2012 the claimant's father applied for leave to remain on the
    basis of family and private life, naming his wife and youngest daughter
    (the claimant) as his dependants.

 5. The application was refused on 12 July  2013.   The  claimant  and  her
    parents appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal,  and  the  appeals  were
    allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Raymond on 15 July  2014  "to  the
    limited extent of remitting these  three  matters  for  reconsideration
    under Article 8 outside the Rules because  the  refusal  decisions  are
    otherwise not in accordance with the law for the reasons given".

 6. According to Judge Raymond's decision, a copy of which Mr  Rees  handed
    up to me, the claimant's older sister was included in  the  application
    of 29 May 2012.  Having reviewed the Home Office material  relating  to
    the older sister, I consider that this is incorrect. At all events, she
    did not figure in the appeal.

 7. The decision was based on a misapprehension of the scope of Edgehill  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA  Civ  402  which
    the judge followed in preference to Haleemuden v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 558.  In  fact,  as  shown  by  the
    subsequent Court of Appeal decision in Singh, the  Secretary  of  State
    had lawfully considered the application  of  29  May  2012  within  the
    framework of the new Rules.

 8. The upshot was that the Secretary of State gave fresh consideration  to
    the application, and on 14 October 2014 gave her reasons  for  refusing
    the application on reconsideration.  The claimant had arrived in the UK
    in 2006 aged 9 years (just short of her 10th birthday).   She  had  now
    lived here for  seven  years,  and  was  aged  17.   Consideration  had
    therefore been given to paragraph  EX.1  as  to  whether  it  would  be
    reasonable for her to leave the UK.  It would be reasonable  to  expect
    her to leave the UK as she had lived in Mauritius for nine  years,  and
    she would be returning to Mauritius with both of her parents.

 9. Reference was made to Section 55.  The claimant was cared for in the UK
    by her parents, and the family  was  maintained  without  public  funds
    through her parents' employment.  In Mauritius her  father  would  have
    the legal right to work, and he had not shown that he would  be  unable
    to seek employment there, or that he would  not  be  able  to  maintain
    himself and his family as he did in the  UK.   The  claimant  may  have
    chosen to continue education in the  UK  but  it  was  clear  from  the
    objective  information  available  that  Mauritius  had  a  functioning
    education system which she would be able to enter, should she choose to
    continue with her studies.  She was not at  a  critical  point  in  her
    schooling, and so the inconvenience of relocation  and  any  transition
    period was considered to  be  proportionate  in  maintaining  effective
    immigration control.  It was in her best interests to remain with  both
    her parents, and it had not been shown that they  would  be  unable  to
    continue to provide for her safety and welfare  outside  the  UK.   The
    main applicant (the father), his spouse and their  daughter  under  the
    age of 18 would return to Mauritius as a family unit  and  continue  to
    enjoy their family life together.

10. On 24 October 2014 the Secretary of State gave her reasons for refusing
    the fourth claimant's separate  application  for  leave  to  remain  on
    private life grounds. The application had been made on  11  July  2014.
    It was accepted that she first  landed  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  1
    December 2006 and had received leave to enter as a visitor valid  until
    1 June 2007.  She had subsequently been granted an extension to stay in
    the United Kingdom as a dependent child.  On 31  August  2012  she  had
    applied for leave outside the Rules which was refused with no right  of
    appeal on 9 September 2013.  While she had lived in the  UK  for  seven
    years, it was not accepted that she had spent at least  half  her  life
    living continuously in the UK.  In order to meet  the  requirements  of
    Rule 276ADE(1)(vi), an applicant had to show that there would  be  very
    significant obstacles to the integration to the country to  which  they
    would have to do if required to leave the UK.  This was not accepted in
    her case.  She had  lived  in  Mauritius  for  twelve  years  prior  to
    entering the UK. Her parents had spent the majority of their  lives  in
    Mauritius, and they would have imparted their knowledge of  the  social
    and cultural customs and language of Mauritius to her.  If  she  wished
    to undertake further studies in the United Kingdom, it was open to  her
    to make an application for entry clearance under Tier 4 of  the  points
    based system.





The Hearing Before, and the Decision Of, the First-tier Tribunal

11. The appeal of the older sister was consolidated with the appeal of  the
    other members  of  the  family.   The  claimants  were  represented  by
    Counsel, and there was no appearance on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
    State.  The Judge received oral evidence from  the  first,  second  and
    fourth claimants and from Mrs Shaheen  Howes,  a  niece  of  the  third
    claimant.  Twenty six years ago the third claimant and his  family  had
    taken into her care in Mauritius following the death of her father when
    she was 6 years old.  She  had  remained  in  the  care  of  the  third
    claimant and his family until age 15.  When she  returned  to  the  UK,
    they continued to support her and she used to visit them  in  Mauritius
    when she could.  After the third claimant  came  to  the  UK  with  his
    family in 2006, this meant she could return to work because they helped
    with childcare for her two children.  She and her  husband  would  like
    the entire family to be permitted to live in the UK.

12. In her subsequent decision, the Judge set out her findings of fact  and
    credibility from paragraphs [23] onwards.  She said  she  was  treating
    all four claimants as in effect making the same appeals  based  on  the
    same facts for leave to  remain  as  a  family  unit  under  Article  8
    "largely outside the Immigration Rules".

13.  She  accepted  that  the  claimant  met  the  requirements   of   Rule
    276ADE(1)(iv) since she had lived continuously in the UK for more  than
    seven years and was still under the age of 18  at  the  time  when  the
    decision was remade on 7 October 2014, although she  was  now  aged  19
    years at the date of the hearing.

14. She found that it would not be reasonable for the claimant  (the  Judge
    in fact referred at this point to "A4", her older sister, but this must
    be a mistake) to leave both her immediate family and extended family in
    the UK and live in Mauritius given that she was aged 9 years  when  she
    first came to the United Kingdom in December 2006.

15. The Judge went on to cite the third and fourth principles enunciated by
    the presidential panel in Azimi-Moayed and Others (decision  affecting:
    onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC).  She accepted that the  claimant
    had completed her secondary and partially tertiary education in the  UK
    at a significant period in her life, having accrued over  seven  years'
    residence as a child from the age of 4.

16. At paragraph [30] she accepted that both daughters were adults  at  the
    date of the hearing and were not British citizens.  Hence the reasoning
    in ZH (Tanzania) and Section 55 of the 2009 Act, and a consideration of
    the best interests of children, was  no  longer  applicable.   But  she
    accepted from Counsel's analysis of the decision in EV (Philippines)  v
    SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874  that  it  would  be  a   disproportionate
    interference with the private lives of both daughters if all the family
    were removed, and the further studies of the daughters in the  UK  were
    interrupted.

17. At paragraph [32] she held that more than emotional  ties  as  per  the
    reasoning in Kugathas had been established in the appeal because of the
    tragic death of Mrs Howes' father, and the  fact  that  Mrs  Howes  had
    returned from the UK to live with the claimants  in  Mauritius  between
    the ages of 6 and 15, and that Mrs Howes'  parents  had  supported  the
    claimants when they first arrived in the United Kingdom.

18. She accepted she should take  into  account  the  factors  set  out  in
    paragraph [35] of EV (Philippines).  While  it  was  correct  that  the
    second to fourth claimants did not have any right to be in the UK,  the
    first claimant did have a right because she  met  the  requirements  of
    Rule  276ADE(1)(iv).   Since  the  younger   daughter   satisfied   the
    requirements of this Rule, her parents should be allowed to remain with
    her and hence they qualified for leave under Section R-LTRP of Appendix
    FM.

19. At paragraph [38] she found that the Secretary of State had  not  given
    full consideration to all the factors relevant to Article 8, ECHR,  nor
    of the fact that the claimant met the requirements of Rule 276ADE.  She
    found that the full extent of all the claimants living  together  as  a
    family unit was not fully considered.  Following  SSHD  v  HK  (Turkey)
    [2010] EWCA Civ 583 and RP (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2008] EWCA  Civ  825  she
    found that the fact that both daughters had remained living with  their
    parents into adulthood, and remained  financially  dependent  on  them,
    meant that neither daughter should be separated from their parents.

20. In paragraphs [42] and [43] the judge addressed  Section  117B  of  the
    2002 Act.  She said it was at least  arguable  that  the  parents  fell
    within Section 117B(6) because arguably at the time  of  refusal  their
    youngest daughter was a qualifying child under Section  117D.   So  she
    was willing to accept that both parents had a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental  relationship  with  a  qualifying  child  and  perhaps   more
    importantly to find it would not be reasonable to expect  the  claimant
    to leave the United Kingdom and return to Mauritius given that so  many
    of her family members were all present and living in the United Kingdom
    and sharing family life as they lived fairly close together or  between
    London E6 and Romford.

The Initial Refusal of Permission to Appeal

21. On 10 August 2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Juliet  Grant-Hutchison
    refused the Secretary of State permission to appeal.  For convenience I
    set out her reasons for doing so as she helpfully summarises  the  main
    thrust of the Secretary of State's  grounds  of  appeal,  and  Mr  Rees
    adopts her reasoning in opposing the error of law challenge:

         "2.  It is submitted that the judge erred law  (a)  by  failing  to
             give a structured approach to Article 8 required by case  law;
             (b) by placing  weight/adopting  Counsel's  skeleton  argument
             without giving the reader knowledge of  what  the  submissions
             were or making her own finding of facts;  (c)  by  failing  to
             give cogent reasons why  there  is  dependency  beyond  normal
             emotional ties between parents  and  adult  children;  (d)  by
             failing  to  explain  why  the  parents  qualify   under   the
             Immigration Rules (R-LTRPT); (e) by giving weight to the  fact
             that the family visas were renewed on 3 previous occasions and
             to the fact that the  Respondent  was  unable  to  attend  the
             hearing; (f) by failing to consider aspects of  family/private
             life when the family's  leave  situation  was  precarious  (AM
             Malawi) and (g)  by  failing  to  asses  the  public  interest
             (economic welfare of the UK as part  of  immigration  control)
             when both children are studying at tax  payers'  expense  with
             the  family  reliant  on  handouts  from  friends  and  family
             members.

         3.   The Procedural Rules allow  the  hearing  to  proceed  in  the
             absence of one party. No unfairness has  been  raised  in  the
             ground  for  permission  to  appeal.   The   judge   had   the
             Respondent's Reasons for Refusal Letter and  the  Respondent's
             bundle. The judge has used a structured approach  in  reaching
             her decision. The judge has set out what  Counsel's  arguments
             are and why she accepts them when considering all the evidence
             before her. The judge has considered the  correct  Immigration
             Rules and case law including sections  117  A  and  B  of  the
             Immigration Act 2014 in coming to her decision. The judge  has
             made appropriate findings which were open to her to make.  She
             has given adequate reasons for her decision.  It was  open  to
             the judge to place what weight she  felt  was  appropriate  to
             place on the evidence before her."

The Eventual Grant of Permission

22. In the renewed application for  permission  to  appeal,  Mr  Melvin  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State  insisted  the  judge  had  failed  to
    follow a structured approach.  It was incumbent on the judge to reach a
    decision  on  proportionality  following  a  "best  interests  of   the
    children" assessment which would include an assessment of the  parents'
    employment prospects in Mauritius,  family  accommodation,  educational
    prospects in Mauritius, etc.  As posed by Lord Justice  Lewison  in  EV
    (Philippines) at paragraphs [58] to [61], the  ultimate  question  was,
    "is it reasonable to expect the child to  follow  the  parent  with  no
    right to remain to the country of origin?"

23. On 15 September 2015 Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Jonathan  Perkins  granted
    permission for the following reasons:

         "1   I have reflected carefully before giving  permission  to  this
             case as the Decision may well stand up to scrutiny but I  have
             the advantage of reading counsel's skeleton argument. Arguably
             I should not need to do that to make  sense  of  the  Decision
             and, arguably, the Decision is not self contained. That  said,
             when the Decision refers to counsel's grounds it may  be  that
             the Decision paraphrases the grounds and so no material  error
             has occurred.

         2    It may be that the reference to "more than emotional ties"  in
             paragraph 32 is a red herring as the relationship between  the
             appellants and Mrs Howes was not the reason that  the  appeals
             were allowed.

         3    It may be that the Tribunal  has  decided  lawfully  that  the
             first appellant has established a right to  remain  under  the
             rules and that other appellants are entitled to remain on that
             account.

         4    Nevertheless, the fact that I may be able to make sense of the
             Decision does not mean that it is not arguably wrong.  I  give
             permission to appeal on each ground. It may be that the First-
             tier Tribunal's decision is not explained sufficiently."





The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

24. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Ms Savage submitted that the judge had erred in not engaging  with
    the reasons given in the refusal decision as to why it  was  reasonable
    for the claimant to return to Mauritius with her parents, and generally
    the judge had not conducted a rounded best  interests  assessment,  and
    taken  into  account  wider  proportionality   considerations,   before
    deciding that it was unreasonable to expect the claimant to  return  to
    Mauritius pursuant to Rule 276ADE.

25. On behalf of the claimants, Mr Rees agreed with Judge Perkins that  the
    decision paraphrased Counsel's grounds, and so there was  no  error  on
    that account; and he agreed that the reference to more  than  emotional
    ties in paragraph [32] was a red herring, as the  relationship  between
    the claimants and Mrs Howes was not the reason that  the  appeals  were
    allowed.  He submitted that the very  experienced  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  had  reached,  through  cogent  and  faultless   reasoning,   an
    unimpeachable decision that the claimant had  established  a  right  to
    remain under the Rules, and that the other claimants were  entitled  to
    remain on that account.

Discussion

26.  EV (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874 provides  the  most  recent
    guidance from the senior courts on the approach to best  interests  and
    the question of reasonableness.  Clarke LJ said:

         "34. In determining whether or not, in a case such as the  present,
             the need for immigration control outweighs the best  interests
             of the children, it is necessary  to  determine  the  relative
             strength of the factors which make it in their best  interests
             to remain here; and also to take account of any  factors  that
             point the other way.

         35. A decision as to what is in the  best  interests  of  children
             will depend on a number of factors such as (a) their age;  (b)
             the length of time that they have been here; (c) how long they
             have been in education; (c) what  stage  their  education  has
             reached; (d) to what extent they have  become  distanced  from
             the country to which it is proposed that they return; (e)  how
             renewable their connection with it may be; (f) to what  extent
             they will have linguistic, medical or  other  difficulties  in
             adapting to life in that country; and (g) the extent to  which
             the course proposed will interfere with their family  life  or
             their rights (if they have any) as British citizens.

         36. In a sense the tribunal is  concerned  with  how  emphatic  an
             answer falls to be given to the question: is it  in  the  best
             interests of the child to remain? The  longer  the  child  has
             been here, the more advanced (or critical) the  stage  of  his
             education, the looser his ties with the country  in  question,
             and the more deleterious the consequences of his  return,  the
             greater the weight that falls into one side of the scales  (my
             emphasis).  If  it  is  overwhelmingly  in  the  child's  best
             interests that he should not  return,  the  need  to  maintain
             immigration control may well not tip the balance. By  contrast
             if it is in the child's best interests to remain, but only  on
             balance (with some factors pointing the other way), the result
             may be the opposite.

         37. In the balance on the other side there falls to be taken  into
             account the strong weight to be given to the need to  maintain
             immigration control in pursuit of the economic  well-being  of
             the country and the fact that, ex hypothesi,  the  applicants
             have no entitlement to remain. The immigration history of  the
             parents may also be relevant e.g. if they are overstayers,  or
             have acted deceitfully."

27.  Lewison LJ said:

         "49. Second, as Christopher Clarke LJ points out, the evaluation of
             the  best  interests  of  children  in  immigration  cases  is
             problematic.  In the  real  world,  the  appellant  is  almost
             always the parent who has no right to remain in the  UK.   The
             parent thus relies  on  the  best  interests  of  his  or  her
             children in order  to  piggyback  on  their  rights.   In  the
             present case, as  there  is  no  doubt  in  many  others,  the
             Immigration Judge made two findings about the children's  best
             interests:

             (a)  the best interests  of  the  children  are  obviously  to
                  remain with their parents; [29] and

             (b)  it is in the best interests of the  children  that  their
                  education in the UK [is] not to be disrupted [53].

         50.  What, if any, assumptions are to be made about the immigration
             status of the parent?  If one takes the facts as they  are  in
             reality, then the first of the  Immigration  Judge's  findings
             about  the  best  interests  of  the  children  point  towards
             removal.  If, on the other hand, one assumes that  the  parent
             has the right to remain, then one is assuming  the  answer  to
             the very question the Tribunal has to decide.  Or is there  is
             a middle ground, in which one has to assess the best interests
             of the children without regard to the  immigration  status  of
             the parent?"

28.  The judge went on to analyse ZH (Tanzania) v  Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department [2011] UKSC 4 in order to elicit an answer to  this
    question.  He reached the following conclusion:

         "58.  In  my  judgment,  therefore,  the  assessment  of  the  best
             interests of the children must be made on the basis the  facts
             are as they are in the real world.  One parent has no right to
             remain, but the other parent  does,  that  is  the  background
             against which the assessment is conducted.  If neither  parent
             has the right to remain, then that is the  background  against
             which the assessment is conducted.  Thus the ultimate question
             will be is it reasonable to expect the  child  to  follow  the
             parent with no right to remain to the country of origin?"

    On the facts of ZH it was not reasonable  to  expect  the  children  to
    follow their mother to Tanzania, not least because the family would  be
    separated and the children would be deprived of the right to grow up in
    the country of which they were citizens.  That was a long way from  the
    facts of the case before them.  No one in  the  family  was  a  British
    citizen.  None had the right to remain in the country.  If  the  mother
    was removed, the father had no independent right to remain.   With  the
    parents removed, then it was entirely reasonable to expect the children
    to go with them:

         "Although it is, of course a question of fact for the  Tribunal,  I
         cannot see that  the  desirability  of  being  educated  at  public
         expense in the UK can outweigh  the  benefit  to  the  children  of
         remaining with their parents.  Just as we  cannot  provide  medical
         treatment for the world, so we cannot educate the world."

    Jackson LJ agreed with both judgments.

29.   In  Azimi-Moayed  &  Others  (decisions  affecting  children;   onward
    appeals) [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC) a Presidential panel held:

         "30. It is not the case that the best interests principle means  it
             is automatically in the interests of any child to be permitted
             to remain in the United Kingdom, irrespective of  age,  length
             of stay, family background or other circumstances.   The  case
             law  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  has  identified  the  following
             principles to assist in the  determination  of  appeals  where
             children are affected by the decisions:

             (i)  As a starting point  it  is  in  the  best  interests  of
                  children to be with both their parents (my  emphasis)  and
                  if both parents are being removed from the United  Kingdom
                  then the starting point suggests that so should  dependent
                  children who form part of their household unless there are
                  reasons to the contrary."

30.  Although the First-tier Tribunal Judge is very  experienced  and  well-
    versed in the relevant authorities, I find that  she  has  fallen  into
    error in two related respects, albeit that the first is not  raised  in
    the grounds of appeal.

31.  The judge's first error  was  to  treat  the  claimant  as  potentially
    qualifying for leave  to  remain  under  Rule  276ADE(1)(iv).   At  the
    beginning of the Rule it is specified that the relevant  criteria  must
    be met "at the date of application".  The date of application  in  this
    case was 29 May 2012, when the claimant had not  accrued  seven  years'
    residence in the  UK.   The  judge  clearly  overlooked  the  potential
    significance of this requirement, as later in her decision she  wrongly
    criticised the Secretary of State for not considering  the  application
    of  Rule  276ADE(1)(iv)  to  the  claimant   when   reconsidering   the
    application in October 2014.

32.  By that time, the claimant was a qualifying child pursuant  to  Section
    117D of the 2002 Act, which came into force shortly  after  the  appeal
    hearing before Judge Raymond.  Consequentially the Secretary  of  State
    rightly considered in the refusal decision whether  it  was  reasonable
    for the claimant to return with her parents to the country of origin in
    the light of the fact that  she  had  now  accrued  over  seven  years'
    residence in the UK, albeit that this exercise  was  conducted  in  the
    context of EX.1, rather than by reference to Section 117B(6).

33.  The claimant entered the United Kingdom just before her 10th  birthday,
    which was 15 December 2006.  The period for which she was a qualifying
    child under the statute was a short one, ending on  15  December  2014,
    when she turned 18.  Accordingly, at the date  of  the  hearing  before
    Judge Plumptre the claimant was neither a qualifying child (as she  was
    no longer under the age of  18)  and  nor  did  she  meet  the  gateway
    requirement for consideration under EX.1 and Rule 276ADE, both of which
    specify that seven years' residence as a child must have  been  accrued
    by the date of application.  While this did not  preclude  some  weight
    being given to the claimant's previous lengthy residence as a child  in
    an Article 8  assessment  outside  the  Rules,  the  judge  misdirected
    herself in finding that the claimant  qualified  for  leave  to  remain
    under the Rules.

34.  The second error is encapsulated  in  the  passage  from  Lord  Justice
    Lewison's judgment which is relied on in the  renewed  application  for
    permission  to  appeal.   When  addressing  the  issue  whether  it  is
    reasonable for the claimant to return to Mauritius, the judge posed the
    wrong question and set off  on  the  wrong  trajectory.   What  was  in
    contemplation was the removal of the entire  family  to  Mauritius,  in
    circumstances where no member of the family had an independent right to
    remain here under the Rules.  So the starting point was whether it  was
    reasonable to expect the claimant to follow both her  parents  with  no
    right to remain to their common country of origin.  At  paragraph  [25]
    the judge  posed  a  different  question,  which  was  whether  it  was
    reasonable for the claimant to go on  her  own  to  Mauritius,  leaving
    behind both her immediate family and her extended  family  in  the  UK.
    There was no question of her immediate family  being  left  behind,  as
    they were simultaneously facing removal to Mauritius.  So  it  was  the
    wrong question to pose.

35.  As a result of  failing  to  conduct  her  analysis  in  a  real  world
    context, the judge completely ignored the best interest  considerations
    which militated in favour of the claimant returning  with  her  parents
    and older sister to the country  of  which  they  were  all  nationals.
    Among other things, there was an egregious  failure  to  recognise  the
    first principle in Azimi-Moayed and Others, which underlay  the  reason
    given by the Secretary of State in the refusal  letter  for  contending
    that it was reasonable for the claimant to return with her  parents  to
    Mauritius.

36.  The judge also failed to bring into the equation wider  proportionality
    considerations before  reaching  a  conclusion  on  the  reasonableness
    question.

37.  As the appeals of the other family members all  hinged  on  the  deeply
    flawed  finding  that  the  claimant  met  the  requirements  of   Rule
    276ADE(1)(iv) and/or that it was not reasonable to expect her to return
    to Mauritius pursuant to Section 117B(6), it follows that the  entirety
    of the decision is vitiated by a material error of law  such  that  the
    decision should be set aside in its entirety.

Future Disposal

38.  One of the error of law challenges raised in  the  initial  application
    for permission was the judge's alleged failure to give  cogent  reasons
    why there was dependency beyond normal emotional ties  between  parents
    and adult children.  Of greater significance  however  is  the  judge's
    finding that there were more than normal  emotional  ties  between  the
    claimants and Mrs Howes.  Although the disruption of family  life  with
    Mrs Howes was not in the event relied on by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Plumptre as a compelling circumstance outside the Rules which justified
    the claimants being accorded Article 8 relief  outside  the  Rules,  it
    remains a live and controversial question, as does the proposition that
    the older daughter is  still  emotionally  dependent  on  her  parents,
    bearing in mind that her application  for  leave  to  remain  was  made
    solely on private life grounds, and not on the  grounds  of  continuing
    emotional dependency.  In the light of the above, I consider  that  the
    extent of fact-finding that is likely to be required  in  remaking  the
    decision is such that this is an appropriate case to be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing, with none of the findings of
    fact made by Judge Plumptre being preserved.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the decision is set aside.

No anonymity direction is made.

Directions

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross for  a  de
novo hearing.  None of the findings of fact made by  the  previous  Tribunal
shall be preserved.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

