
[pic]


Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/42449/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Birmingham ET               |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 22 January 2016                   |On 26 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |



                                   Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And





                                     KIO


                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs A Lynch, counsel instructed by Crown Solicitors



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a decision of FTTJ Pooler, promulgated on  31
    March 2015. Permission to appeal was granted by FTTJ Page  on  10  June
    2015

Background


 2. The respondent entered the United Kingdom  on  25  January  2013,  with
    leave to enter as a visitor. On 23 July 2013, he sought leave to remain
    on the basis of his relationship with his partner and children, who are
    Zimbabwean nationals with Discretionary Leave to Remain in  the  United
    Kingdom. That application was refused on 10 September 2013 because  the
    respondent's partner had only limited leave to remain;  the  respondent
    was ineligible because he was in the United Kingdom as a visitor and he
    also could not benefit from consideration under EX.1  of  Appendix  FM.
    With regard to the children, it was said that they  were  not  British,
    settled and nor had they resided in the United Kingdom for at  least  7
    years. In addition, the respondent lived with his partner and  children
    as a family unit and he was in the United Kingdom as a visitor and thus
    ineligible for consideration under EX.1. The Secretary of State did not
    accept that the appellant had lost ties to Nigeria during the  time  he
    had been in the United Kingdom. It was noted that  he  had  resided  in
    Nigeria for 35 years. It was also considered there were no  exceptional
    circumstances involved.

 3. In the grounds of appeal, it was argued that the respondent's wife  had
    been living in the United Kingdom for 11 years; that his eldest son had
    resided here for 7 years and the respondent left  Nigeria  to  live  in
    Benin in 1989; first arrived in the United  Kingdom  in  2005  and  his
    relatives in Nigeria had either passed away, moved away or  he  was  no
    longer communicating with them.

 4. The respondent's appeal was previously allowed by First-tier Tribunal V
    A Lowe, on human rights grounds, in a determination promulgated  on  10
    June 2014. That decision was  set  aside,  in  part,  by  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Pickup, following a hearing on 21 October 2014  and  the
    appeal remitted to the  First-Tier  Tribunal.  The  evidential  summary
    referred to between [7] and [18] of the  determination  was  preserved,
    with leave given to the parties "to adduce further  evidence  to  bring
    private and family life circumstances up to date for the  rehearing  of
    the appeal."

The hearing before FTTJ Pooler

 5. The respondent and his partner gave evidence before the FTTJ. The  FTTJ
    found that the respondent could not meet any of the  Immigration  rules
    relating to private and family life. In terms of Article 8 outside  the
    Rules, the FTTJ considered that any interference with  the  appellant's
    family   life   was   disproportionate,   particularly   taking    into
    consideration the best interests of the children who were then  aged  8
    and 4.

Error of law


 6. The grounds of appeal argue that the FTTJ's finding  that  it  was  not
    reasonable to expect the respondent's  children  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom was inadequately reasoned, irrational  and  ignored  the  clear
    guidance in  Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decision  affecting  children;
    onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197 (IAC).

 7. FTTJ Page granted permission, finding there to be an arguable error  of
    law on the basis argued in the grounds.

 8. The respondent did not file a Rule 24 response. However  an  additional
    bundle of evidence was served in advance of the hearing, which included
    documents showing that the  appellant's  wife  and  children  had  been
    granted further discretionary leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
    until 2018.

The hearing


 9. Mr McVeety  had  not  been  supplied  with  a  file.  Counsel  for  the
    respondent was also lacking documents. Copies were  therefore  provided
    of the FTTJ's decision, grounds of appeal and grant of permission  from
    the IAC case file.

10. Mr McVeety had little to argue in respect of the grounds, stating  that
    he disagreed with the grant of permission, in that the FTTJ had applied
    the case law in question, albeit incorrectly.

11. Mrs Lynch argued, in essence,  that  the  FTTJ's  findings  were  well-
    reasoned. There had been a  substantial  quantity  of  information  put
    before the FTTJ, none of which was in dispute.   The  FTTJ  heard  oral
    evidence from the respondent and his wife; assessed  their  credibility
    and considered  reasoned  arguments.  He  was  entitled  to  reach  the
    conclusions he did. She stressed that the guidance in Azimi-Moayed  was
    not a straightjacket and the FTTJ was entitled to use his discretion.

12. Mr McVeety had nothing to add in reply.

Decision on error of law

13. I found there to be no material error of law in the FTTJ's decision and
    reasons and accordingly upheld his decision in  its  entirety  for  the
    following reasons.

14. The FTTJ followed a structured approach to deciding this  appeal.  This
    can be seen from [16] onwards where he considers  that  the  respondent
    was unable to meet the requirements of  the  Rules  and  correctly  and
    carefully follow the steps set out in Razgar. The FTTJ attached  weight
    to the public  interest  at  [23]  of  the  decision  with  a  specific
    reference to section 117B(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002, as amended.

15. The grounds assert that the FTTJ's finding that it was  not  reasonable
    to expect the respondent's minor children to leave the  United  Kingdom
    was inadequately reasoned; I consider this argument to be misconceived.
    The decision was resplendent with reasoning. The FTTJ explored the best
    interests of the children; at [20] he took into consideration the  fact
    that the eldest child had then been in the United Kingdom for  8  years
    and 7 months; at [21] he found, on  the  unchallenged  evidence  before
    him, that the eldest child had started to establish  relationships  and
    put down roots in the United Kingdom. Also at [21] the FTTJ  took  into
    consideration the Secretary of State's case, specifically  noting  that
    the children were not British and had no medical or educational  needs.
    Between [27] and [30] of the decision, the FTTJ set out the  particular
    issues with the eldest child relocating to either Nigeria or Zimbabwe.

16. The grant of permission refers to the general guidance given in  Azimi-
    Moayed. I find that the FTTJ did not materially err in his approach  to
    this case. The headnote of the said determination, indicates  that  the
    principles outlined therein were given  to  assist  judges  with  their
    decisions. As Mrs Lynch rightly argues,  judges  are  entitled  to  use
    their discretion. I consider the FTTJ took into consideration  headnote
    iv) at [21], in that notwithstanding that seven years from the  age  of
    four is likely to be  more  significant,  on  the  particular  evidence
    before him the eldest child in this case had established  relationships
    of his own and put down roots. The FTTJ did not  err  in  finding  that
    eight  and  a  half  years  residence  was  a  relevant  consideration.
    Furthermore at [24] the FTTJ concluded  that  it  was  the  nature  and
    quality of family life in this case, which gave it strength.

Conclusion

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I uphold the decision of the FTTJ.

An anonymity direction was made by the FTTJ and I  maintain  that  direction
in the following terms;-

    "Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. "


Signed      Date: 24 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

