

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA428882014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                         |Decision Promulgated         |
|On: 19th May 2016                             |On: 25th May 2016            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                Keren Oaknin
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A. Seelhoff ,  A. Seelhoff Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Brocklesby-Weller ,  Senior Home Office
                       Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is an Israeli national born on the 22nd February 1983.


 2. On  the  2nd  October  2016  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Thorne)
    dismissed her appeal against a decision to refuse to issue her  with  a
    residence card confirming her right of residence as the  family  member
    (spouse) of an EEA national exercising treaty rights in the UK. At  the
    date of the appeal before Judge Thorne the Appellant had separated, but
    not divorced, from her Hungarian husband. Their relationship  had  been
    placed under considerable strain by  the  fact  that  in  2012  he  was
    diagnosed with significant mental health problems, which had also  left
    him unable to work. Judge Thorne considered the  Appellant's  husband's
    position, and so her own,  with reference to Regulation 6 (2)  and  (3)
    of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006:

         (2) A person who is no longer working shall not cease to be treated
         as a worker for the purpose of paragraph (1)(b) if-

         (a) he is temporarily unable to work as the result of an illness or
         accident;

         (b) he is in duly recorded involuntary unemployment after having
         been employed in the United Kingdom, provided that he has
         registered as a jobseeker with the relevant employment office and-

         (i)he was employed for one year or more before becoming unemployed;



         (ii)he has been unemployed for no more than six months; or

         (iii)he can provide evidence that he is seeking employment in the
         United Kingdom and has a genuine chance of being engaged;

         (c)he is involuntarily unemployed and has embarked on vocational
         training; or

         (d)he has voluntarily ceased working and embarked on vocational
         training that is related to his previous employment.

           (3) A person who is no longer in self-employment shall not cease
         to be  treated  as  a  self-employed  person  for  the  purpose  of
         paragraph (1)(c) if he is temporarily unable to pursue his activity
         as a self-employed person as the result of an illness or accident.


 3. The Tribunal directed itself to this Regulation because that is the one
    referred to  in  the  Respondent's  reasons  for  refusal  letter.  The
    Appellant was not legally represented.

 4. The Tribunal found as fact that the illness of the Appellant's  husband
    was not a temporary incapacity:  Reg  6(2)  did  not  therefore  apply.
    There was a long term inability to work.   Nor could it be  established
    that he had been recorded as being involuntarily unemployed. The appeal
    was thereby dismissed.

 5. The grounds of appeal are that the First-tier Tribunal erred in failing
    to consider  a) whether the Appellant's husband, and so the  Appellant,
    had already acquired a permanent right of residence and b) whether  any
    period of residence accrued in accordance with Regulation 5(1) and  (3)
    would assist.

 6. Regulation 15 sets out the means  by  which  EEA  nationals  and  their
    family members can acquire a permanent right of residence in the UK:

           15.-(1) The following persons shall acquire the right to  reside
         in the United Kingdom permanently-

         (a) an EEA national who has resided in the United Kingdom in
         accordance with these Regulations for a continuous period of five
         years;

         b)a family member of an EEA national who is not himself an EEA
         national but who has resided in the United Kingdom with the EEA
         national in accordance with these Regulations for a continuous
         period of five years;


 7. Regulation 5 makes provision for the preservation of 'qualified person'
    status in circumstances of incapacity:

           5.-(1) In these Regulations, "worker or self-employed person who
         has ceased activity"  means  an EEA national  who  satisfies  the
         conditions in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).

           ...

            (3) A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if-

           (a) he terminates his activity in the United Kingdom as a  worker
         or self-employed person as a result of a  permanent  incapacity  to
         work; and

           (b)either-

           (i) he resided in the United Kingdom continuously for more than
           two years prior to the termination; or

           (ii) the incapacity is the result of an accident at work or an
           occupational disease that entitles him to a pension payable in
           full or in part by an institution in the United Kingdom.


 8. Mr Seelhoff submitted that  under  Regulation  15(1)(b)  the  Appellant
    would be entitled to proof of a permanent right  of  residence  if  she
    could establish, on a balance of probabilities, that she had  lived  in
    the United Kingdom for a continuous period of five years in  accordance
    with the Regulations. It is not in issue that  the  Appellant  and  her
    husband have lived in the UK since 2007.  As a family member of an  EEA
    national she had to demonstrate that her husband  had  been  exercising
    treaty rights for a continuous five-year period following her  arrival.
    If he had been living in the UK in accordance with the Regulations,  it
    would follow that so had she and she would acquire a permanent right of
    residence.

 9. Before me Ms Brocklesby-Weller agreed that this  was  so.  She  and  Mr
    Seelhoff very helpfully took the time to check the loose bundle of HMRC
    correspondence, bank statements, payslips and and  accounts  which  the
    Appellant had handed in to the First-tier  Tribunal.   Having  done  so
    they were in agreement  that  these  documents  demonstrated  that  the
    Appellant's husband had been in continuous employment for in excess  of
    a five year period, from 2007 until he stopped work  in  2012.  He  had
    therefore acquired a permanent right of  residence,  and  applying  Reg
    15(1)(b),  so  had  she.   There  was  therefore  no  need  to  examine
    Regulation 5(3), although on the face of it the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    findings as to his permanent incapacity to work would have allowed  the
    Appellant to rely on any period after he stopped work due  to  illness,
    had that been necessary.

      Decisions

10. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law
    (the omission to consider Regulation 15) and it is set aside.


11. The appeal is allowed  with  reference  to  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area Regulations) 2006


12. I was  not  asked  to  make  a  direction  for  anonymity  and  in  the
    circumstances I see no reason to do so.







                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce

                                20th May 2016
