
[pic]
IAC-AH-pc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42413/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26th June 2015                    |On 9th July 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                     JN
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No legal representation
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Sangha, promulgated on 1st October 2014, following at hearing  at
    Birmingham  on  30th  July  2014.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of JN.  The Appellant  subsequently  applied  for,
    and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal,  and  thus
    the matter comes before me.

 2. The Appellant is a female citizen of Kenya who was  born  August  1978.
    She entered the UK in July 2008 as a domestic  worker.   She  has  been
    looking after three children whilst  the  children's  mother  has  been
    studying at university and the father is working  in  Sweden.   On  3rd
    July 2013 the Appellant applied for leave to remain on the  grounds  of
    her private and family life.  This  application  was  rejected  on  6th
    August 2013 by the Respondent on grounds that an Article 8  application
    from 9th July 2012 falls under  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge heard evidence from  EK,  and  she  gave  evidence  that  the
    Appellant now lived with her at her home address and that "she and  her
    children have developed a very strong relationship with  the  Appellant
    and that they are emotionally attached to her and it would  not  be  in
    the children's best interests if  the  Appellant  were  now  forced  to
    return to Kenya" (paragraph 11).  The Appellant provides  the  children
    with "childcare, cooking and assists the children with their  homework"
    (paragraph 11).  The judge held that the Appellant had originally  been
    granted a domestic worker visa in a diplomatic household from June 2008
    until June 2009, but because of mistreatment, she  left  that  employer
    when she met EK, and began living with her.  The judge  observed  that,
    "despite the fact that  the  Appellant  appears  to  have  changed  her
    employer she has not made any application to extend her stay in the  UK
    on the basis  that  she  is  now  employed  by  a  different  employer"
    (paragraph 15).  Nevertheless, the judge concluded that "the  Appellant
    has no family relationship with EK or  her  children".   She  may  have
    established a private and family life with Emily and the  children  for
    the past three and half years but  the  Respondent's  decision  was  in
    pursuance of the legitimate aim  of  maintaining  immigration  control.
    The Appellant had her parents in Kenya.  Her  six  brothers  and  three
    sisters  lived  in  Kenya.   Moreover,  there   were   no   exceptional
    circumstances (see paragraph 16).  The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 4. The grounds of application  state  that  the  judge  erred  in  law  in
    overlooking the full extent of the  private  and  family  life  of  the
    Appellant.

 5. On 2nd December 2014, permission to appeal was  granted  on  the  basis
    that, as the  grounds  state,  one  of  the  children  is  particularly
    vulnerable, as she was the victim of sexual assault whilst attending  a
    church Sunday school.  But there is no mention of this in  the  judge's
    determination.  In granting permission, it was stated  that,  "what  is
    clear however, is that  the  Appellant  and  the  children  enjoyed  an
    extremely close relationship and that the Appellant was  considered  to
    be part of the family" (paragraph 2).  Given that this  was  the  case,
    proper consideration ought to have been given to Section 55 of the 2009
    Act.  This would have allowed the judge to look at the  best  interests
    of the children with respect to whether or not they could  properly  be
    returned to Kenya.  This was not done.



Submissions

 6. At the hearing before me on 26th June 2015, JN, the Appellant, appeared
    herself to make submissions.  She said that  she  has  lived  with  the
    children for a very long time and that they love and need her.  She has
    always been there for them.  The mother, EK was alone.  She has  always
    been there for the children always.

 7. For the Respondent, Mr Smart submitted that I should have regard to the
    Rule 24 response.  This was dated 11th December 2014.   The  judge  did
    give proper regard to  the  relationship  between  the  Appellant,  her
    employer, and the employer's children (see paragraph 16).  There was no
    blood  relationship  with  either  the  employer  or  children  and  no
    dependency. There was no submission that the children are dependent  on
    the Appellant.  There was no submission that the children would come to
    any harm if the Appellant is required to leave to the UK.  Section 5 of
    the BCIA is designed for the protection of children from  harm  and  it
    does not mean  that  it  has  to  be  factored  into  every  Article  8
    evaluation in the consideration of the issues.  The judge  had  applied
    the law properly.  It is possible that the judge can be  considered  in
    his consideration of Article 8 at paragraph 16 because of  the  failure
    to factor in Section 117B of the Immigration Act  2014.   However,  the
    Appellant only had precarious leave and little weight should  be  given
    to private life developed in circumstances where there is a  precarious
    immigration status.  Therefore, the judge would not have erred in law.

Error of Law

 8. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law, see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007, such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.  This is a case where the Appellant  has  been  looking  after
    three children over the past five years and all the  evidence  is  that
    the "children have  developed  a  very  strong  relationship  with  the
    Appellant and that they are emotionally  attached  to  her"  (paragraph
    11).   The  judge  gave  consideration  to  paragraph  276ADE  of   the
    Immigration Rules.  He did not apply  Section  55  of  the  BCIA.   The
    effect of this omission was that, whereas in  relation  to  Article  8,
    regard was given to "the Appellant has not demonstrated any exceptional
    circumstances as to why she cannot return to  her  country  of  origin"
    (see paragraph 16), no regard was given to the "best interests" of  the
    children.  This was important, not least because one of the twins,  who
    was aged 4, had been sexually abused  whilst  attending  Sunday  church
    school and proceedings had been ongoing in the court over the past  two
    years so that on 20th May 2014 the accused was charged at [...] Justice
    Centre, and there is an excerpt of a newspaper article confirming this.
     No consideration has been given  to  this  state  of  affairs  in  the
    application of Section 55 of the BCIA.  Accordingly,  having  found  an
    error of law, I now proceed to remake the decision.

Remaking the Decision

 9. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before him, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am allowing this  appeal  for  the  following  reasons.   The
    Section 55 of the BCIA 2009 obligation upon the responsible  party  has
    been overlooked by  the  judge  because  this  was  a  case  where  the
    statutory guidance issued  under  Section  55  had  to  be  taken  into
    account.  In JO (Section  55  duty)  Nigeria  [2014]  UKUT  00517,  the
    Tribunal explained that the decision maker must be properly informed of
    the position of the child.  Being properly informed  and  conducting  a
    scrupulous analysis is a prerequisite of identifying the  child's  best
    interests, and then balancing them with other essential considerations.
     Performing these duties  would  be  an  intensely  fact-sensitive  and
    contextual exercise.  In this case, there was an administrative failing
    in this regard with respect to the children.  The judge did not  engage
    with this failing.  This is a failing of a legal obligation.

10. In Mundeba [2013] UKUT 88 the Tribunal  explained  that  the  focus  in
    Section 55 cases is on the circumstances of the child in the  light  of
    his/her age, social background and developmental  history.   The  facts
    here are quite compelling and they have not been  taken  into  account.
    The judge's determination makes it  clear  at  paragraph  11  that  the
    evidence was that the Appellant and the "children have developed a very
    strong  relationship  with  the  Appellant  and  they  are  emotionally
    attached to her ...".  The judge did not consider this in his  eventual
    findings, preferring instead to give consideration to the fact that the
    Appellant had six brothers and three sisters in Kenya,  a  country  the
    language of which she spoke, and to which she could easily return  (see
    paragraph 16).  Yet, the facts are that one of the twins, at the age of
    4, was sexually abused in a church school.  A court case has been going
    on for the last two years.  On 20th May 2014 a person was charged.

11. It is the Appellant who has been attending court, as she makes clear in
    her evidence before the First-tier Tribunal in  writing  (see  her  "my
    reasoning and argument" at paragraph 2) and she makes  clear  that,  "I
    have accompanied her to every court hearing throughout the  proceedings
    and we have cried many tears along the way and I have stood between the
    gaps for this  family  whose  father/husband  works  in  Sweden".   She
    explains that the child's mother, EK, is a person who,

         "... finds it very hard to trust anyone with  her  children  except
         myself because I have been there ever since the sexual assault.   I
         can confirm that even though the perpetrator was charged  that  did
         not bring closure for this family because there is the  element  of
         fear by both parents as to whether  their  children  are  safe  out
         there" (paragraph 2).

12. In Mundeba [2013] UKUT 88, the Tribunal made it clear that the  Section
    55 obligation requires an enquiry into whether there is (a) evidence of
    neglect or abuse; (b) there are unmet needs that should be catered for;
    and (c) whether there are stable arrangements for the child's  physical
    care.  The assessment  involves  a  consideration  as  to  whether  the
    combination of circumstances are sufficiently serious and compelling.

13. Since the Appellant has not had these matters taken into  account,  and
    since the question of the sexual assault on one of the  two  twins  has
    not been addressed in the determination  below,  the  only  appropriate
    course of action is for this matter to be remitted back to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal under Practice Statement 7.2 because the  effect  of  the
    error has been to deprive a party before the First-tier Tribunal  of  a
    fair hearing or other opportunity for the party's case to  be  put  and
    considered by the First-tier Tribunal.  I  therefore  direct  that  the
    matter be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  determined  by  a
    judge at Birmingham other than Judge Sangha.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This matter is  remitted
back to the First-tier Tribunal at Birmingham under Practice  Statement  7.2
to be determined by  a  judge  other  than  Judge  Sangha  at  the  earliest
possible opportunity.

No anonymity order is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    9th July 2015
