
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/42966/2014
                                                               IA/42967/2014
                                                               IA/42968/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 October 2015                    |On 29 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                         mrs agnes monisola onilude
                       master opeyemi ayomide onilude
                   miss fopefunoluwa oluwamayokun onilude
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellants against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Borsada (Judge  Borsada),  promulgated  on  13  February
    2015, in which he dismissed their appeals. The appeals were against the
    Respondent's decisions of 16 October 2014, refusing to vary their leave
    to remain and to remove them from the United Kingdom under  section  47
    of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006. The Appellants are
    all citizens of Nigeria. The first  Appellant  is  the  mother  of  the
    second and third.

 2. On 30 July  2014  the  first  Appellant  made  an  application  to  the
    Respondent for further leave to remain as a Tier  1  Entrepreneur.  She
    submitted supporting evidence with that  application.  The  second  and
    third Appellants applied as dependents of their mother. The  Respondent
    refused the first Appellant's application on the basis that  no  points
    were awarded under Appendix A to  the  Rules.  It  was  said  that  the
    advertising materials provided was inadequate and that the contract for
    services did not state the duration of the contract.

Decision of Judge Borsada

 3. The judge found that the advertising materials were in  fact  compliant
    with the requirements of paragraph 41-SD of Appendix A  (see  paragraph
    7). The sole remaining issue for determination  was  therefore  whether
    the contract satisfied the evidential  requirements  of  paragraph  41-
    SD(iv)(1) of Appendix A in respect of the contract.

 4. Judge Borsada concluded that the requirements were not in fact met.  He
    found that the contract did not include  the  contact  details  of  the
    other  party,  and  that  the  contract  did  not  state  its  duration
    (paragraph 7). On this basis, the appeal failed insofar as the  Tier  1
    Entrepreneur issue was concerned.

 5.  The  judge  specifically  notes  that  the  issue  of  the  children's
    circumstances was not being pursued before him. In any event, he  deals
    with Article 8 briefly, given the dearth of information  provided.  The
    appeals failed on this ground too.

The grounds of appeal

 6. The grounds focus on the  issue  of  fairness.  It  is  said  that  the
    Respondent should have exercised discretion in either  seeking  further
    evidence  from  the  first  Appellant  or  granting   the   application
    exceptionally. Article 8 was not raised.

 7. In granting  permission  to  appeal,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McWilliam
    observed in her decision of 31 July 2015 that Judge  Borsada  may  have
    erred in failing to consider whether the evidence provided by the first
    Appellant did in fact satisfy the evidential requirements of  paragraph
    41-SD. Nothing is said about fairness here.

The hearing before me

 8. Although the first Appellant had been legally  represented  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, she was by now appearing in person. I took time to
    ensure that she was aware of the nature  of  the  proceedings.  It  was
    clear to me that she was a well-organised individual, and fully able to
    present her case. A skeleton argument (prepared with  assistance  of  a
    friend) was submitted on her behalf. Mr Whitwell  provided  myself  and
    the first Appellant with the decisions in Shebl (Entrepreneur: proof of
    contracts) [2014] UKUT 00216 (IAC) and Sabir  [2015]  EWHC  264  Admin,
    these having been  mentioned  in  the  grant  of  permission.  He  also
    produced a copy of HC532, which  introduced  relevant  changes  to  the
    evidential requirements of paragraph 41-SD.

 9. It was noted at paragraph  9  of  Judge  Borsada's  decision  that  the
    Appellants' representative had sought to withdraw the  appeals  of  the
    second and third Appellants at the hearing  because  they  should  have
    been dependents on the first  Appellant.  For  whatever  reason,  their
    appeals remained live, and are before me now. The first  Appellant  and
    Mr Whitwell agreed that I should deal with them.

10. The first Appellant confirmed that the contract in the papers  was  the
    only one provided  in  support  of  the  application  (see  D1  of  the
    Respondent's bundle and 31 of the  Appellant's  bundle).  She  accepted
    that the duration of the contract  had  accidently  been  omitted  from
    section 4.1 of the document. In respect of the  other  party's  contact
    details, she said that the company did not have  a  landline  or  email
    address. A mobile telephone  number  had  existed,  but  this  was  not
    required by paragraph 41-SD(iv)(1)(d). The address of the  other  party
    was in fact included in section 7.1 of the contract. Alternatively, she
    submitted that a Barclays Bank letter dated 1 July 2014, provided  with
    the application, was enough to satisfy paragraph 41-SD(iv)(2).

11. Mr Whitwell submitted that the contract did  not  contain  all  of  the
    required information and therefore the requirements of paragraph  41-SD
    were not met. The duration of the contract was not stated. It  was  not
    clear what the address stated in section 7.1 of the  contract  referred
    to, it being a section on restraint of trade. The Barclays  letter  did
    not assist the first Appellant because it did  not  show  trading,  but
    only when the business account was opened. In terms  of  fairness,  the
    omissions were of a substantive rather than a  formal  nature.  As  the
    Respondent's initial refusal was based on multiple grounds,  there  was
    no requirement to contact the first Appellant.

12. The first Appellant briefly replied by saying that the bank letter  was
    sufficient and that the contract only had minor omissions. She did  not
    seek to say anything about Article 8.

Decision on error of law

13. I have concluded that there are no material errors of law in respect of
    Judge Borsada's decision.

14. The simple fact is  that  the  sole  contract  provided  by  the  first
    Appellant did not contain its duration. Section 4.1 is the  appropriate
    location for the duration to have been included, but the first sentence
    reads, "This agreement shall be effective as of 6 July 2014, and  shall
    continue in full force and effect for __ consecutive months." The judge
    did not overlook any other evidence which  might,  on  a  common  sense
    view, have verified the duration in any event. The judge  was  entitled
    to conclude  that  the  requirement  of  paragraph  41-SD(iv)(1)(d)  of
    Appendix A was not met.

15. In respect of the contact details of the other party to  the  contract,
    the only reference to any form of address other than that of the  first
    Appellant's company is to be found in section 7.1 of the document. This
    relates to a restraint of trade clause. The address stated  therein  is
    not expressly linked to the other party to the contract. There  was  no
    other evidence, as far as I can see, to establish such a  link.  Having
    read the Record of Proceedings from the hearing  before  Judge  Borsada
    and the witness statement contained in the first Appellant's bundle,  I
    can see  no  reference  to  any  explanation  by  way  of  evidence  or
    submissions as to why or how the address in section 7.1 referred to the
    other party. The judge was fully entitled to find as  he  did  on  this
    issue.

16. The two cases of Shebl and Sabir  do  not  in  fact  assist  the  first
    Appellant. In respect of Shebl, the present case is not one in which no
    single contractual document has been provided: it has.  In  respect  of
    Sabir, I note the  observation  of  the  Deputy  High  Court  Judge  in
    paragraph 36 of her judgment that the requirement to provide a physical
    address for the client was a sensible one.

17. The Barclays Bank letter of 1 July 2014  takes  the  first  Appellant's
    case no further. Although the judge did not refer to it, it is clear to
    me that the letter was  not  evidence  of  trading  for  the  requisite
    period, but simply confirmation of the opening of the business account.
    Therefore the judge made no material error here.

18. There is then the issue of fairness. From what I can see the point  was
    not argued before Judge Borsada. It was not in the original grounds  to
    the First-tier Tribunal. It featured for the first time in the  grounds
    of appeal to the Upper Tribunal. In the circumstances, I find that  the
    judge did not err in failing to address a matter that  was  simply  not
    put to him, whether by evidence or submissions.

19. In the event that I was wrong about that, any error in failing to  deal
    with the issue was not material to the outcome of  the  appeal.  It  is
    right that the Respondent's concerns over the advertising materials was
    found by Judge Borsada to be misplaced. It is also right  that  on  its
    face, the omission in  section  4.1  of  the  contract  appears  fairly
    obvious in the sense that a figure  had  not  been  inserted  into  the
    appropriate space. However, the carelessness of the first Appellant  in
    making this omission was compounded by the failure to  include  express
    reference to the physical address of the other party to  the  contract.
    What is said in section 7.1 is, as I have observed earlier, obscure and
    insufficient. Thus, whilst if it were  only  the  duration  omission  I
    might have had more  sympathy  to  the  first  Appellant's  cause,  the
    additional omission of required information leads me to  conclude  that
    the Respondent was under no duty of fairness  by  virtue  of  paragraph
    245AA(b) of the Rules or otherwise, and the judge  did  not  materially
    err in failing to consider the point.

20. Article 8 has not been raised as a challenge to the judge's decision.

21. The first Appellant's appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  fails  and  the
    decision of Judge Borsada therefore stands. The  same  applies  to  the
    appeals of the second and third Appellants.

Additional comments

22. It transpired at the hearing that the first Appellant's husband had had
    an  appeal  dismissed  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in   a   decision
    promulgated on 19 August 2015. She appeared to be unaware of  this,  as
    did her husband, who attended the hearing before me.  A  copy  of  that
    decision was provided to them by Mr Whitwell. It is a matter  for  them
    as to what action if any to take in respect of that decision.  Further,
    as I understand it, the  first  Appellant  could  make  a  new  Tier  1
    application provided this occurs within twenty eight days of her appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal being finally determined. That too  is  a  matter
    for her.

Anonymity

23. I make no direction.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The Appellants' appeals are dismissed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


Signed      Date: 24 October 2015

H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed      Date: 24 October 2015

Judge H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
