
[pic]
st

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42074/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At  Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 18th August 2015                  |On 24th August 2015                   |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                         MRS CELIA TEREZINHA ROACHA
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Herself and her sponsor.
For the Respondent:    Ms Julie Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I will refer to the parties as they were  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    though the respondent is appealing in these proceedings.

 2. The appellant sought a residence card under European Treaty provisions,
    transposed domestically by the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 (the 2006 Regulations). This was on the basis she  was
    an extended family member  of  Mr  Carlos  Manuel  Gonclaves  Pimentel,
    namely, his partner. He is  a  Portuguese  national  exercising  Treaty
    rights.

 3. The application was refused because the respondent  was  not  satisfied
    they  were  in  a  durable  relationship.  Regulation  7  of  the  2006
    Regulations  deals  with  family  members,  which  includes  a  spouse.
    Regulation 8 is concerned  with  extended  family  members,  which,  at
    regulation 8(5), includes partners other than civil partners of an  EEA
    national

 4. In the case of partners it is necessary to establish  the  relationship
    is durable. For parity with domestic provisions the respondent normally
    expects the parties to have been together for two years though this  is
    merely a rule of thumb. The respondent was not satisfied they were in a
    durable relationship.

The First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellant's appeal was heard by First tier Judge Amin on  27  April
    2015. The appeal was allowed with the decision promulgated on  1st  May
    2015. The judge found the appellant and her sponsor credible and  their
    evidence was supported by the documents.  At  paragraph  25  the  judge
    concluded they were in a  durable  relationship  and  her  partner  was
    exercising Treaty rights and allowed the appeal.

The Upper Tribunal.

 6. In seeking leave to appeal to the Upper Tribunal the respondent  relied
    upon only one issue, namely, the fact  the  judge  allowed  the  appeal
    outright rather than referring the matter back to the respondent.  This
    was because the grant of a family permit to an extended  family  member
    was in the respondent's discretion.  The  respondent  had  not  had  an
    opportunity to exercise that discretion by  the  appeal  being  allowed
    outright. Ms Isherwood takes no issue with the finding that the parties
    are in a durable relationship. Rather, the only  objection  relates  to
    the fact the judge allowed the appeal outright.

Error of law

 7. I am satisfied that there is a material error of law in the decision.

 8. If regulation 17 of the 2006 regulations  is  considered  it  is  clear
    there is a distinction between the status of a family member  and  that
    of an extended family members. By regulation 17(1) the respondent  must
    (my emphasis)  issue  a  residence  card  to  family  member.  However,
    regulation 17(4) provides that the respondent  may  issue  a  residence
    card to an extended family member. Clearly this confers discretion.  In
    the latter situation,  regulation  17(5)  requires  the  respondent  to
    undertake an extensive examination of the personal circumstances of  an
    applicant.

 9. The leave application referred to the decision of Ihemedu (OFM-meaning)
    Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00340 (IAC). The head note states that Article 3(2)
    of Directive 2004/38/EC  ("Citizens  Directive")  treats  other  family
    members ("OFMs") as a residual category  .Regulation  17(4)  makes  the
    issue of a residence card to an OFM/extended family member a matter  of
    discretion. Where the Secretary of State has  not  yet  exercised  that
    discretion the most an immigration judge is entitled to do is to  allow
    the appeal as being not in accordance with the law, leaving the  matter
    of whether to exercise this discretion in the appellant's favour to the
    Secretary of State.

Decision

10. There was a material error of law in the First-Tier Judge allowing  the
    appeal outright. Having found a durable relationship the  judge  should
    have allowed the appeal to the limited extent that the decision was not
    in accordance with the law and the matter referred  to  the  respondent
    for consideration.

11. I remake the decision by preserving all of the factual findings of  the
    First-tier Judge and direct the respondent to consider whether a family
    permit should be issued in all the circumstance, bearing in mind  those
    findings.


Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly

