
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/42251/2013
     IA/42252/2013
     IA/42253/2013
     IA/42255/2013
     IA/42257/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 8th May 2014                                 |On 15th May 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and


                            QA (FIRST APPELLANT)
                            MA (SECOND APPELLANT)
                            HA (THIRD APPELLANT)
                            AA (FOURTH APPELLANT)
                            FA (FIFTH APPELLANT)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Miss Farrall, Adamson Legal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Kelly who  allowed  the  Claimants'  appeals  following  a  hearing  at
    Bradford on 20th January 2014.

 2. The First Claimant came to the UK in September 2001 with leave and  was
    joined by the Second Claimant  in  2005  after  marriage  in  Pakistan.
    Their children, the minor children, were all born in the UK.

 3. The First Claimant was continuously and lawfully resident in the UK for
    a period of eleven and a half years but did not  make  the  application
    which was the subject of the appeal before the  judge  until  some  six
    months after the last period of leave to remain had expired.

 4. The application was considered under paragraphs A277C, Appendix FM  and
    paragraphs 276ADE of the Immigration  Rules.   The  Principal  Claimant
    could not meet the requirements  for  limited  leave  to  remain  as  a
    partner  under  R-LTRP.1.1  because  his  partner  cannot  satisfy  the
    requirements of paragraphs E-LTRP.1.2 since she is neither  settled  in
    the UK nor a British citizen.  Nor could he meet  the  requirement  for
    limited leave to  remain  as  a  parent  under  R-LTRPT.1.1  since  the
    children are not settled in the UK.

 5. The Secretary of State considered paragraph  EX1  of  Appendix  FM  and
    concluded that there were no insurmountable obstacles  to  family  life
    with the Second Claimant continuing outside the UK and it would not  be
    unreasonable for the family to return to Pakistan  as  a  family  unit.
    She also considered paragraph 276ADE.

 6. The judge made the following findings of fact.   The  First  Claimant's
    father and two of his five siblings  reside  in  Pakistan.   His  other
    three siblings are married with children and  reside  in  the  UK.   He
    obtained a Bachelor of Commerce degree whilst  in  Pakistan  and  since
    coming to the UK has obtained a  Diploma  in  Business  Studies  and  a
    Bachelor of Business Administration.

 7. With respect to the Third Claimant he said that she was nearly 8  years
    old and attends a primary school where  she  is  settled,  popular  and
    making excellent progress with her studies.  Also attending the  school
    are a number of first cousins on her father's side with  whom  she  has
    regular contact outside the immediate family.  She has  been  diagnosed
    as having celiac disease which means that she  requires  a  gluten-free
    diet, although the judge rejected the First Claimant's  assertion  that
    it would be prohibitively expensive to maintain the diet  in  Pakistan.
    Similarly he accepted that she had been diagnosed with a  problem  with
    her knees which may require surgical intervention,  but  there  was  no
    evidence that it would unavailable in Pakistan.





 8. He wrote as follows

         "The Third Appellant has clearly lived continuously in the UK for a
         period  of  at  least  seven  years  and  I  note  that  in   these
         circumstances the test is whether it would be reasonable to  expect
         her to leave the UK rather than whether  there  are  insurmountable
         obstacles to private and family life continuing  in  Pakistan  (see
         Section EX1 quoted at paragraph  6  above).   In  considering  this
         question I have noted that the Third Appellant  was  born  and  has
         spent the entirety of her life in the  UK  and  that  she  has  not
         visited Pakistan within her living memory.  She  is  as  one  might
         expect in such circumstances happy and fully  integrated  into  her
         local community in Hull.  I thus have no hesitation in holding that
         it would be unreasonable to expect her to leave the UK.

         The adult Appellants are however unable to meet the requirement  of
         paragraph E-LTRP2.2 of the Immigration Rules.  This is because they
         share responsibility for their children  and  neither  of  them  is
         settled in the UK.  Paragraph 6 defines this phrase as meaning  the
         applicant has unlimited leave to remain and is ordinarily  resident
         in the UK without having entered  or  remained  in  breach  of  the
         immigration  laws.   As  noted  at  paragraph  3  above  the  adult
         Appellants have only ever had limited leave to remain in the UK and
         they remained without leave for a period of  six  months  prior  to
         making the instant applications.  However as Ms Farrall pointed out
         had he acted promptly the  First  Appellant  would  have  had  good
         prospects  of  being  granted  unlimited  leave  to  remain   under
         paragraph 276B on the ground that he  had  acquired  at  least  ten
         years' lawful residence in the UK.

         Having taken full account of the matters that I  have  set  out  at
         paragraphs 15 to 17 above I  am  nevertheless  satisfied  that  the
         circumstances I have outlined in paragraph  19  and  20  above  are
         exceptional and that removal of the Appellants  would  consequently
         be unjustifiably harsh and thus incompatible with  the  Appellants'
         rights to respect for private and family life under  Article  8  of
         the 1950 ECHR."

 9. On that basis he allowed the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

The Grounds of Application

10. The Secretary of State submitted detailed Grounds of Appeal  which  are
    as follows.

11. Firstly the judge materially misdirected himself in law by finding that
    the Third Claimant meets the requirements of EX1 because the First  and
    Second Claimants do not meet the requirements of Sections R-LTRPT and E-
    LTRPT.  The Immigration Judge materially misdirected himself by finding
    that the requirements of EX1  can  be  met  independently.   The  judge
    failed to make any findings regarding the Fourth  and  Fifth  Claimants
    and the failure to indicate the outcome of  their  appeals  amounts  to
    material error of law.

12. Alternatively the judge has allowed the appeals on  Article  8  grounds
    but failed to take into account that the Claimants remained in  the  UK
    unlawfully for six months and failed to make an  in  time  application.
    It is not clear whether the Claimants gave any reasons for  failing  to
    make  the  application  and  the  judge   failed   to   give   adequate
    consideration to the Secretary of State's interests in  maintaining  an
    effective immigration policy.  The decision by the Court of  Appeal  in
    Miah and Others [2012] EWCA Civ 261 confirmed that  there  is  no  near
    miss principle applicable to the Immigration Rules.

13. Thirdly  the  judge  misdirected  himself  in  finding  that  the  best
    interests of the child made removal disproportionate.  The  Immigration
    Rules make it clear that children who have spent less than seven  years
    in the UK will not have developed a strong enough private life  in  the
    UK to outweigh the public interest in immigration  control  outside  of
    exceptional circumstances.  Children whose parents are in the UK  on  a
    temporary  basis  can  reasonably  be  expected  to  leave  with  them.
    Moreover the best interest principle does not automatically  mean  that
    it is in the best interests of the child to remain in the UK.

14. Finally the judge failed to consider whether there were  insurmountable
    obstacles to the family continuing family life outside the UK.

15. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Hodgkinson  for  the  reasons
    stated in the grounds on 25th February 2014.

Submissions

16. Mrs Pettersen relied on her grounds and submitted that since the family
    came to the UK on a temporary basis with no expectation  of  settlement
    it would not be disproportionate for them to  be  removed.   There  was
    nothing exceptional about the Third Claimant's circumstances and  there
    would need to be  something  more  in  order  to  justify  the  judge's
    decision.  The fact that the First Claimant overstayed by more than six
    months was  not  properly  weighed  by  the  judge  when  reaching  his
    decision.

17. Miss Farrall initially submitted that the Claimant  could  successfully
    navigate his way through to EX1 but after reflection accepted  that  he
    could not.  She did however submit that there  was  no  error  in  this
    determination because the judge had made a clear finding  open  to  him
    that it would not be reasonable for the Third Claimant to leave the  UK
    and she was therefore in a position  to  satisfy  paragraph  276ADE(iv)
    namely that the applicant

         "Is under the age of 18 and has lived continuously in the UK for at
         least seven years and it would not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
         applicant to leave the UK."





Findings and Conclusions

18. Despite Mrs Pettersen's able defence of the grounds  they  do  in  fact
    merely amount to a disagreement with the decision.

19. With respect to ground 1 the judge did not  allow  the  appeal  on  the
    basis that the Claimants met the requirements of EX1.  He  allowed  the
    appeal on human rights grounds rather than under  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Rules.  He did take into account the provisions of EX1,  which  he  was
    fully entitled to do, but then properly directed himself  to  the  fact
    that the adult Claimants were unable to meet the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules which  would  allow  them  to  successfully  navigate
    through to EX1.

20. It is right to say that no separate findings were made with respect  to
    the Fourth and Fifth Claimants but, having found that it would  not  be
    reasonable for the Third Claimants to be removed it is inevitable  that
    the Fourth and Fifth  Claimants'' appeals would  be  allowed  in  line.
    The determination refers to all five Claimants as  Appellants  and  the
    fact that the decision is formulated in the singular is not material.

21. With respect to ground 2 essentially  this  is  simply  a  question  of
    weight.  The judge was  plainly  aware  of  the  fact  that  the  first
    Claimant failed to make the application  within  the  currency  of  his
    leave.  Some reference seems to have been made in the evidence that  it
    was  overlooked  because  of  the  distraction  caused  by  the   Third
    Claimant's illness.  Be that as it may it is not properly arguable that
    the judge failed to take a relevant matter into account.  The reference
    to near miss is one which refers to the Immigration Rules but is not an
    irrelevant factor so far as consideration of Article 8 is concerned.

22. The remaining grounds simply amount to a re-argument of  the  Secretary
    of State's case.  It was for the  judge  to  decide  whether  the  best
    interests of the Third Claimant  should  dictate  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal.  The reference  to  insurmountable  obstacles  is  misconceived
    since the appeal was not allowed on the basis of the Second  Claimant's
    position.  In this case there was a clear finding by the judge that  it
    would be unreasonable to expect the Third Claimant to leave the  UK,  a
    finding plainly open to him on the evidence and on that basis there  is
    no error in his allowing the appeal for the reasons which he gave.

Decision

23. The Secretary of State's challenge fails.  The judge's decision stands.




Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
