
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42763/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Sheldon Court, Birmingham            |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 July 2014                               |On 22 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey

                                   Between

                                CHING-I-YANG
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

 Appellant:   Mr D Lawrence (of Counsel), instructed by Walters Solicitors.

 Respondent:  Mr Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is a condensed version  of  the  judgment  given  orally,  in  the
    presence of the parties and their representatives, at the conclusion of
    the hearing of this appeal on 10 July 2014.

 2. The appeal originates in a decision made on behalf of the Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department (the  "Secretary  of  State"),  dated  08
    October 2013, whereby the Appellant's application for settlement in the
    United Kingdom as a Tier 1 Highly Skilled  Migrant  was  refused.   The
    focus of the decision was whether  the  Appellant  had  demonstrated  a
    period of five years continuous residence  in  the  United  Kingdom  as
    required by paragraph 245 CD(c) of  the  Immigration  Rules.    It  was
    concluded that she had not satisfied this requirement.   On  appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal (the "FtT"), it was argued that a short  period
    of absence of approximately one month's dimensions, in August/September
    2009,  should  be  disregarded  for  the  purposes  of  the   requisite
    calculation.  The FtT rejected this argument  on  the  basis  that  the
    Appellant's lawful presence in the United Kingdom  had  expired  before
    this departure occurred, as she had become an "overstayer"  almost  two
    months previously.  Hence the Judge considered the decision  under  the
    Immigration Rules to be correct.  Secondly,  the  Judge  dismissed  the
    appeal under Article 8 ECHR.


 3. Initially, the Appellant's application for  permission  to  appeal  was
    refused.  This contained an acknowledgement  by  the  permission  Judge
    that the FtT "was wrong in fact to conclude  that  there  would  be  no
    problem in Mr Evans [the Appellant's British spouse] living  in  Taiwan
    with  her."    This,  however,  was  offset  in   the   proportionality
    assessment by the Judge's recognition that it  would  be  open  to  the
    Appellant to apply for entry  clearance,  qua  Mr  Evans  spouse,  from
    abroad.  The initial refusal of permission  to  appeal  was  challenged
    successfully.  Permission was granted by a Judge of the Upper  Tribunal
    in the following terms:

         "It is arguable that the First-Tier Tribunal Judge's error of  fact
         as to the possibility of the Appellant's husband settling in Taiwan
         could have significantly impacted  upon  the  findings  as  to  the
         proportionality of the decision to remove the  Appellant  from  the
         United Kingdom."

     Permission  to appeal was, therefore, granted at the second attempt.

 4. The passage in the FtT's determination to which the grant of permission
    to appeal relates is the following:

         "The Appellant maintains strong links with Taiwan, for both  family
         and business purposes.  I find that she would have no problem in re-
         establishing herself there.  She has not offered  any  evidence  to
         suggest that there would be any problem in Mr  Evans  living  there
         with her."


         [Emphasis added.]


    In my judgment, the first permission Judge erred in characterising this
    an erroneous finding of  fact.   Ditto  the  second  permission  Judge.
    Properly analysed, this was a predictive evaluative assessment  on  the
    part of the FtT.  Moreover, having regard to the evidence adduced, this
    assessment  plainly  lay  within  the  range  of   reasonable   options
    available.  This, accordingly, did not entail any arguable error of law
    and I consider that permission to appeal should not have been  granted.





 5. Significantly, upon  the  hearing  of  this  appeal,  Mr  Lawrence  (of
    Counsel) did not develop any argument based on the grant of permission.
     Rather, the centrepiece of his submissions was that the conclusion  of
    the FtT gave rise to a disproportionate interference with his  client's
    right to respect for private and family life under Article 8 ECHR.  His
    submissions focused on those passages in the determination in which the
    FtT balanced the legitimate aim in play  (on  the  one  hand)  and  the
    factors on the other side of the scales favouring the Appellant (on the
    other).   The  outcome  of  this  balancing  exercise   was   to   give
    determinative  weight  to  the  public  interest  in  maintaining  firm
    immigration control. I consider that this conclusion is  unimpeachable.
    There was no suggestion  that the Judge  had  considered  inappropriate
    factors  or  had  left  out  of  account  any  material   evidence   or
    considerations.    The question for this Tribunal is  whether  the  FtT
    committed any material error of law in performing  the  proportionality
    exercise or reached  a  conclusion  vitiated  by  irrationality.  I  am
    satisfied that no such error has been demonstrated.

DECISION

 6. It follows that the appeal must be dismissed.  I affirm the decision of
    the FtT.





                                            Signed:
                                                      [pic]
                                             THE HON. MR JUSTICEMCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                        Date:   12 July 2014


