
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42659/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 December 2015                            |On 4 January 2016             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              MR AZLAN ALI MIR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant

Representation:

For the Appellant:              Ms A Holmes, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent/Claimant:    Mr M Biggs, Counsel instructed by M-R
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Oakley sitting at Hatton Cross  on  7
    May 2015) allowing the claimant's appeal against the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of  State  to  refuse  to  issue  him  a  residence  card  as
    confirmation of his right  to  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  an
    extended family member of Mr Saqib  Farook,  a  Dutch  national,  whose
    relationship to the claimant, a citizen of Pakistan,  was  said  to  be
    that of a maternal uncle.  The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an
    anonymity direction, and  I  do  not  consider  the  claimant  requires
    anonymity for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

The Reasons for Granting Permission to Appeal

 2. On 21 August 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein granted the  Secretary
    of State permission to appeal on all grounds raised.  His reasoning was
    as follows:

         2.   I am persuaded that this  application  demonstrates  that  the
             First-tier Tribunal Judge may have made an  error  of  law  in
             failing to give adequate reasons for his findings on  material
             matters and raises arguable issues as to whether the judge was
             entitled in law to reach  the  conclusions  that  he  did  for
             reasons given.

         3.   A losing party is entitled to know and understand the  reasons
             given why he/she has lost and whilst brevity has its place  in
             the writing of determinations it can never be at the  expense,
             as arguably here, of clear and adequate reasoning."

Relevant Background

 3. The claimant's date of birth is 14 April 1990.  He entered  the  United
    Kingdom as a student on 22 May 2011, and he  applied  for  a  residence
    card on 7 August 2014.  His application was  refused  on  a  number  of
    grounds.  For present purposes it is only necessary to refer  to  three
    of them.  He had not provided any evidence or any  sufficient  evidence
    of his EEA family member's current  economic  activity  in  the  United
    Kingdom as a  self-employed  person.   He  had  failed  to  submit  any
    evidence of work carried out such as recent  invoices  and  statements,
    audited accounts, business bank  statements  clearly  showing  payments
    received or any advertisements that his EEA family member may have made
    in order to generate work.  The evidence that he had provided suggested
    that the sponsor had  merely  showed  an  interest  in  becoming  self-
    employed; it did not prove that he was economically active.

 4. He had not provided sufficient evidence of his dependency  on  his  EEA
    national sponsor whilst residing in Pakistan.  He had provided five  A4
    Western Union transfer receipts ranging from 20  November  2009  to  27
    April 2011 as evidence of his  dependency.   But  not  only  did  these
    documents state "agents' copy" on the bottom, they were full  A4  size,
    which was not expected of Western Union  receipts.   Additionally,  the
    quality of the documents provoked questions regarding their legitimacy.
     It was clear the documents may have been  self-printed.   He  had  not
    provided any evidence that he had received the amount of  money  stated
    in each of the transfer receipts.

 5. When he entered the United Kingdom as a student on 22 May 2011, he  had
    not entered as the dependant of an EEA national, nor did he state  that
    he was dependent "on the EEA national" on his visa application.  It was
    therefore concluded that he was  not  dependent  on  his  EEA  national
    sponsor upon entering the United Kingdom as required  under  Regulation
    8(2A).



The Hearing before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 6. Both parties were legally represented  before  Judge  Oakley,  and  the
    judge received oral evidence from the claimant and the sponsor.  In his
    subsequent decision,  the  judge  set  out  his  findings  of  fact  at
    paragraphs [13] to [19], and his  conclusions  at  paragraphs  [20]  to
    [26].  The paragraphs which are of particular relevance to this  appeal
    are reproduced below.

         17.  The Sponsor claims that in the last 2 years he has not  earned
             enough to pay  any  tax  and  whilst  no  self-assessment  tax
             assessment has been produced he confirmed that  he  understood
             that this had been filed by his accountants.

         18.  The Appellant before he left  Pakistan  was  living  with  his
             mother and father, one brother and one  sister.   He  has  two
             further sisters who are  married  and  have  left  home.   The
             Appellant's father used to work  as  a  subcontractor  to  the
             Pakistan Post Office but he left that employment  due  to  ill
             health 12 years ago and  does  not  receive  a  pension.   The
             family are supported by  the  Appellant's  other  brother  who
             works as a shoemaker.

         19.  The Appellant's uncle chose to support the Appellant while  he
             was living with his family in Pakistan as  he  wanted  him  to
             complete his education and sent money for him that purpose and
             it was not for the remainder of the family.

                            THE IMMIGRATION RULES

         Conclusions

         20.  Applying the relevant law to the established facts  firstly  I
             would say that overall I found both the evidence given by  the
             Appellant and his uncle to be credible and I found  them  both
             to be open and credible witnesses.

         21.  I will  of  all  first  deal  with  the  relationship  of  the
             Appellant with the Sponsor and I am satisfied from  inspection
             of the original birth certificates  that  have  been  produced
             that the Appellant's mother is the sister of the  Sponsor  and
             that therefore the Appellant and the Sponsor  are  related  as
             nephew and uncle as claimed.

         22.  I then turn to the issue of dependency when the Appellant  was
             living in Pakistan and I am satisfied  that  the  Sponsor  did
             provide funds for the Appellant to enable him to complete  his
             education as well as to support him whilst he  was  living  at
             home and so that he was not a further burden on the family who
             in later years have been supported by the Appellant's  brother
             who works as a shoemaker.

         23.  I  am  also  satisfied  that  throughout  the  time  that  the
             Appellant has lived in the United Kingdom after his arrival as
             a student he has lived with his uncle and has  been  supported
             by him.  They both share a joint bank account and in  addition
             the Appellant holds his own bank account in to which money  is
             paid from time to time by the Sponsor.

         24.  I am also satisfied that the Sponsor is actively employed as a
             self-employed caterer.  It would certainly appear that  whilst
             his business may have been conducted since 2011/2012 that  has
             been in quite an embryo state for a year or so  but  that  now
             this is generating more work for the Sponsor and  producing  a
             larger cash flow and up to the present time the  business  has
             not generated sufficient cash for which the Sponsor has had to
             pay tax although he has paid self-employed national  insurance
             stamps in 2014.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

 7. Mr Tufan of the  Specialist  Appeals  Team  settled  the  Secretary  of
    State's application for permission to appeal.  He  submitted  that  the
    judge's  so  called  findings  of  fact  and  conclusions  were  either
    completely unreasoned or at best inadequately reasoned.  They were also
    devoid of adequate analysis.

 8. The first point raised in the refusal letter was the lack  of  evidence
    of the sponsor's economic activity.  It was not  clear  how  the  judge
    arrived at the conclusion that the sponsor was actively employed  as  a
    self-employed caterer when the sponsor claimed in the past two years he
    had not earned enough money to pay any tax.  The  judge  also  did  not
    explain how the claimant could be dependent  on  the  sponsor  in  such
    circumstances.  The decision was also silent on the issue raised in the
    refusal letter of the sponsor not  making  regular  national  insurance
    contributions.

 9. With regard to the issue of prior dependency, the judge  simply  stated
    at paragraph 22 that he was satisfied, and it was  not  clear  how  the
    judge arrived at this conclusion.  Mr Tufan referred to  Moneke  [2011]
    UKUT 430 where a Presidential panel decreed that in determining appeals
    regarding OFM applications made in-country, Immigration  Judges  should
    scrutinise with some care the supporting evidence, in order to  satisfy
    themselves that the burden of proof demonstrating eligibility had  been
    discharged.

10. Even if the decision was one which  could  be  legally  sustained,  the
    judge could  not  have  allowed  the  appeal  outright  under  the  EEA
    Regulations.  The most the judge could do was to remit the  matter  for
    the Secretary of State to  exercise  her  discretion  under  Regulation
    17(4).

The Error of Law Hearing

11. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Biggs accepted that Regulation 17(4) applied, but  he  did  not
    accept that Ihemedu (OFMs - Meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 340  had  been
    correctly decided.  By allowing the appeal outright, the judge did  not
    prevent the Secretary of State from  exercising  her  discretion  under
    Regulation 17(4).

12. On the principal error of law challenge, he invited me to note that  it
    was not a challenge on perversity grounds, but on the ground  that  the
    judge's finding  of  prior  and  present  dependency  was  inadequately
    reasoned.

13. He  accepted  that  the  paragraphs  headed  "Findings  of  Fact"  were
    completely devoid of any reasoning.  He submitted that  in  truth  they
    were not findings of fact, but a summary of the oral evidence given  by
    the claimant and the sponsor which  the  judge  went  on  to  find  was
    credible at paragraph [20].

14. He accepted that the finding of prior dependency at paragraph [22]  was
    not supported  by  any  reasoning  in  the  paragraph  itself,  but  he
    submitted  that  adequate  reasons  for  underpinning  the  finding  at
    paragraph [22] were to be found in paragraphs [18] and [19].

15. Mr Biggs accepted the judge had not engaged with various issues  raised
    in the refusal letter, including the fact that the  appellant  had  not
    entered the United Kingdom  as  a  dependant  of  Mr  Farook.   But  he
    submitted that it was not necessary for  the  judge  to  address  every
    point raised in the refusal letter.

16. Having carefully listened to the submissions on  both  sides,  I  ruled
    that an error of law was made out such that the decision should be  set
    aside in its entirety and re-made.  I gave my reasons for so finding in
    short form, and I undertook to provide written reasons in due course.

17. The parties were in agreement that none of the findings of fact made by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Oakley should  stand,  and  that  the  appeal
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

18. The fact that the claimant had not sought to enter the  United  Kingdom
    as the extended family member of Mr Farook, but  had  only  asserted  a
    dependency relationship some three  years  after  he  had  entered  the
    United Kingdom as a student,  meant  that  he  had  to  provide  cogent
    evidence that he was entitled to a residence card as an OFM; and  there
    was a corresponding duty on the judge to consider the  evidence  relied
    upon  with  considerable  care,  particularly  the  evidence  of  prior
    dependency.

19. This is highlighted in the two Upper Tribunal  decisions  cited  by  Mr
    Tufan in the application for permission to appeal.

20. In Ihemedu (OFMs - meaning) Nigeria [2011]  UKUT  00340  (IAC)  Senior
    Immigration Judge Storey, as he then was, gave the  following  guidance
    which is quoted at sub-paragraph 2 of the head note:

         An important consideration in the context of an OFM/extended family
         member case is that if a  claimant  had  come  to  the  UK  without
         applying for a family permit from abroad ..., this will  mean  that
         the  UK  authorities  have  been  prevented  from  conducting   the
         extensive examination of the  individual's  personal  circumstances
         envisaged by Reg 12(3) and in the course  of  such  an  examination
         check the documentation submitted.  If an applicant chooses not  to
         apply from abroad for a family permit under  Reg  12  of  the  2006
         Regulations, thereby denying the UK authorities an  opportunity  to
         check documentation in the country concerned, he cannot expect  any
         relaxation in the burden of proof that applies to him when  seeking
         to establish an EEA right (my emphasis).

21. In the same case, Judge Storey noted  at  paragraph  [4]  that  Article
    10(2)(e) of the Citizens Directive stipulated  that  in  cases  falling
    under Article 3(2)(a), which deals with OFMs, applicants  must  produce
    "a document issued by the relevant authority in the country  of  origin
    or country from which  they  are  arriving  certifying  that  they  are
    dependants or members of the household of the union citizen ...".

22. The same observation was made in Moneke (EEA -  OFMs)  Nigeria  [2011]
    UKUT 00341 (IAC) at paragraph [42]:

         We note further that Article 10(2)(e)  of  the  Citizens  Directive
         contemplates documentary evidence.  Whether dependency  could  ever
         be proved by oral testimony alone is not something that we have  to
         decide in this case, but Article 10(2)(e)  does  suggest  that  the
         responsibility is on the applicant  to  satisfy  the  Secretary  of
         State by cogent evidence that is in part documented  (my  emphasis)
         and can be tested as to whether the level of material support,  its
         duration and its impact upon the applicant combined  together  meet
         the material definition of dependency.

23. The judge's  finding  on  prior  dependency  is  completely  devoid  of
    reasoning, and the judge has not engaged at all with the concern raised
    in the refusal letter as to the reliability of the documentary evidence
    relied upon.   I  accept  that  the  finding  of  prior  dependency  in
    paragraph  [22]  is  underpinned  by  the  findings  of  fact  made  in
    paragraphs [18] and [19].  But the judge has not given any  reason  for
    making these findings in favour of the claimant.  It is not enough  for
    the judge simply to say that he found the evidence of the claimant  and
    the sponsor to be credible, particularly  when  some  of  the  evidence
    given by the sponsor cast doubt on his ability to have provided funding
    for the claimant in Pakistan in the period 2009 to 2011.

24. The reasoning of the  judge  on  the  other  disputed  issues  is  also
    inadequate, with the arguable exception of the judge's reasoning on the
    discrete issue of whether the claimant is related  to  the  sponsor  as
    alleged.  However, Mr Biggs did not invite me to preserve  the  judge's
    finding on this discrete issue, and I do not consider it would be  safe
    to do so.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  an  error  of  law,  such
that it should be set aside and re-made.

As directed at the hearing,  this  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal at Taylor House for a de novo hearing before any judge  apart  from
Judge Oakley, and none  of  the  findings  of  fact  made  by  the  previous
Tribunal shall be preserved.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

