
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42056/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16 January 2015                            |On 10 February 2015          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                GEORGE KOFFIE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Yousseifan, Legal Representative, D J Webb & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's  appeal  against  a  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Hindson  promulgated  on  30  September  2014
    following a hearing at Richmond on 22  September  2014.   For  ease  of
    reference I shall throughout this determination reefer to Mr Koffie who
    was the original appellant as "the claimant" and to  the  Secretary  of
    State who was the original respondent as "the Secretary of State".

 2. The claimant, who was born on 29 July 1985 and  who  is  a  citizen  of
    Ghana, appealed against the Secretary of State's decision refusing  his
    application for leave to  remain  in  the  UK  on  the  basis  of  long
    residence and under  Article  8.    His  appeal  was  allowed  and  the
    Secretary of State  was  granted  permission  to  appeal  against  this
    decision by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Hollingworth  in  the  following
    terms:

         "An arguable error  of  law  has  arisen  in  the  context  of  the
         application of the provisions of the Immigration Act 2014  and  the
         degree of weight to be attached to them."

    No further reasons have been given for granting the Secretary of  State
    permission to appeal.

 3. Before me on behalf of the Secretary of State,  Mr  Wilding  stated  as
    follows:

         "I accept that the grounds of appeal set out at paragraph 3 are not
         ones which challenge the findings of fact made as to whether  there
         are insurmountable obstacles or not.

         In essence, the grounds argue law when the appeal  was  allowed  on
         fact, if that makes sense."

 4. Mr Wilding for this reason did not seek  to  pursue  the  Secretary  of
    State's appeal and on the facts of this case I agree that he  is  right
    to take this approach.  In these circumstances it is not necessary  for
    me now to do more than to state that as the appeal is no  longer  being
    pursued by the Secretary of State it is dismissed and the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal must accordingly be affirmed.

Decision

It not now being asserted that there was any material error of  law  in  the
determination of the First-tier Tribunal, the Secretary  of  State's  appeal
is dismissed and the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  allowing  the
claimant's appeal is affirmed.


Signed:

[pic]                             Date: 6 February 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig

