
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42699/2013
     IA/42702/2013
     IA/42704/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                           |Determination Promulgated |
|on 17th December 2014                    |On 17th December 2014     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                               GODWIN ARIKIBE
                              CHINYERE ARIKIBE
                        CHINONSO CHUKWUEMEKA ARIKIBE
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: No attendance
For the Respondent: Miss C Johnstone - Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    1. This is an appeal against  a  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge V A Osborne promulgated  on  30th  January  2014,  following  a
       hearing at Stoke on 9th January 2014,  in  which  she  dismissed  the
       appellants' appeals under both the Immigration Rules and on Article 8
       grounds.



  Background



    2. The appellants are a  family  group  all  of  whom  are  citizens  of
       Nigeria. The first appellant father was born on 5 October  1959,  the
       second appellant his wife on 22 July 1961 and their  son,  the  third
       appellant, on 11 April 1995.


    3. On 19th August 2013 the first appellant submitted an application  for
       leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier 2 Migrant  under  the
       Points-Based System. He had previously been granted leave to enter in
       2006 as  a  student.  That  leave  was  extended  on  three  separate
       occasions, the last period of which expired on 30th August 2013.


    4. The application was considered by the respondent  who  wrote  to  the
       applicant  querying  the  code  appearing  on  the   certificate   of
       sponsorship and asking whether the code provided, 3543, was  correct.
       Judge Osborne notes and when no reply  was  received  the  query  was
       repeated a week later after which the sponsor replied confirming that
       the code to be relied upon was that stated as a result of  which  the
       application was refused on the basis that the prospective  employment
       most closely corresponds with occupation code 3541.  It  is  accepted
       that that in itself is a typographical error which should  have  read
       3543.


    5. The respondent stated the occupation code relied upon is  not  listed
       in the list of NVQ level 6 occupations, as  stated  in  the  Code  of
       Practice, and that the skills for the  job  the  first  appellant  is
       being sponsored for should be at least NVQ 6 level.


    6. Having considered the evidence provided  the  Judge  found  that  the
       appropriate code against  which  the  application  should  have  been
       assessed was 1132- which is in accordance with the job description as
       a Marketing Director and which is at NVQ level 6, which accords  with
       the first appellant's qualifications as having obtained an MBA.   The
       first appellant also indicates that he had moved on to  study  for  a
       PhD although the Judge was not satisfied he had made it clear in  his
       application form that it was his intention to continue  work  on  his
       PhD at the same time as working for his sponsor. It was also accepted
       that the first appellant's  primary  consideration  is  to  be  in  a
       position to earn money to support his family.


    7. The appellant sought permission to appeal which was  granted  by  the
       First-tier Tribunal on 4th April 2014.  The  matter  was  listed  for
       hearing before Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley on 19 September 2014. On
       22 September 2014 Judge Chalkley issued a  document  described  as  a
       'Notice of Withdrawal'. Judge Chalkley noted the  procedural  history
       and records that at the  hearing  he  drew  the  Presenting  Officers
       attention to the fact the refusal notice appeared  to  refer  to  the
       wrong classification under the Occupational Codes of  Practice  which
       was accepted. The Presenting Officer sought to withdraw the  decision
       for which leave was  granted.   Judge  Chalkley  then  stated:  "That
       decision operates as a withdrawal of the Secretary  of  State's  case
       before the Upper Tribunal and the First-tier  Tribunal,  pursuant  to
       rules 17 of the Upper  Tribunal  and  First-tier  Tribunal  Procedure
       Rules respectively". Judge  Chalkley  then  found  that  consequently
       there was no longer an outstanding appeal before either tribunal.


    8. That finding was subsequently set aside by  Judge  Chalkley  in  late
       October 2014 by reference to SM  (withdrawal  of  appealed  decision:
       effect) Pakistan [2014] UKUT 00064 followed by a direction  that  the
       matter be listed for further hearing which comes before me today.



  Discussion



    9. All three appellants have  attended.  They  have  a  nominated  legal
       adviser who did not attend and during the course of the  hearing  the
       first appellant referred on more than one occasion to the fact he did
       not have a lawyer present. Whilst I appreciate that he is not himself
       a lawyer and that there was not a lawyer there  to  speak  to  or  to
       assist or advise him, there is no specific adjournment application to
       permit legal representation and nor  has  it  been  established  that
       without legal representation the appellants will not receive  a  fair
       hearing.


   10. An earlier application for an adjournment was refused  by  the  Upper
       Tribunal. This was based upon  pending  judicial  review  proceedings
       issued by  the  appellant  challenging  the  decision  of  the  Upper
       Tribunal to refuse to adjourn today's hearing and transfer  the  case
       to Taylor House in London. That application is potentially flawed  as
       the Upper Tribunal do not  sit  at  Taylor  House.  Today  the  first
       appellant indicated he has written to the High Court seeking to amend
       his grounds to substitute the reference to Taylor House  to  that  of
       Field House where the Upper Tribunal sits in London. As indicated  to
       the first appellant in court it is not appropriate for me to  make  a
       comment upon the judicial review application as the respondent is the
       Upper Tribunal of which I am a salaried judge, although the  fact  he
       attended with his family before the Upper Tribunal in  Stoke  and  in
       light of the fact the matter  has  been  appropriately  disposed  off
       today may indicate that there is little merit in his continuing  with
       the judicial review proceedings. That is a matter for him.


   11. Many people appear before tribunals without legal representation  and
       it is  an  established  principle  of  English  and  Welsh  law  that
       ignorance of the law is no defence. When the appellant mentioned lack
       of  representation  he  was  asked  whether  he  had  paid  for  such
       representation or for a lawyer to attend.  The  question  had  to  be
       repeated on five separate occasions with the request that  the  first
       appellant gives either a yes or no answer which he failed to give. It
       can only be assumed in the absence of an assertion a lawyer had  been
       paid or there was a legitimate expectation that one would attend that
       in fact no payment has been made for his lawyer to attend  or  for  a
       local representatives such as an  agent  solicitor  or  barrister  to
       represent him before this  tribunal.  Although  the  first  appellant
       stated that this particular point was not the issue, the fact of  the
       matter is that if he has not taken steps to secure the attendance  of
       his lawyer he cannot complain that there is no lawyer there to assist
       him, whatever his own level of legal knowledge.


   12. It is not in issue that the decision made by the Secretary  of  State
       is flawed. Judge Osborne in her determination referred to the  nature
       of the error in that the wrong code had been considered but failed to
       determine the matter by reference to the correct code or to find that
       as the incorrect code had been considered by the Secretary  of  State
       the decision might be one that was 'not in accordance with  the  law'
       which needed to be remitted to the Secretary of State  for  a  lawful
       decision to be made. Such material legal error in  the  determination
       of Judge Osborne was conceded  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  Miss
       Johnstone. I accordingly set the determination aside.


   13. Miss Johnstone was asked whether she is instructed  to  withdraw  the
       decision in accordance with Mr  Harrison's  indication  before  Judge
       Chalkley which she indicated she was.   Had  the  decision  not  been
       withdrawn I would have substituted a decision allowing the appeal  to
       the limited extent it was remitted to the Secretary of  State  for  a
       lawful decision to be made. Permission was, however, granted to  Miss
       Johnstone to withdraw the decision as a result of which there  is  no
       extant immigration decision before the Upper Tribunal  against  which
       the appellants can appeal and a upon which a decision can be made.  I
       have had regard to the guidance provided by the Upper Tribunal in  SM
       (withdrawal of appealed decision: effect) Pakistan [2014] UKUT  00064
       (IAC) in relation to this matter.


   14.  The  effect  of  the  decision  made  is  that  application  remains
       outstanding upon which  a  lawful  decision  is  awaited.  The  first
       appellant referred to the impact upon him and his family of the delay
       to date and the situation  that  has  arisen,  which  Miss  Johnstone
       noted. The tribunal hope that a lawful decision is made at the  first
       available opportunity. If the decision is to grant  leave  that  will
       resolve the matter but if to refuse leave the appellants will have  a
       further right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.


  Decision


   15. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law.  I  set  aside
       the decision of the original Judge. Following the grant of permission
       to the Secretary of State to withdraw the immigration decision  which
       is the subject of this appeal there is no longer an  extant  decision
       before the Upper Tribunal upon which a substantive  decision  can  be
       made.


  Anonymity.


   16. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005. I make no such order  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
       Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).






  Signed.......................................................
  Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson


  Dated the 17th December 2014


