
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42455/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th October 2015                 |On 23rd November 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                              MS SIRREH MANNEH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Darboe; Queen's Park Solicitors
For the Claimant: Mr S Whitwell, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Beg dismissing the appeal against the  Respondent's
    decision  to  refuse  her  application  for  settlement   and   removal
    directions under section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality
    Act 2006.

 2. The Appellant appealed against that decision and was granted permission
    to appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Hollingworth.  The  basis  upon
    which permission was granted may be summarised as follows:

      i) It is arguable that the judge erred in failing to take into account
         Mr Manneh's inability to visit his daughter in Gambia, as not being
         a matter of  choice,  which  would  affect  the  assessment  of  Mr
         Manneh's credibility, with reference to paragraphs 16 and 18 of the
         determination; and

     ii) It is arguable that the judge erred in her findings, which  do  not
         portray an awareness of  the  distinction  between  an  absence  of
         corroborative evidence, internal inconsistency or implausibility in
         relation to the assessment of Mr Manneh's evidence, with  reference
         to paragraph 28 of the determination.

 3. I was provided with a  Rule  24  response  from  the  Respondent  which
    submitted in summary that the factual  error  was  immaterial  and  the
    finding concerning the lack  of  corroborative  evidence  is  similarly
    immaterial.

    Error of Law

 4. At the close of submissions,  I  indicated  that  I  would  reserve  my
    decision, which I shall now give. I find that there was an error of law
    in the decision such that it should be set aside.  My  reasons  for  so
    finding are as follows.

 5. In relation to the first ground, I find that the Appellant's appeal  is
    just made out and I reach this decision  after  significant  pause  and
    reluctance.  In  relation  to  the  factual  error,  the   judge   does
    unfortunately state at paragraph 16 that the Appellant's father made no
    attempt to see his daughter for 17 years,  which  overlooks  the  facts
    that Mr Manneh did not receive his ILR vignette until 2011, he had made
    a legacy request which was pending an outcome  and  consequently  could
    not travel to visit his daughter owing to a lack of immigration  status
    and an unresolved legacy request. Although Mr Whitwell  rightly  raised
    that the judge was entitled to take into account the absence of  visits
    from 2011 to the date of the Appellant's entry into the UK after  being
    granted a visit visa in December 2013, he pragmatically  accepted  that
    the judge could not criticise Mr Manneh for not visiting  his  daughter
    for 17 years from his entry to the UK until her entry on a visit visa.

 6. The findings made upon the relationship between the Appellant  and  her
    father, Mr Manneh, and the credibility findings  that  ensue  from  the
    judge's views of Mr  Manneh's  absence  of  reasons  for  visiting  his
    daughter, would clearly be tainted by  the  view  that  the  judge  had
    formed that Mr Manneh was a person whom "could not find time to go  and
    see" his daughter for "seventeen years". Consequently,  those  findings
    must be set aside and the determination is infected, such that it  must
    be set aside.

 7. In light of my findings upon the first ground,  I  do  not  propose  to
    consider the second ground.

 8. I therefore find that there is an error and that the appeal  will  need
    to be re-made.



    Postscript

 9. I have found this appeal an unnecessarily difficult one to decide. This
    is in part due to the presentation of the Appellant's appeal before me,
    which  was  unclear  and  confusing.  It   appeared   as   though   the
    representative was unaware of the  nature  of  the  task  before  them,
    repeatedly asking me  to  uphold  the  grant  of  permission  by  Judge
    Hollingworth, but saying little in relation to the determination of the
    First-tier Tribunal, which distracted from the merit in the  underlying
    factual error. It is hoped that such errors will not occur in future.

    Decision

10. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

12. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to  be  heard  by  a
    differently constituted bench.

    Anonymity

13. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an  anonymity  order.  I  was  not
    invited to make any such order and in any event I see no reason to make
    such an order.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini
