
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42954/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 21st October 2015                 |On 29th October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                            MISS CHOMPUNUT BUNMEE
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Bazini (instructed by E2W Ltd)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Secretary of State  in  relation  to  a  Decision  of   the  First-tier
    Tribunal  (Judge Iqbal) promulgated on  26th  May  2015  by  which  she
    allowed the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's refusal
    to grant her leave to  remain  on  human  rights  grounds  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.

 2. For the purposes of continuity and clarity I shall continue to refer to
    Ms Bunmee as the Appellant and the Secretary of State as the Respondent
    in this judgment.

 3. The Appellant is a national of Thailand who entered the UK as a visitor
    in 2001. In 2002 she applied for leave to remain as a spouse. There was
    considerable delay in the application being  dealt  with  but  she  was
    eventually granted discretionary leave from February 2007  to  February
    2010. She made two further applications to remain, both unsuccessful in
    2010 and 2011.

 4. In 2014 she applied for leave to remain to remain on the basis  of  her
    private and family life with her same-sex partner. That was refused  on
    2nd October 2014 and it was her appeal against that decision which came
    before the First-tier Tribunal. At paragraph  8  of  her  Decision  the
    Judge referred to the Letter of Refusal which noted that the  Appellant
    had claimed that her removal would breach her human  rights;  that  she
    had no ties to Thailand and as some-one in a same-sex relationship  she
    and her partner would be stigmatised and ostracised if they were forced
    to go to Thailand. She claimed that the discrimination would  mean  she
    would be unable to find employment and accommodation  as  a  result  of
    which she would become destitute. The Judge noted that the Secretary of
    State had considered both Appendix  FM  and  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules. The Appellant could not  meet  the  requirements  of
    either. She had not been in the UK long enough to bring herself  within
    paragraph 276ADE and in terms of Appendix FM was outwith the definition
    of partner, not having been in the relationship long enough.

 5. The Secretary of State  did  not  accept  that  the  couple  could  not
    relocate and enjoy life together in Thailand. The  Secretary  of  State
    noted that despite the partner claiming she had no ties to Thailand she
    had two children there and there  was  no  reason  why  she  could  not
    accompany the Appellant to  Thailand.  Furthermore,  the  Secretary  of
    State  did  not  accept  that  the  couple  would  be  stigmatised  and
    ostracised by the Thai community or would be unable to find employment.
    The Secretary of  State  accepted  Thailand  did  not  have  any  anti-
    discrimination laws regarding LGBT people and also accepted that  there
    was no law legalising same-sex partnerships. However, the Secretary  of
    State noted that same-sex sexual activity was legal in Thailand.

 6. The judge also noted that since February 2010 the Appellant had been in
    the UK without permission as an overstayer.

 7. At paragraph 25 the Judge set out that she heard oral evidence from the
    Appellant, her partner and her partner's daughter. It was accepted that
    they could not meet the Immigration Rules. Specifically at paragraph 26
    the Judge records:-"it was clarified that the issues in the appeal were
    to be considered outside of the rules under Article 8 of the ECHR  with
    reference  to  whether  the  parties  had  a  subsisting  relationship,
    therefore family life. Furthermore  consideration  then  the  issue  of
    proportionality if it was accepted there was  family  life  to  include
    whether they could live in Thailand together."

 8. That is relevant because of what is said in the  Secretary  of  State's
    grounds. Additionally I would point out that the Record of  Proceedings
    makes clear that at no time did  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer
    before the First-tier Tribunal make any  submissions  that  the  matter
    should not be  considered  as  a  freestanding  Article  8  application
    outside the Immigration Rules.

 9. At this point I turned to the grounds upon which permission  to  appeal
    was sought. Ground 1 argues  that  the  Judge  did  not  identify  very
    compelling circumstances for considering Article 8  outside  the  Rules
    which the Appellant could not meet. Ground 2 argues that the judge fell
    into error by failing to consider the requirements of section  117B  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. Ground 3 argues  that
    the Judge erred in finding a positive factor in favour of the Appellant
    that she was working. Ground 4 submits that the Judge erred in  finding
    that  had  the  Secretary  of  State  decided  her  spouse  application
    timeously she would  have  completed  the  necessary  time  to  acquire
    Indefinite Leave to Remain. Ground 5 asserts that  the  Judge  gave  no
    reason why restrictions on same-sex  marriages  in  Thailand  prevented
    their having family life together there and  Ground  6  criticises  the
    Judge for stating that the Appellant had been seeking to regularise her
    stay. The Secretary of State asserts  that  she  was  both  in  the  UK
    unlawfully and precariously and those are matters that  ought  to  have
    been matters taken into account by the Judge. Finally Ground 7  asserts
    the Judge gave no adequate reasons as to why it was sufficient to allow
    the appeal on the basis that the partner would have  "difficulties"  in
    Thailand.

10. Mr Walker relied on the detailed grounds but said that the main  thrust
    of the argument was that the Judge  had  erred  in  her  conclusion  on
    proportionality  especially  when   applying   the   strict   test   of
    exceptionality. In effect what the Judge had done was consider  Article
    8 on a freestanding basis without any consideration  of  whether  there
    were any  exceptional  circumstances  to  require  a  consideration  of
    Article 8 outwith the Rules.

11. On the Appellant's behalf Mr Bazini indicated  that  on  a  superficial
    reading of the grounds they would appear to  have  some  merit  but  on
    closer  analysis  of  the  judgment  they  did  not.  In  terms  of   a
    consideration of Article 8 outside the Rules he referred  to  paragraph
    10 where the Judge  recognised  that  the  Appellant  could  not  bring
    herself within the Rules.  At paragraph 26 the Judge further noted that
    because of the length of time the Appellant and her  partner  had  been
    together they could not  bring  themselves  within  the  definition  of
    partner. However at paragraph 33 and 34 the  Judge  correctly  directed
    herself as to what was required before considering  Article  8  outside
    the Rules and in particular at paragraph 33 set out the comments in  SS
    (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387  that an individual would need to show that
    "after applying the requirements of the rules, only  if  there  may  be
    arguably good grounds  for granting leave to remain outside them is  it
    necessary for Article 8  purposes to go on to  consider  whether  there
    are compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised  under  them".
    At paragraph 34 the Judge noted the grounds of  appeal  which  stressed
    that the Rules did not contain provision for someone in the Appellant's
    circumstances  namely  a  same-sex  couple  in  a  genuine   subsisting
    relationship with an established family and private  life  in  the  UK.
    For that reason the Judge found that there were arguably  good  grounds
    for granting leave outside the  Rules.  The  judge  therefore  directed
    herself appropriately in accordance with current case law.  It  may  be
    that another Judge may have decided differently but  that  is  not  the
    issue.

12. The Judge then went on to consider Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27  and  asked
    herself the questions set out therein concluding  that  this  case  was
    essentially about proportionality.

13. It is clear therefore that the Judge did ask  herself  the  appropriate
    questions and concluded, giving her reasons, why it was appropriate  to
    consider the matter outside the Rules. As I have  mentioned  above,  it
    was made clear at the outset of the hearing  by  both  representatives,
    which of course includes the Secretary of State's representative,  that
    this case was about proportionality and Article 8 outside the Rules. In
    the absence of any submissions that this was an inappropriate  step  to
    take it ill-behoves the Secretary of State to make that argument now. I
    therefore find that the Judge did not  err  in  considering  Article  8
    outside the Rules.

14. While Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE are intended to cover Article  8
    issues there will be occasions when they are incomplete.  It is only in
    deportation cases where the Rules have been  found  to  be  a  complete
    code.  The Appellant's  application  was  outside  the  Rules  and  the
    refusal carries a right of appeal.  It must therefore be right that  it
    is possible for an Appellant to succeed otherwise the right  of  appeal
    would be worthless.

15. So far as a failure to mention section 117B is concerned the Judge does
    refer to this at para 43 and makes the point that she has already taken
    all those matters into account.  The judge at paragraph 41 clearly  set
    out the factors contained in section 117B. She notes that the Appellant
    speaks English, is financially self-sufficient  having  worked  in  the
    past and that she and  her  partner  have  plans  to  set  up  business
    together in future. The Judge notes that had  the  Secretary  of  State
    reached a conclusion on the spouse application  made  in  October  2002
    more promptly than she did (2007) the Appellant would have  been  in  a
    position in any event to have sought Indefinite Leave to Remain. To  be
    fair, Mr Walker accepted this to be correct.

16. The Judge noted that the law of Thailand did not permit this couple  to
    regularise their relationship as same-sex partners and that this  would
    affect their family life. The  Judge  did  not,  as  suggested  by  the
    Secretary  of  State,  say  this  inability  to  enter  into  a   civil
    partnership would "prevent" them having family life; rather  the  Judge
    said it would "affect" their family life. The inability  to  regularise
    their relationship affects property and inheritance, and recognition as
    next of kin, not insignificant matters. If the  right  to  marry  is  a
    Human Right then it would be discriminatory to suggest that  the  right
    to enter civil partnerships  are  not  similarly  protected.  This  was
    clearly a matter that weighed heavily with the Judge.

17. The Judge did take into account the fact that the Appellant had been in
    the UK for 14 years and also recognised that  during  that  period  her
    position was at all times precarious and for part of  the  time  (since
    2010) unlawful but the Judge was also entitled  to  take  into  account
    that she had been seeking to regularise her stay' on a  regular  basis.
    She had not gone "under the radar"

18. The judge was entitled  to  take  into  account  that  the  Appellant's
    partner was 65 years of age and had worked in the UK for 25  years  and
    there would no doubt be difficulties in expecting her  to  relocate  at
    this juncture to Thailand. Had they met the  requirements  as  partners
    there is no doubt it would have been unreasonable to expect the partner
    to live in Thailand. At paragraph 42 the Judge noted that it was  clear
    because of the totality of the circumstances that have been referred to
    above cumulatively demonstrate that it would be disproportionate and  a
    breach of the Appellant's  right  to  family  and  private  life  under
    Article 8 to remove her to Thailand.

19. Whilst on the facts  of  this  case  another  Judge  may  have  decided
    differently, it cannot be said that this Judge made a material error of
    law in the way she approached the appeal. She  took  into  account  all
    matters she was required to take into account, including the concession
    by the Home Office Presenting Officer  that  it  should  be  considered
    outside the  Rules,  in  concluding  that  removal  in  this  case  was
    disproportionate.

20. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


Signed   Date 28th October 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin



Direction regarding anonymity

I make no anonymity direction.


Signed   Date 28th October 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
