
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42362/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On the papers                                   |On 4th September 2014      |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              John Carl Maynard
                                                                  Respondent




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State against  the  decision  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge   Hindson)   of   the   determination
    promulgated on 4th March 2014 who allowed  the  appeal  of  Mr  Maynard
    against the decision of the Respondent to  refuse  to  grant  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on the grounds of family and private life.



 2. Whilst this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for  convenience  I
    will refer to the parties in the determination as they appeared  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. In a determination promulgated on the 26th June 2014, I found that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal should be set  aside  and  gave  my
    reasons for reaching that  conclusion.  As  to  the  re-making  of  the
    decision and in respect of the circumstances of the Appellant  who  was
    involved in court proceedings relating to his child, I considered  that
    the appropriate decision was for there to be a period of  discretionary
    leave of a length sufficient for that to take place. It would  then  be
    open to the appellant to make a further application before  the  expiry
    of that leave. At the conclusion of the determination I said this:

         "As I have said, that is my preliminary view  as  to  remaking  the
         decision in those terms.  However, if either party  disagrees  with
         that approach, then I make the  following  direction:  that  within
         fourteen days of the service of this determination, the parties are
         to write to the Tribunal to indicate whether they  seek  a  further
         hearing.  If nothing further is heard from either party I shall re-
         make  the  decision  in  accordance  with  the  contents   of   the
         determination."

 4. There has been no further  correspondence  form  either  party  to  the
    proceedings and therefore I re-make the decision in the terms  set  out
    above; the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is set aside and is re-
    made by allowing the appeal on the basis that it is understood that  he
    should be given a period of leave in order to continue his  involvement
    in the court proceedings relating to contact to his child.

Decision:

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses the making of an error  of
law. The decision is set aside. The  decision  is  re-made;  the  appeal  is
allowed in accordance with the preceding paragraphs.



Signed                              Date: 1/9/2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
