

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42460/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre         |Decision and reasons          |
|                                              |Promulgated                   |
|On 28 April 2015                              |On 30 April 2015              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 surjit kaur
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms D Dhaliwal, instructed by Charles Simmons
Immigration


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On 15 January 2015, Designated Judge Woodcraft granted the Secretary of
    State permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal against  the  decision
    and reasons statement of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Chohan  that  was
    promulgated on 28 November  2014.   Judge  Chohan  allowed  Mrs  Kaur's
    appeal against the immigration decisions of 2 October 2013 refusing  to
    vary her leave and to remove her by way of  directions.   Judge  Chohan
    found that although the appellant could not meet  the  requirements  of
    the immigration rules she succeeded under article 8 ECHR  when  applied
    directly.

 2. Mrs Kaur was born on 1 August 1928 and is a citizen of India.  She last
    arrived in the  UK  on  30  September  2012  as  a  visitor.   She  had
    previously been resident in the UK but any settlement status ended many
    years ago when she returned to live in India in  the  1970s.   She  was
    widowed in May 2001.

 3. Having heard from both representatives, as I indicated at  the  end  of
    the hearing, I dismiss the Secretary of State's  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, thereby upholding the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  I
    reserved my reasons, which I now give.

 4. Although the Secretary of State mounted five grounds of  appeal,  taken
    together they seek to challenge the Judge Chohan's  assessment  of  the
    proportionality of the immigration decisions.  I mention at the  outset
    of my consideration of the case that Judge Chohan  did  not  allow  the
    appeal because of any issue relating to article 3 or in relation to Mrs
    Kaur's medical needs. He allowed  the  appeal  solely  in  relation  to
    article 8 and it is only that decision which is challenged.

 5. Mr Smart acknowledged that the author of the grounds was  disadvantaged
    by not having  sight  of  the  Home  Office  file  when  preparing  the
    application for permission to appeal.  As such it would appear that the
    author failed to understand that Mrs Kaur has no  relatives  living  in
    India, despite her son having gone there to  secure  her  property  and
    assets.  Her son, whom it is claimed took possession of  her  land  and
    assets in India, is resident in the UK.  Mr Smart submitted that it was
    not clear whether Judge Chohan had himself been  confused  about  these
    matters.  However, when  pressed,  Mr  Smart  was  unable  to  identify
    anything in the decision and reasons statement that would suggest Judge
    Chohan failed to appreciate the evidence.  Ms Dhaliwal took me  through
    the statement of reasons and I am satisfied, given the  description  of
    the whereabouts of Mrs Kaur's children in paragraph 4 of the  statement
    of reasons, that Judge Chohan was fully aware  of  the  evidence  about
    their residence.

 6. It is evident from the statement of reasons that there was  no  dispute
    between the parties as  to  whether  Mrs  Kaur  could  obtain  adequate
    medical care in India.  She could.  This, however, was not the  central
    issue for Judge Chohan to determine.  He  was  asked  to  consider  Mrs
    Kaur's care  needs.   He  clearly  identified  this  central  issue  in
    paragraph 18 of his decision and reasons statement.  Since arriving  in
    the UK as a visitor in September 2012, Mrs Kaur had been diagnosed with
    dementia (Alzheimer's disease) and depression.   The  medical  evidence
    was not disputed by the Secretary of State.  Judge  Chohan  found  that
    the evidence showed that it was more likely than not that Mrs Kaur  was
    (and is) incapable of looking  after  herself  on  a  daily  basis  and
    required the support of her daughter and  other  relatives  in  the  UK
    because she has no family member  to  look  after  her  in  India  (see
    paragraph 25 of the decision and reasons statement).  That  finding  is
    unchallenged.

 7. In paragraph 19 of his decision and  reasons  statement,  Judge  Chohan
    identified the importance  of  considering  the  public  interest  when
    assessing proportionality.  He refers specifically to part  5A  of  the
    Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  as  amended  by  the
    Immigration Act 2014.   In  paragraph  27  he  found  that  Mrs  Kaur's
    circumstances were exceptional and in the following  paragraph  weighed
    her personal circumstances against the public interest  considerations.
    He found the exceptional circumstances outweighed the  public  interest
    considerations.

 8. The Secretary of State challenges that assessment  on  the  basis  that
    Judge Chohan did not address each element of s.117B of  the  2002  Act.
    Mr Smart sought to raise particular concerns as to the English language
    ability of Mrs Kaur and with regard to the  precarious  nature  of  her
    immigration status.  Any private  life  had  been  established  in  the
    knowledge that she could have had no expectation to remain in the UK.

 9. I chastised Mr Smart regarding  the  English  language  issue  that  he
    sought to pursue.  Not only does the Secretary of  State  have  general
    policies indicating that such an issue is not relevant where  a  person
    is over the age of 65, such issues are also irrelevant in circumstances
    where a person has some mental or physical impairment that  would  make
    the learning of English impossible.  This  policy  intention  has  been
    part of immigration law for many years and is currently set  out  in  a
    number of places in the Immigration Rules, for example paragraph 3.1 of
    Appendix KoLL.  The undisputed medical evidence and Mrs Kaur's age mean
    there was no need for Judge Chohan to make specific  findings  on  such
    issues.  Mr Smart's contention  that  the  policy  considerations  were
    overridden by the statutory provision of s.117(5) is  unarguable  given
    that it has never been argued that Mrs Kaur should not benefit from the
    published policy.  Only one conclusion was possible and it should  have
    been obvious to the author of the grounds and to Mr Smart.

10. The issue of what weight should have been given to the  fact  that  any
    private life  established  by  Mrs  Kaur  was  established  whilst  her
    immigration  status  was  precarious  is  a  more  significant   issue.
    However, even though Judge Chohan did not specifically mention  it,  he
    was clearly aware  of  her  status  and  the  law.   He  describes  her
    immigration status in paragraph 2 and as I have  already  indicated  he
    makes reference to s.117 of the 2002 Act in paragraphs 17 and  28.   It
    is also evident that Mrs Kaur's circumstances, being exceptional,  must
    outweigh the public  interest  considerations.   Her  vulnerability  if
    returned to India is so clear that it would  undermine  her  moral  and
    physical integrity to  remove  her.   On  the  facts  found,  no  other
    conclusion would be logical or reasonable.

11. In reaching my conclusion I have had regard  to  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    reported decision,  Dube  (ss.117A-117D)  [2015]  UKUT  90  (IAC).   Of
    course, it was not available to Judge Chohan or to the  author  of  the
    grounds.  I refer to it simply because it expresses how the  First-tier
    Tribunal should approach part 5A of the 2002 Act.  However, as will  be
    evident from what I have said above, I am satisfied that  Judge  Chohan
    properly considered the  public  interest  considerations  set  out  in
    s.117B of the 2002 Act even though he has dealt with them  as  a  whole
    rather than individually.  There can be no requirement for a  judge  to
    have to spell out the obvious.

12. This is a case where the Secretary of State is unhappy with the outcome
    but makes no sustainable challenge to  any  of  the  judge's  findings.
    Those findings,  because  of  the  exceptional  nature  of  Mrs  Kaur's
    circumstances,  lead  to  only  one  possible  conclusion,   that   her
    circumstances outweigh the public interest considerations.  Although  I
    am satisfied that Judge Chohan did not err in  law,  even  if  he  did,
    given the findings any error would be immaterial.

13. I add two comments which were not raised  by  the  Secretary  of  State
    either in her grounds or through Mr Smart.   Judge  Chohan  might  have
    been asked to make a finding as to whether Mrs Kaur enjoyed family life
    with her daughter and other relatives in the UK.  The care needs  would
    suggest that she would meet the family life test  set  out  in  Ghising
    (family life - adults - Gurkha policy) Nepal  [2012]  UKUT  160  (IAC).
    However, this was never pursued before the First-tier Tribunal.  I make
    no findings in relation  to  this  issue  but  it  would  clearly  have
    enhanced Mrs Kaur's rights had it been considered.

14. Secondly, there has  been  no  argument  as  to  whether  it  might  be
    reasonable for Mrs Kaur's daughter or some other relative  to  relocate
    to India to care for Mrs Kaur.  I presume this was not  argued  because
    the daughter and other relatives are all British citizens  with  strong
    connections to the UK making such a prospect unreasonable.  Again,  the
    point was not argued before the First-tier Tribunal or  raised  in  the
    grounds.  I make no finding on it other than to say that the  time  for
    making such arguments has passed.

15. For all the reasons I have given, I dismiss the  Secretary  of  State's
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal and uphold the decision of the First  tier
    Tribunal.



Decision

The decision and reasons statement of First-tier Tribunal Judge Chohan  does
not contain an error on a point of law and the decision is upheld.




                               Signed                     Date


                               John McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
