
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42177/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |                 Decision & Reasons   |
|                                       |Promulgated                           |
|On 28 November 2015                    |                 On 4 January 2016    |
|                                       |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                          ABDULLAH ADEL A ALHARSHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N S Ahluwalia, Counsel, instructed by Laura
Devine Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Claimant is a citizen of Saudi Arabia born on 13 January 1990.   He
    appealed to the Tribunal against the decision by the Secretary of State
    for the Home Department to refuse an application for leave with respect
    to paragraph 321A of the Immigration Rules on the  basis  that  he  had
    made a false statement in relation to  his  application  for  leave  to
    enter,  namely  that  he  had  sat  a  Test  of  English  International
    Communication (the TOEIC) in February 2012 but in fact he had  not  sat
    it but had arranged for a proxy to sit it on his behalf.

 2. The Claimant challenged that decision and his  appeal  was  listed  for
    hearing in Newport on 4 March  2015  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal O'Rourke. There were a number of preliminary matters raised at
    the hearing, the first  of  those  was  that  his  representatives  had
    previously applied to the First-tier Tribunal on 23 February  2015  for
    disclosure of information and documentation by the Respondent  relating
    to the Educational Testing Services (ETS) because that  was  the  basis
    upon which the Secretary of State had made her decision and  copies  of
    any voice recognition recording of the Claimant or any  multilple  test
    taker and the evidence upon which the  ETS  relied  in  asserting  that
    there was no multiple test taker and evidence of the circumstances  and
    chain  of  administration  for  the  Claimant  being  included  on  the
    invalidated list were all requested.

 3. At the hearing before Judge O'Rourke  the  Respondent's  representative
    confirmed that the  direction  had  not  been  complied  with  and  the
    Respondent's position was that  they  did  not  hold  this  information
    because it is retained by ECS and indeed  the  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer was unable to confirm whether or not any request had been  made
    of ETS for such disclosure.  The Judge was informed that the Claimant's
    representatives had also made a  request  directly  to  ETS  but  their
    response was that they were not a party to the proceedings and were not
    obliged to comply with the  request,  and  despite  a  request  for  an
    adjournment in order for this information  to  be  produced  the  judge
    decided to proceed with the appeal, and he then proceeded to allow  the
    Claimant's appeal on the basis that the burden of proof  was  upon  the
    Respondent to satisfy him on balance of probabilities that the Claimant
    had indeed made a false statement and he found that  the  Claimant  had
    not discharged that burden.

 4. His reasons, which are at paragraph 17 of his  decision,  are  firstly,
    that a report by Dr Harrison which had been submitted by  the  Claimant
    and was unchallenged by the Respondent cast sufficient doubt  upon  the
    ETS process  in  order  to  render  their  conclusions  as  unreliable.
    Secondly the evidence the Respondent relied upon by Miss  Collings  and
    Mr Millington was in respect of the ETS cases generally and these  were
    statements that were relied on in the decision  in  Mohamed  [2014]  JR
    6299 UKUT, that these were generic and hearsay, they had no  scientific
    background and they provided insufficient  technical  detail  in  their
    statements.  Thirdly, the Respondent had had the opportunity to provide
    further evidence to the Claimant's representatives and/or  Dr  Harrison
    but for whatever reason chose not to or to require or request ETS to do
    so.

 5. The Judge did not place weight on the evidence of  ETS  in  respect  of
    their assertion that the Claimant had taken the test in  Portsmouth  as
    the Claimant stated he had definitely taken it in London and given that
    ETA had wrongly recorded his nationality as  being  Indian  whereas  in
    fact he is from Saudi Arabia.

 6. The Respondent sought permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  and
    permission was granted in respect of one ground only, that ground being
    that the Judge held against the  Respondent  that  she  had  failed  to
    comply with directions i.e. the production of tape  recordings  of  the
    English language test and voice analysis tapes and the  Respondent  was
    unable to obtain these tapes because they are not in her possession but
    in the hands of ETS who ran the test.  It was also  asserted  that  the
    production of such material in each and every ETS case would not  be  a
    resourceful uses of public funds  and  would  possibly  also  prejudice
    future criminal proceedings against those involved in the ETS fraud.

 7. On 6 August 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Gillespie granted permission
    to appeal in respect of that ground only stating

         "It is arguable that the directions could not  lawfully  have  been
         given against the Respondent at least not in  the  terms  on  which
         they were applied  in  the  determination  and  that  this  led  to
         procedural unfairness, or error of law in assessing the  weight  of
         evidence for the Respondent, which prejudiced the Respondent in its
         conduct of the case."

 8. At the hearing before me the Claimant was represented by  Mr  Ahluwalia
    of Counsel and  the  Secretary  of  State  by  Mr  Staunton.   I  heard
    submissions from both parties and Mr Ahluwalia in addition  produced  a
    helpful Rule 24 response dated 20 November 2015.

 9. In light of the submissions and the Rule 24 response I find that First-
    tier Tribunal Judge O'Rourke did not materially  err  of  law  for  the
    reasons asserted by the Respondent  in  ground  3  of  her  grounds  of
    appeal.

10. Firstly, it is open to the First-tier Tribunal under Rules 5 and  6  of
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014 to issue directions and if a party  has  failed  to
    respond with a direction, rule 6(2) specifically states that the First-
    tier Tribunal may take such action as  it  considers  just,  which  may
    include (b) requiring  the  failure  to  be  remedied  or  waiving  the
    requirement. The Judge in this case, in fact, decided to  proceed  with
    the appeal in the absence of the evidence upon which the  Tribunal  had
    directed  be  produced.  Consequently,  he   essentially   waived   the
    Respondent's non-compliance with the direction issued by the First-tier
    Tribunal.

11. Given that the burden  was  upon  the  Respondent  to  prove  that  the
    Claimant made a false statement it was incumbent upon her to  discharge
    that burden of proof by way of evidence.  Whilst there was evidence  in
    the form of the witness statements of Miss Collings and  Mr  Millington
    which had been relied upon in the case of Mohamed there was no adequate
    specific evidence relating to this Appellant to discharge the burden of
    proving that his specific ETS test had been undertaken by a  proxy.  As
    Mr Ahluwalia submits and I accept, the Judge gave a number  of  reasons
    for being satisfied that the Respondent had  not  shifted  the  initial
    burden of proof in respect of whether or not the Claimant  or  a  proxy
    sat the test and in so doing, the issue as to the giving of  directions
    and the effect of that on his decision was supplementary to his primary
    findings. These were firstly, that he preferred  Dr  Harrison's  report
    which was not challenged by the  Respondent  and  he  noted  that  this
    report cast sufficient doubts upon the process whereby ETS had  reached
    their conclusions, and secondly, that the evidence relied upon  in  the
    form of statements from Miss Collings and Mr Millington was genetic and
    hearsay; they were not witnesses with  any  scientific  background  and
    they provided insufficient technical details.

12. I further find that First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  O'Rourke  was  clearly
    entitled to rely  upon  the  fact  that  the  Respondent  had  had  the
    opportunity   to   provide   further   evidence   to   the   Claimant's
    representatives  and/or  Dr  Harrison  and  indeed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal but did not do so and did not ensure  that  such  evidence  in
    relation  to  this  specific  Claimant  had  been  obtained  from  ETS.
    Consequently, in the absence of such evidence, the Judge  was  entitled
    to find that the Respondent had not discharged the  burden  of  proving
    that the requirements of paragraph 321A of the Immigration  Rules  were
    met.

Notice of Decision

13. For those reasons I uphold the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    O'Rourke and dismiss the appeal by the Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department.



Notice of Decision

The appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.







Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman



