
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/42245/2014
                                                               IA/42255/2014
                                                               IA/42258/2014
                                                               IA/42259/2014
                                                               IA/43064/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 December 2015                  |On 15 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH


                                   Between

                             AMIN ISHOLA AKANBi
                         oluwadamilola samuel akanbi
                         joseph oluwatimisola akanbi
                            atinuke ramat akanabi
                        oluwadoyinsola esther AKANBI
                       (NO anonymity directions made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J. Komolafe, solicitor at Dele Adedeji Associates
Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr C. Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The First Appellant was born on 24 October 1972 in Nigeria.  It is  his
    account that he entered the United Kingdom in 2003 or 2004 but  at  the
    appeal hearing a document was produced, which indicated he had actually
    applied for entry clearance  from  Lagos  on  26  April  2005  but  his
    application had been refused.  He was not tendered for evidence at  the
    hearing to explain this document.  Therefore, I have  assumed  that  it
    was accurate.

2.   According to  the  entry  clearance  document,  he  was  refused  entry
    clearance on 29 April 2005. He did not appeal against this decision but
    at some later date he entered the United Kingdom illegally. On  30  May
    2005  the  Second  Appellant,  his  wife,  and  the  Third  and  Fourth
    Appellants, their children, entered the  United  Kingdom  as  visitors.
    They had multi-entry visas but were only entitled  to  remain  here  as
    visitors for six months at any one time. Therefore,  from  30  November
    2005 they were in the United Kingdom without leave.

3.   On 19 September 2012 the Appellants applied  for  leave  to  remain  on
    human rights grounds. They were refused leave on 15 July 2013  with  no
    right of appeal.  On 11 October 2013 they brought a judicial review  on
    the basis that they were entitled to a right of appeal.   On  13  March
    2014 they withdrew their judicial review because the Secretary of State
    had agreed to reconsider their case.

4.   On 13 June 2014 the Secretary of State decided to remove them and  this
    gave rise to a right of appeal, which they  exercised.  An  appeal  was
    listed for 19 September 2014 but the Respondent withdrew  her  decision
    and agreed to reconsider it but when she did so, on 3 October 2014, she
    refused their application.

5.   On 22 October 2014 they appealed against this further decision  and  on
    18 February  2015  their  appeal  was  dismissed  by  Designated  Judge
    McCarthy and First-tier Tribunal Judge Hetherington. On  9  March  2015
    they applied for permission to appeal and on  5  June  2015  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Levin granted then permission to appeal.  When doing so,
    he said that, if it was the case that the Third Appellant  had  applied
    to give oral evidence and had been refused, then the Tribunal's failure
    to give reasons for this refusal would  amount  to  an  error  of  law.
    However, at  the  error  of  law  hearing,  the  Appellants'  solicitor
    accepted the statement made by the two judges, which said that no  such
    application had been made, and this ground of appeal was withdrawn.

6.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Levin also found that it  was  arguable  that
    the Tribunal had  erred in law by failing to consider the  evidence  of
    the First Appellant in his witness statement that the Appellants  would
    be destitute and would have nowhere to live in Nigeria. But at error of
    law hearing, the Appellants' solicitor relied  on  the  fact  that  his
    statement said that:

         "My dad is deceased but my mum is still alive and lives in a rented
         room. We do not have a family home. I have no means of survival  in
         Nigeria or to look after the children.  My cousin  who  assists  us
         now financially cannot fund their education in  Nigeria.   My  wife
         and I will find it very difficult to get a job and look  after  the
         children because the unemployment rate in Nigeria is very high.  My
         parents-in-law are alive in Nigeria but in their 70s. They live  in
         rented acocmdation. My wife has two brothers and three sisters  all
         in Nigeria. Her three sisters  are  married  and  live  with  their
         families and her two brothers  live  with  their  parents  but  are
         unemployed.  I have  a  cousin  here,  Mr  Philip  Adebebe  who  is
         supporting us.  I also have an uncle here."

7.   The  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  accepted  that  the  Tribunal's
    decision was brief but submitted that I have  to  consider  whether  it
    addressed the necessary facts and law.

8.   In paragraph 21, in response to what was said in the First  Appellant's
    statement, the Tribunal noted that:

         "Some of the difficulties claimed are economic. It is asserted that
         a cousin of the First Appellant financially supports the family. No
         reason has been advanced as to why this cousin,  who  now  provides
         financial support, would be unable to do so in Nigeria."

9.   At the error of law hearing the  Appellants'  solicitor,  who  had  not
    represented them at an  earlier  stage  in  the  proceedings,  drew  my
    attention to a letter on his file from this cousin, which said that  he
    could no longer support them. But this letter was not on the court file
    or the Respondent's file and was not in  the  Appellants'  bundle.   In
    contrast, in the Appellants' bundle there was a letter from the  cousin
    saying he had been supporting them financially and morally  since  they
    had been in the United Kingdom. Therefore, on the  evidence  which  was
    before the Tribunal, I find that it was reasonable for it  to  conclude
    that he would be able to support the Appellants if  they were  returned
    to Nigeria and were looking for work.

10.  The Appellants had asserted that the Tribunal  had  not  addressed  the
    First Appellant's statement in sufficient detail but, as  noted  above,
    the statement confirms that actually the Appellants do have a number of
    relatives still alive and living in Nigeria in their own accommodation.
    I also find that the fact that they are living in rented  accommodation
    does not mean that they could not accommodate the Appellants; at  least
    in the short term. I have also taken into account the fact that  it  is
    not said that the Fourth Appellant's sisters and  their  husbands  were
    unemployed.  It was not necessary for the Tribunal to  refer  to  every
    detail of  the  evidence  as  long  as  the  decision  it  reached  was
    reasonable in  the  light  of  this  evidence.  The  decision  was  not
    unreasonable as the First  Appellant's  statement  confirmed  that  the
    Appellants would have potentially have some support in Nigeria.

11.  At the error of law  hearing  the  Appellants'  solicitor  also  argued
    further that it would amount to a breach of Article 3 of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights for the Appellants to be removed to Nigeria.
    However, I find that there  was  no  evidence  to  establish  that  the
    Appellants would face inhuman and degrading  treatment  if  removed  to
    Nigeria. In any event, this does not appear to have  been  an  argument
    raised before the Tribunal at their appeal hearing.

12.  The other ground of appeal on  which  leave  was  given  was  that  the
    Tribunal  failed  to  make  a  sufficiently  detailed   proportionality
    assessment.

13.  I accept that the decision was a short one but this needs to be  viewed
    in the context of a hearing during which the Appellants were not called
    to give oral evidence and the statement upon which they relied was very
    short.  In addition the vast majority of the Appellants'  bundle  dealt
    with the children's attendance at  school.   There  was  a  very  brief
    letter  from  the  Fourth  Appellant,  which  just  adopted  the  First
    Appellant's statement. In addition, there were  two  letters  from  the
    children which said they did not want to go back, predominantly because
    they had friends and were at school here,  and  there  were  some  very
    short letters from members of the community who know  them  and  a  few
    pictures of the children.

14.  The Appellants placed significant weight on the  children's  attendance
    at school in the United Kingdom. However, I am bound by  the  Court  of
    Appeal's decision in EV (Philippines) and Others v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874.

15.  At paragraph 22 of the decision, the Tribunal relied  on  paragraph  22
    of EV, which states:

         "If it is overwhelmingly in the  child's  best  interests  that  he
         should not return,  the  need  to  maintain  effective  immigration
         control may well not tip the balance. By contrast, if it is in  the
         child's best interests to remain, but only in balance, the  results
         may be the opposite."

16.  I find that this is why in the second sentence of paragraph 22  of  its
    decision the Tribunal used the word "overwhelming". I find that it  did
    so because it was introducing the test contained in EV.

17.  I am bound by this Court of Appeal judgment and  I  note  that  in  its
    judgment the Court of Appeal correctly referred to and applied  Section
    55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009,  VW  (Uganda)
    [2009] EWCA Civ 5, ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4 and  MK  (India)  [2011]
    UKUT 00475 (IAC) and reminded  itself  of  the  jurisprudence  on  best
    interests before concluding at paragraph 58 of its decision that:

         "... the assessment of the best interests of the children  must  be
         made on the basis that the facts are as they are in the real world.
           If neither parent  has  a  right  to  remain  then  that  is  the
         background  against  which  the  assessment  is  conducted.    Thus
         ultimately the question will be is  it  reasonable  to  expect  the
         child to follow the parent with no right to remain to  the  country
         of origin and that was particularly the case here."

18.  As was said at the beginning of  the  Tribunal's  decision,  the  first
    question was did the children have a right to  remain  under  paragraph
    276ADE(4).  This was a two stage test which had to consider whether the
    children had been in the United Kingdom for more than seven  years  and
    then whether it would be reasonable for them to  be  removed  from  the
    United Kingdom. I find that this is the test, which was adopted  in  EV
    and also by the Tribunal in this case.

19.  In paragraph 60 of EV the Court of Appeal continued by finding that:

         "In our case none of the family is a British  citizen.    None  has
         the right to remain in this country.  If the parents  are  removed,
         then it is entirely reasonable to expect the children  to  go  with
         them.  As the immigration judge found it is obviously in their best
         interests to remain with their parents. Although it is, of  course,
         a question of  fact  for  the  Tribunal,  I  cannot  see  that  the
         desirability of being educated at public  expense  in  the  UK  can
         outweigh the benefit  to  the  children  of  remaining  with  their
         parents. Just as we cannot provide medical treatment for the world,
         so we cannot educate the world."

20.  There may be some cases where there are other additional factors  which
    relate to the children of parents without leave to remain, for instance
    if they have severe medical problems or educational problems.  This  is
    not the case here.  It is not said that the  children  have  any  other
    difficulties apart from the fact that they would like to remain here to
    finish their education and to remain with their friends.   It  is  also
    not said that there are any other additional factors which  would  make
    it difficult for the First and Fourth Appellants to  look  after  their
    children in Nigeria. Therefore, I find that it was reasonable  for  the
    Tribunal to rely upon EV.

21.  I also note that at paragraph 24 of  its  decision  the  Tribunal  also
    relied on Zoumbas  [2013] UKSC 74 where it was said

         "There is no irrationality in the conclusion that  it  was  in  the
         children's best interests to go with their parents to the  Republic
         of Congo. No doubt it would have been possible to have stated  that
         other things being equal, it was  in  the  best  interests  of  the
         children that they and their parents stayed in the  United  Kingdom
         so that  they  could  obtain  such  benefits  as  health  care  and
         education. But other things are not equal.  They  are  not  British
         citizens, they had no right to future education and health care  in
         this country.  They are part of a close-knit family and are  of  an
         age which their emotional needs could  only  be  fully  met  within
         that family unit. Such integration, as  had  occurred  into  United
         Kingdom society, would have been  predominantly in the  context  of
         that family unit. Most significantly, the decision maker  concluded
         that they could be removed to the Republic of Congo in the care  of
         their parents without serious detriment to their wellbeing."

22.  It is also my view that in paragraph 29 of the  decision  the  Tribunal
    did look at the substance of Section 117B and apply that as it  had  to
    in the proportionality  exercise.   And  again  in  paragraph  29  this
    exercise is dealt with briefly but in my view it is sufficient  because
    they look at the substance  of  Section  117B  and  that  emphasis  was
    clearly on the children's education and therefore it is not  surprising
    that the decision actually  mainly  dealt  with  that  in  the  earlier
    paragraphs because that was the case as put before the Tribunal at  the
    hearing.

Notice of Decision

23. Therefore, I find that there were no errors of law  in  the  Tribunal's
    decision and that its decision should stand.


Nadine Finch


Signed   Date: 7 January 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch

