
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/42546/2013
                                                               IA/42547/2013
|                        |                                                    |
|                        |THE IMMIGRATION ACTS                                |
|                        |                                                    |
|                        |Decision and reasons Promulgated                    |
|Heard at  Field house   |On 5 November 2015                                  |
|On 1 October 2015       |                                                    |
|                        |                                                    |
|                        |                                                    |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between

                              mS Sonia MACAULEY
                               MR DERIS SESAY
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Smith of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellants are citizens of Sierra Leone born on  10  October  1970
      and 16 January 1996 respectively. They appealed against the  decisions
      of the respondent made on 7 December 2011  to  refuse  to  grant  them
      further leave to remain in the United Kingdom based  on  their  rights
      under the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006.
      (hereinafter the 2006 Regulations) for  Derivative Residence Cards.




   2. Their  appeals  were  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Wyle
      following  a  hearing  in  at  Hatton  Cross  on  15  December   2014.
      Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  initially  refused  by
      first-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew on 12 February 2015 and  subsequently
      granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun on 20 May 2015 on the basis that
      it was arguable that the Judge misapplied the  principle  in  Zambrano
      and Sanade.

 3. Thus the appeal came before me.

    First-tier Tribunal's findings

 4. In his determination, the Judge made the  following  findings  which  I
    summarise. On 2  December  2011  the  first  appellant  applied  for  a
    Derivative Residence Card as confirmation of a right of residence under
    the European Community Law as the primary  carer  of  an  EEA  national
    exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom. The first appellant now
    appeals against the decision dated 26 September 2013 refusing to  issue
    her  and  her  dependent  Derivative  Residence   Cards.   The   second
    appellant's claim for  a  Derivative  Residence  Card  and  appeal  was
    against the decision of the respondent dated 26 September 2013  as  the
    dependent of the first appellant. The cases have been linked due to the
    family relationship.

 5. The first appellant is the mother of a child named S who is  a  British
    citizen, born on 29 May 2008 and therefore aged six. Her father is also
    a British  citizen.  She  has  always  been  cared  for  by  the  first
    appellant,  who  is  her  mother.  It  is  her  mother   who   provides
    accommodation for her and looks after her on a daily basis.  She  takes
    decisions on education and her daily life.

 6. The second appellant has always lived with the first appellant  because
    he is her son. He has lived in the same household as S, his stepsister,
    since her birth. The first appellant  does  not  work  and  the  second
    appellant is undertaking an apprenticeship, working four  days  a  week
    and attending college for  one  day  a  week.  He  supports  the  first
    appellant and S by contributing to the rent,  paying  council  tax  and
    paying bills. Before the second appellant started  work,  he  sometimes
    collected S from school. The second appellant's  former  girlfriend  is
    expecting a baby in February 2015 of which he is the  father.  His  own
    father lives in Sierra Leone. He has three  paternal  half-sisters  who
    live with their mother in Kent. He is in contact with them.

 7. The first appellant has a former husband in Sierra  Leone.  She  claims
    that she was subjected to violence and abuse from him  and  the  second
    appellant also suffered abuse. She has not had contact with her  former
    husband for six or seven years. The first appellant is in contact  with
    her mother and brother in Sierra Leone. She speaks to them by telephone
    every three or four weeks. S and the second appellant  speak  to  their
    grandmother during these calls.

 8. S's father is employed as an immigration officer. He works at times  in
    the United Kingdom, Belgium and in France. His mother lives in Croydon.
    When in the United Kingdom, he lives at his mother's  address.  He  has
    contact with S. He sometimes picks her up  from  school.  He  sometimes
    goes to watch her swimming lessons. He sees S once a twice a month.  He
    telephone sometimes. He pays maintenance for her. Occasionally  S  sees
    her paternal grandmother.

 9. The first appellant stated that she could not return to live in  Sierra
    Leone because of fear of her former partner, concerns about the risk of
    Ebola virus, the loss of her  contact  with  the  support  network  she
    enjoys in the  United  Kingdom  and  wished  not  to  be  embroiled  in
    traditional secret societies with which  her  mother  is  engaged.  The
    first appellant states that were  she  required  to  return  to  Sierra
    Leone, S will have to come with her as there is no  family  member  who
    could look after her in the United Kingdom. The second appellant stated
    that he was afraid of his former stepfather who was violent and abusive
    towards him. He has spent a big part of his life in the United  Kingdom
    and has a close circle of friends here.

10. The first appellant's  claim  is  under  Regulation  15A  of  the  2006
    regulations. It has been maintained by the  first  appellant  that  she
    shares responsibility for S's care with the child's father,  a  British
    citizen. She referred to a letter written in 2011 where  Mr  Lisk,  S's
    father stated that due to the nature of his job he could not spend time
    with S every day and he finds the time to be  with  her  on  a  regular
    basis and that "he may not be able to care for her full-time".

11. It was submitted on behalf of the Home Office that the implication  was
    that S's father saw her most days, and certainly more than that once or
    twice a month as described in the first appellant's oral evidence.  The
    handwritten letter was not consistent with the  statement  produced  in
    the appellant's  bundle.  It  was  suggested  that  the  statement  was
    prepared to assist the first appellant's claim and that the information
    in the handwritten letter should be preferred. It was submitted that it
    appeared that the father was unwilling to share the care  of  S  rather
    than that he was unable to do so. If the first appellant  was  required
    to leave, S would remain in the care of her father. He had not attended
    the  hearing  and  his  evidence  could  not  be  tested.   There   was
    insufficient evidence to support the claim that S's father  was  unable
    to adjust his  working  pattern.  The  paternal  grandmother  lived  in
    Croydon in the house where her father lives when in the United Kingdom.
    The grandmother may well be able to care for the child when the  father
    was at work. There was no information from her.

12. The appellant's representative relied on Harrison v  SSHD  [2012]  EWCA
    Civ 1736 and submitted that although the  Zambrano  principle  did  not
    apply in this case but the child's quality of life may be diminished if
    she remained in the United Kingdom without her mother and she could not
    be forced to leave the country, and it was only on that bases that  the
    case of Zambrano would apply. The test was not met.

13. Mr Adedeji for the appellant referred to the case of Hines [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 660 at paragraph 19 to 23 and said, there should have been  a  full
    assessment of the child's father's ability or otherwise to care for the
    child. The welfare of the child had to be considered and the extent  to
    which the quality standard of a life would be impaired  if  her  mother
    was required to leave. The child has never lived with her  father.  The
    evidence was that S's father could not look after her  because  of  his
    work. He has not been unable to swap shifts to enable him  to  come  to
    the hearing. There was  no  alternative  care  for  S  other  than  the
    appellant and thus the child would be compelled  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom. Accordingly he submitted that the Zambrano principle applied.

14. It is for the first appellant to show that there is no  alternative  to
    the child being required to leave the country. The welfare of the child
    must be considered, and an assessment made if suitable alternative care
    is available for the child remaining in the United Kingdom.  The  Judge
    agreed with the Home Office Presenting  Officer  submissions  that  the
    information from the father is inconsistent, and he would be unable  to
    care for S if she remained in the United Kingdom, after the  appellants
    have left. Whilst he reasonably states that he would not want  to  give
    up work to rely on benefits in order to look after  S,  this  would  be
    possible and this is an option which would provide alternative care for
    the child. As such, I therefore find that the Zambrano  principle  does
    not apply, and accordingly the first appellant is  not  entitled  to  a
    Derivative Residence Card on that basis. As the  claim  of  the  second
    appellant is directly related to that of the first appellant,  he  also
    is not entitled to a derivative residence card. The appellants  do  not
    meet paragraphs 276 ADE of the Immigration Rules.

15.  As  the  respondent's  reasons  for  refusal   letter   rejected   any
    consideration of any entitlement of the  appellants'  to  live  in  the
    United Kingdom under Article 8, it is appropriate to consider this.

16. In respect of the Article  8  claim  the  appellants  did  not  provide
    supporting evidence of the claimed abuse, such as medical reports  from
    a hospital attendant, or  any  statements  from  witnesses.  The  first
    appellant confirmed that she had  not  been  contact  with  her  former
    husband for six or seven years. Both appellant refer to  the  risk  the
    first appellant's Article 8 rights were refused in December  2011.  Any
    fear of violence and abuse by the first husband's  former  husband  are
    not  genuine.  There  are  no  significant  obstacles  to   the   first
    appellant's integration into Sierra Leone. She has been in  the  United
    Kingdom for seven years but had spent most of her life in Sierra Leone.
    Her mother, brother and sister are there and she is in regular  contact
    with them.

17. In considering the best interests of S, given her  young  age  and  the
    fact that she has always  lived  in  family  with  the  appellant's,  I
    consider that her best interests would be safeguarded and  promoted  if
    she remains living with the first appellant.

18. Although it is accepted that S has contact with her  father,  there  is
    little information as to the extent of  contact  and  nature  of  their
    relationship. In his witness statement dated 7 December 2014 her father
    states "I try and see S whenever I get back to  the  UK.  I  visit  her
    school and speak to her teachers to ensure she is settling in and doing
    well". There is no evidence as to the strength of  their  relationship.
    In his letter of 15 March 2011, S's father speaks of loving  his  child
    and wanting her to be in the United Kingdom where he can have access to
    her as she is very dear to him and he provided parental guidance to her
    and he would always want to be involved  in  her  upbringing.  In  oral
    evidence the first appellant said that he saw S once a  twice  a  month
    and telephoned sometimes. There was no information on S's views.  There
    is insufficient evidence of a close, genuine and subsisting  bond  with
    her father.

19. At a young age, S  has  very  limited  independent  life.  She  attends
    school, but because they have recently moved  house,  she  has  already
    experienced a change of school. The first appellant no longer regularly
    attend St Peter's Church as she did when S was at  St  Peter's  primary
    school and S is therefore no longer a part of that community. The first
    appellant said that  he  took  S  to  visit  her  paternal  grandmother
    occasionally, perhaps at Christmas. S's father comes from Sierra  Leone
    and the first appellant met him when he was  in  that  country.  He  is
    therefore able to travel there from time to  time.  He  could  maintain
    contact with S by social media or telephone. He could also visit her in
    Sierra Leone. "In my view the removal of S to Sierra  Leone  would  not
    substantially interfere with her relationship with her father".

20. The fact of S's status as a British citizen must be taken into account.
    She cannot be compelled to leave the United Kingdom. It may be possible
    for her to be cared for in the United Kingdom by her  father,  although
    this not discussed it would  appear  that  S's  relationship  with  her
    father is limited.

21. The Judge took into account the provisions of section  117B  and  noted
    that paragraph 117B (4) states that little weight should be given to  a
    private life that is established by a person at a time when the  person
    is in the United Kingdom unlawfully. The appellants' immigration status
    in the United Kingdom has been  unlawful  since  their  visitor's  visa
    expired a few weeks after S was born.  Section  117B  (5)  states  that
    little weight should be given to a private life established at  a  time
    and the person's immigration status is precarious. S was conceived  and
    born when the first appellant's immigration status was precarious.

22. S is a qualifying child as a British citizen. It is accepted that  both
    the  first  and  second  appellant  have  a  genuine   and   subsisting
    relationship with S. In considering whether it would be  reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the United Kingdom, it was taken into account
    in particular the fact that S's father is a British citizen  living  at
    times in the United Kingdom and that she has British citizenship and is
    entitled to the benefits of British citizenship. He took  into  account
    the case of the ZH Tanzania [2011] two AC 166 and Zoumbas v SSHD [2013]
    UK SC 74.

23. The Judge stated, "I have to consider whether it is reasonable for S be
    required to leave the United Kingdom to live in Sierra Leone. I have to
    look at the level of integration into the  United  Kingdom,  where  and
    with whom she will live and the arrangements for care in  Sierra  Leone
    and the strength of her relationship  with  her  father  which  may  be
    severed if she has to move away". "It is in S's best interests that she
    remains in the care of the first appellant. At present the family  unit
    comprises of her and her mother and brother. The  Judge  was  satisfied
    that S will be well looked after by the first appellant in Sierra Leone
    as she has been in the United Kingdom. Although she has started school,
    she  is  still  in  the  early  stages  of  primary  school,  and   has
    successfully experienced one change of school. She  would  be  able  to
    integrate into Sierra Leone, a country which was her mother and brother
    will now live. Her life in the United Kingdom is very much bound up  in
    activities carried out with and arranged by her mother.  As  indicated,
    the relationship with her father would be significantly severed to  her
    detriment if she were to move to Sierra Leone.

24. Although S is a British citizen she does not  have  sufficient  contact
    with the father or his family, and because of her  age  limited  social
    links with the community here. Her mother and brother will be  able  to
    easily reintegrate into Sierra Leone and she will be assisted  by  them
    to settle there. It would therefore not be unreasonable to expect S  to
    leave the United Kingdom.

25. The Judge stated in his notice of decision "the appeal is dismissed  on
    human rights grounds".

    Grounds of appeal

26.  The  appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  state  the  following  which  I
    summarise. The appellant seeks to challenge the decision based  on  the
    following grounds, which are that no sufficient weight was attached  to
    the appellant's circumstances and there was an  erroneous  approach  to
    Article 8. The best interests  of  the  child  has  not  been  properly
    considered and there has been an erroneous approach to  assessment  and
    application of  Zambrano  principles  to  the  child's  rights  in  the
    appellant's circumstances.

    The hearing

27. I heard submissions from the parties as to whether there is an error of
    law in First-tier Tribunal's determination.

28. Mr Smith stated that he is not pursuing the Article 8 ground of appeal.
    He relies on the appellants  rights  under  the  2006  regulations  for
    Derivative Rights as the first appellant is the primary carer of an EEA
    national child. The second appellant is a dependent of his mother.

29. Having considered the determination I find that  there  is  a  material
    error in the determination because the findings blurs  the  distinction
    between the 2006 Regulations and Article 8. At paragraph 44  the  Judge
    found that there is no evidence of the extent of the relationship  with
    S's father. The Judge also found that there  is  a  close  and  genuine
    subsisting bond with her father. These are contradictory findings.  The
    Judge did not make explicit findings as to whether responsibility for S
    was  shared  with  S's  father.  The  Zambrano   principle   has   been
    misunderstood by the Judge. The Judge concludes that it  would  not  be
    unreasonable for the British child to leave the  United  Kingdom.  This
    may be relevant to Article 8 but not EU law.  Requiring  the  child  to
    leave the United Kingdom with her mother contravenes European Law.

30. Mr Tufan  submitted  that  the  appellant  is  a  British  citizen  and
    therefore cannot be compelled to leave the United Kingdom and there  is
    no issue of compulsion. The Judge said at paragraph 27 that the  father
    will not be able to care for S. The child's father is another  relative
    who could  care  for  the  child.  The  father  is  involved  with  S's
    upbringing. If the husband has to give up working  to  look  after  the
    child, so be it.

31. Mr Smith  stated  that  the  best  interests  of  the  child  plays  no
    consideration in respect of Regulation 15A. In  Haines,  the  Court  of
    Appeal endorsed the test that the appellant should not be compelled  to
    leave.

    Decision as to whether there is a material error of law

32. I found that there is a material error of law in the  determination  of
    the First-tier Tribunal which involved the Judge's  assessment  of  the
    2006 regulations. The Judge also fell into  error  by  misunderstanding
    the case of Zambrano and the application of the case  to  this  appeal.
    The Judge has made  confusing  and  contradictory  findings  about  S's
    father's ability to  care  for  S.  The  Judge  found  that  the  first
    appellant's mother was the primary carer for S and her  best  interests
    lie with being with her mother. The Judge then said that S  can  remain
    in this country with her father. The Judge also  found  that  there  is
    insufficient evidence of a close, genuine and subsisting bond with  her
    father. She also said that S can leave the country  and  accompany  her
    mother and step brother to Sierra Leone and the family could  integrate
    into life in that country. These are not sustainable findings.

33. Regulation  15A  (4A)  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations  2006/1003  (the  "Immigration  Regulations"),  which   was
    inserted  with  effect  from  8th  November  2012  by  the  Immigration
    (European Economic  Area)  (Amendment)  (No.2)  Regulations  2012/2560,
    provides for a derivative right of  residence  for  primary  carers  of
    British citizens as follows.

34. Regulation 15A(4A) was inserted to comply with  the  interpretation  of
    the Court of Justice of the European Union ("CJEU") of  article  20  of
    the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union  ("TFEU")  in  Ruiz
    Zambrano v. Office National de l'Emploie [2012]  QB  265  ("Zambrano"),
    where the Grand Chamber of the CJEU held that:- i) Article  20  of  the
    TFEU "precludes national measures which have the  effect  of  depriving
    citizens of  the  European  Union  of  the  genuine  enjoyment  of  the
    substance of the rights conferred by virtue of their status as citizens
    of the European Union" (paragraph 42); and ii) A  refusal  to  grant  a
    right of residence to a third country  national  with  dependent  minor
    children in the member state where those  children  are  nationals  and
    reside has such an effect (paragraph 43), because "[i]t must be assumed
    that such a refusal would lead to a  situation  where  those  children,
    citizens of the European Union, would have to leave  the  territory  of
    the European Union in order to accompany their parents". 8. In Harrison
    v. Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  1736
    ("Harrison"), to which I shall return, Elias LJ  (with  whom  Ward  and
    Pitchford LJJ agreed) held at paragraph 63 that the Zambrano  principle
    did not cover anything short of a situation where  the  EU  citizen  is
    forced to leave the territory of the EU

35. I have therefore to consider the welfare of the British  citizen  child
    and the extent to which the quality or standard of  his  life  will  be
    impaired if the non-EU citizen is required to leave. This  is  all  for
    the purpose of answering the question whether the  child  would,  as  a
    matter of practicality, be unable to remain in the UK. This requires  a
    consideration, amongst other things, of the impact which the removal of
    the primary carer would have on the child,  and  the  alternative  care
    available for the child.

36. The evidence before the Judge was that S's  father  is  an  immigration
    officer and works in the United Kingdom, Belgium and France. He is away
    much of the time from the United Kingdom and when he is in the  country
    he lives with his mother. If S cannot live with her father,  who  could
    be her alternative care provider, she would be  effectively  forced  to
    leave the United Kingdom and accompany her mother to Sierra  Leone.  Mr
    Tufan suggested that the father could give up his  employment  to  look
    after S. I do not think that that is the answer.

37. The Judge found that S  has  always  lived  with  her  mother  and  her
    brother. The judge did not find that there was sufficient evidence of a
    close, genuine and subsisting bond with her father  and  therefore  S's
    relationship with her father is tenuous at best. The Judge  found  that
    the best interests of S, lies with her remaining  with  her  mother.  I
    also take into account that she is a girl child and requires a mother's
    care over the care of a semi-absent father. Exclusion of the appellants
    from this country will seriously impair the quality of S's standard  of
    life and she will effectively be forced to leave the United Kingdom  to
    be with her mother.

38. I emphasise that I do not consider S's interests as  paramount,  though
    S's interests must be  taken  into  account.  The  law  is  clear  from
    Zambrano and Derici as applied in Harrison. I take  into  account  that
    the decision to exclude S's mother from  the  United  Kingdom  will  to
    infringe the right of residence of S because she will have to  give  up
    residence and travel with her mother to Sierra Leone. It  is  for  this
    reason that the welfare of S in this case comes into play.

39. The appellant's application for a derivative residence card was as  S's
    primary carer under EEA law and the second appellant's application  was
    as his mother's dependent. Therefore the question I have to  answer  is
    whether S would be unable to reside in the United Kingdom if her mother
    was required to leave. I answer that question in the affirmative taking
    into account all the evidence in the round.

40. I find that there is an error of law in the determination of the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge and I set it aside. I remake the decision and allow
    the appellant's appeal for them to be issued with Derivative  Residence
    Cards by the Secretary of State according to the 2006 Regulations.

Decision


Appeal allowed


Signed                                  Date 3rd day of November 2015


Ms S Chana
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



