
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/42052/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision and Reasons            |
|                                |Promulgated                     |
|On 15th December 2014           |On 16th December 2014           |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                             Mr Edison Prozllomi
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms V Laughton, instructed by J D Spicer Zeb
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Albania born on 11th  June  1987  and  he
    appeals against the decision of the Secretary of State dated 7th August
    2013 to refuse to issue him residence card as an extended family member
    of Joanna Malgorzata Batko, a Polish  national  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 2. In a determination dated  18th  July  2014  Judge  of  the  First  Tier
    Tribunal Maxwell refused the appellant's appeal.

Application for Permission to Appeal

 3. The application for permission to appeal made by the appellant asserted
    that the only reason the Judge gave for finding that the appellant  and
    his partner were not in a durable relationship was that  they  had  not
    lived together for 2  years.   This  was  not  treated  solely  as  the
    starting  point.  It  was  the  start  and  the  end  of  the   judge's
    consideration.  The evaluation was set out only at [10].  Permission to
    appeal was granted on renewal of the application to the Upper  Tribunal
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb.

 4. At the hearing before Ms Laughton relied on her skeleton argument which
    essentially advanced that the First Tier Tribunal  Judge  had  elevated
    the starting point of the Regulations to a rule and had ignored YB (EEA
    reg 17(4) - proper approach) Ivory Coast [2008] UKAIT 00062

 5. Mr Melvin resisted the ground with reference to a failure  to  consider
    Article 8 and submitted that JM Liberia [2006] EWCA Civ 1402 could  not
    be relied upon.  He submitted that the appellant was an illegal entrant
    prior to being joined by the sponsor.

Conclusions

 6. The First Tier Tribunal Judge accepted that the appellant  and  sponsor
    were in a genuine relationship and this  is  recorded  at  [6]  of  the
    determination.  However  thereafter  he  failed  to  consider  relevant
    factors  in  the  assessment  of  whether  they  were  in   a   durable
    relationship for the purposes of Regulation 8 of the  EEA  Regulations,
    that is an assessment  of  whether  the  appellant  was  in  a  durable
    relationship with his sponsor and could be considered  as  an  extended
    family member.  The Judge stated [10]

         'I find no good reason why the fact that the relationship  has  yet
         to endure the two years ought properly to be disregarded.   I  find
         no compelling evidence which proves on the balance of probabilities
         that the relationship, and for the avoidance  of  doubt,  I  accept
         there is a relationship between the appellant and his partner,  has
         been proven to be a durable  relationship  within  the  meaning  of
         Regulation 8'.

 7. There is no definition of durable relationship.  The European  casework
    instructions set out that the parties should have been living  together
    in a relationship akin to marriage which has subsisted for two years or
    more but YB (EEA ref 17(4) - proper approach) Ivory Coast [2008]  UKAIT
    00062 establishes the approach to be taken and  holds  that  the  'fact
    that a person meets or does not meet the requirements of  the  relevant
    immigration rules cannot be treated as determinative of the question of
    whether a residence  car  should  or  should  not  be  issued'  and  in
    accordance with the Directive, there should be an extensive examination
    of the personal circumstances of the appellant.  Further a  caveat  was
    identified that to seek  to  reduce  such  an  examination  to  whether
    comparable national law criteria  are  met  would  run  contrary  to  a
    general principle of Community  law  namely  that  of  proportionality.
    There  should  also  be  an  extensive  examination  of  the   personal
    circumstances.  'Neither principle  is  necessarily  met  simply  by  a
    mechanical checking of the comparable national law criteria'.  YB  held
    that the concept of a durable relationship is a term of EU law  and  as
    such it does not impose a fixed time period and further does  not  even
    need to entail co-habitation.

 8. Despite the evidence put before the judge he simply stated  that  there
    was no compelling reason for him to depart  from  the  EEA  regulations
    established under UK law and elevated the 'two year'  rule  to  a  rule
    without more contrary to  YB.   The  judge  did  not  engage  with  the
    evidence in this respect.   The policy  and  EEA  Regulations  must  be
    taken into account but it was incumbent  upon  the  Judge  to  make  an
    examination of all the circumstances and this is not disclosed  by  the
    decision.

 9. The judge also failed to address Article 8  although  for  the  reasons
    given above I have set aside the decision.

10. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified.  I set aside the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).

11. Mr Melvin conceded at the hearing that the appellant  and  his  sponsor
    had been engaged in a durable relationship of two years and two  months
    by the date of the hearing before me. He opined that  the  presence  of
    the appellant was that of illegality in the UK as the appellant entered
    on the back of a lorry.  It was  submitted  by  Ms  Laughton  that  the
    refusal of the residence card would frustrate the  continuing  exercise
    of treaty rights by the  sponsor.   Further  that  someone  is  the  UK
    illegally is not grounds for refusing to grant a residence card.   This
    has some force being in mind the principle of non-interference with  an
    EEA national's  treaty  rights,  however  that  is  a  matter  for  the
    Secretary of State to consider.

12. Specifically I refer to Aladeselu  and  Others  (2006  Regs  -  reg  8)
    Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00253 (IAC) headnote of which states:


         "1. For the purposes of establishing whether a person qualifies  as
         an  Other  Family  Member  (OFM)/extended   family   member   under
         regulation  8  of  the   Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
         Regulations 2006, the requirement that they accompany or  join  the
         Union citizen/EEA national exercising Treaty rights must be read as
         encompassing both those who have arrived before and those who  have
         arrived after the Union citizen/EEA national sponsor. "


         2. The 2006  Regulations  do  not  impose  a  requirement  that  an
         OFM/extended family member must be present in  the  United  Kingdom
         lawfully.


         3.  But  in  the  context  of  the  exercise  of  regulation  17(4)
         discretion as  to  whether  to  issue  a  residence  card,  matters
         relating to how and when an OFM/extended family member arrives in a
         host Member State are not irrelevant."

13. However further  to  Ihemedu  (OFMs  -  meaning)  Nigeria  [2011]  UKUT
    00340(IAC) and as in this case the  Secretary  of  State  had  not  yet
    exercised  that  discretion,  I  allow  the  appeal  as  being  not  in
    accordance with the law leaving the matter of whether to  exercise  the
    reg 17(4) discretion in his favour to the Secretary of State:  see  Yau
    Yak Wah [1982] Imm AR 16; MO (reg 17(4) EEA  Regs)  Iraq  [2008]  UKAIT
    00061.

Decision

Appeal allowed to the extent determined above.




Signed      Date 15th December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington



