
 [pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42137/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 6th April 2016                        |On 28th April 2016                  |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY

                                   Between

                                     h g
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Uppal, Glen Solicitors, London
For the Respondent:    Ms Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nepal born on  [  ]  1988.   He  appealed
    against the decision of the Respondent dated 6th October 2014  refusing
    his application for leave to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  the
    partner  of  a  relevant  points-based  system  migrant  and  deciding,
    pursuant to Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality  Act
    2006, that he would be  removed  when  his  existing  leave  to  remain
    expired.  His appeal was heard by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Higgins on 5th August 2015.  The appeal was  dismissed  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 8th September 2015.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Hollingworth  on  4th
    February 2016.  The permission states that  it  is  arguable  that  the
    judge should  have  made  findings  of  fact  in  the  context  of  the
    Appellant's wife's ability or inability to travel due to being  in  the
    last stage of pregnancy and the fact that she had no relatives  in  the
    United Kingdom save for her husband and that it is arguable that in the
    absence of these findings the reference by the judge at paragraph 16 of
    the decision, to the issue of whether the  Appellant's  wife  chose  to
    remain in the United Kingdom, was a reference to  a  state  of  affairs
    without a foundation of findings in fact.  The permission  goes  on  to
    state that the reference by the judge at paragraph 17 of  the  decision
    to his  conclusion  that  the  Appellant's  wife  might  reasonably  be
    expected to return to Nepal with the Appellant is equally  arguable  on
    the footing that the judge did not set out sufficient findings of  fact
    in order to reach this conclusion.

The Hearing

 3. The Appellant's representative submitted that  he  is  relying  on  the
    permission.  He submitted that there is an error of law in  the  First-
    tier Judge's decision as normally short  term  leave  would  have  been
    granted to the Appellant by the Judge in the circumstances of this case
    but the Judge did not even consider this.  He submitted that the  child
    has now been born so Section 55 applies.   He  submitted  that  at  the
    hearing the Presenting Officer submitted that given  the  circumstances
    the Appellant could have been granted short term leave and he submitted
    that there is an error of law  in  the  decision.   The  representative
    submitted that the case should be remitted back to the  Respondent  for
    reconsideration on compassionate grounds.  He submitted that  that  was
    put to the judge at the First-tier hearing.  He  submitted  that  since
    2015 there has been a  blockade  in  Nepal  so  there  is  evidence  of
    hardship for the Appellant's child if the  family  have  to  return  to
    Nepal.  I put to the Appellant's representative that this is  an  error
    of law hearing.  At the date of the hearing the child had not been born
    and so could not be taken  into  account  and  it  is  clear  from  the
    decision that the judge was aware of the Appellant's wife's  pregnancy.
    In these circumstances Section 55 does not apply.

 4. The representative submitted that short term  leave  should  have  been
    granted to the Appellant and not to do so was an error of law.

 5. I was asked to consider the terms of the grant of  permission.   I  was
    told the appellant's bundle may not have  been  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.

 6. The only items in the appellant's bundle are his witness  statement,  a
    copy of his passport and visas,  his  wife's  residence  permit  and  a
    maternity certificate.  Even if these papers were not before the  judge
    I find that he had sufficient evidence before him to  make  a  reasoned
    judgment.  His decision  makes  it  clear  that  he  is  aware  of  the
    pregnancy and the facts in this case.

 7. The Presenting Officer made her  submissions  submitting  that  as  the
    child was not born at the date of the hearing Section 55 should not  be
    taken into account as it is not relevant.  She submitted that the Judge
    was clearly aware of the pregnancy as it is referred to  at  paragraphs
    13 and 14 of the decision.

 8. With regard to the concession which the representative of the Appellant
    states was made by the Presenting Officer relating to short term leave,
    she submitted that there is nothing to indicate that a  concession  was
    made.  I asked if there is anything in the Record of Proceedings of the
    Presenting Officer and she said that there is not.  She submitted  that
    the representative's submission relating to hardship on return to Nepal
    has arisen only since the decision was made.

 9. The Presenting Officer submitted that there is nothing to indicate that
    the Appellant's wife will be unable to look  after  the  child  if  the
    Appellant is not in the United Kingdom.  The burden of  proof  relating
    to this is on  the  Appellant.   She  submitted  that  the  Appellant's
    partner, now that she has had the child, can return but she  does  have
    permission to remain in the United Kingdom and it is up to her  whether
    she decides to return to Nepal with the  Appellant  or  stay  with  her
    child in the United Kingdom.  She submitted that the  First-tier  Judge
    considered both positions.

10. The Presenting Officer submitted that the decision made by  the  First-
    tier Judge was open to him.  She submitted that adequate  reasons  were
    given in the decision for refusing the claim under Article 8.

11. She submitted that there is no error of law in the  First-tier  Judge's
    decision.

12. The Appellant's representative had no further submissions to make.

Decision and Reasons

13. This Appellant has always had leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
    with his wife who came as a student on  1st  February  2010.   On  12th
    August 2014 the Appellant's wife  made  an  application  as  a  Tier  4
    Student including the Appellant in her application as her dependant but
    although she was granted leave the  Appellant  was  not  granted  leave
    because Westminster Academy was not a body in receipt of funding  as  a
    higher education institution.  His wife was a Tier 1 (Post-Study  Work)
    Migrant when she applied.  The relevant paragraph of the Rules is 319C.
     The Appellant's contention is that he  satisfied  paragraph  319C(iv).
    He also made a human rights claim because his wife was  pregnant.   She
    became pregnant after the application  was  made.   The  Appellant  was
    seeking leave to remain on compassionate grounds.

14. At paragraph 11 of  the  decision  the  First-tier  Judge  rejects  the
    submissions  of  the  Appellant's  representative  that   sub-paragraph
    319C(iv) is satisfied,  as  the  Appellant  and  his  wife  made  their
    applications when she was a Tier 1 (Post-Study Migrant) and he was  the
    partner of a Tier 1 (Post-Study Migrant) during the three months  prior
    to making their applications.   It  is  clear  that  the  claim  cannot
    succeed under the Rules.

15. The Respondent was under no obligation  to  grant  a  short  period  of
    discretionary leave on compassionate grounds.  I  have  considered  the
    Record of Proceedings on my file and  can  see  no  concession  by  the
    Presenting Officer on this basis.  A  child  was  conceived  after  the
    Respondent's decisions were made in October 2014 and at the date of the
    hearing the child had not been born.  Section 55  therefore  cannot  be
    considered and it was open to the judge to find  that  the  Appellant's
    removal would not interfere with the family life  he  enjoys  with  his
    wife as she might reasonably be expected to return to Nepal  with  him.
    The judge not only considered this but also considered the fact that as
    she still has leave to remain she might choose to remain in the  United
    Kingdom without the Appellant.  This is a matter of her choice.

16. The situation in Nepal has happened since the decisions were  made  and
    affect the return of the child who was not born when the decisions were
    made.

17. The judge has properly considered Section 19  of  the  Immigration  Act
    2014, Article 8 and Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act  2002  sections  117A-D.   The  First-tier  Judge  refers  to   the
    Appellant's private life in the United Kingdom being established during
    periods  when  his  continued  presence  in  the  United  Kingdom   was
    precarious.

18. The decision makes it clear that the First-tier Judge was aware of  the
    Appellant's wife's pregnancy and her due date for the birth and I  find
    that based on what was before him the judge was entitled to come to the
    decision he did on the Immigration Rules and on discretionary leave.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the decision of  Judge  of  the  First-
tier Tribunal Higgins promulgated on 8th September 2015.

This decision must stand and the Appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity has been directed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray

