
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42299/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 26th November 2014                         |    On 5th December 2014     |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE

                                   Between

                       MS MARIA ISABEL QUEIROS RIBEIRO
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K McCarthy, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Irwin Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            REMITTAL AND REASONS


   1. The appellant is a citizen of  Brazil,  born  14  October  1954.   She
      applied for a permanent residence card as confirmation of a  right  to
      reside in the United Kingdom  as  the  extended  family  member  of  a
      Hungarian national.  The application was  refused  and  the  appellant
      appealed that decision.  The appeal came before Judge  of  the  First-
      Tier Tribunal Ghaffar sitting at Birmingham on 19 June 2014.  An  oral
      hearing was held.  The appellant gave  evidence  and  each  party  was
      represented.

   2. In a determination dated 2 July  2014,  Judge  Ghaffar  dismissed  the
      appeal finding that the appellant could not benefit from "any retained
      rights" given that her daughter (with whom she  lived)  had  separated
      from her Hungarian husband.

   3. At paragraph  17  of  the  determination  the  judge  found  that  the
      Hungarian  national  was  exercising  treaty  rights  based   on   the
      contention that there was nothing to suggest that he was not.

   4. The appellant sought leave to  appeal  alleging  that  the  judge  had
      failed to consider that the  appellant  remained  dependent  upon  her
      daughter and the judge had failed to apply Regulation 7(1)(c)  of  the
      EEA Regulations 2006.

   5. In granting leave to appeal another judge of the  First-Tier  Tribunal
      gave the following as reasons:

         "1.  Permission to appeal is sought by a female national of  Brazil
      against the decision of First-Tier Tribunal Judge Ghaffar  sitting  at
      Birmingham  to  dismiss  her  appeal  against  the  refusal   of   her
      application for a residence card  of  confirmation  of  the  right  of
      residence in the United  Kingdom  as  the  family  member  of  an  EEA
      (Hungarian) national.  The appellant arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom
      from Brazil in 2007 to live with her daughter and her daughter's  then
      husband, the Hungarian national, Mr Kovacs.  The three of  them  lived
      together until 2009 or 2010 until the marriage broke down.  Since then
      the  appellant  had  lived  with  her  daughter,  and  the  daughter's
      children, but not with Mr Kovacs.  The application was  refused  under
      Regulation 15(1)(b) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006  because
      the respondent was  not  satisfied  that  the  EEA  sponsor  had  been
      exercising treaty rights  for  a  continuous  period  of  five  years.
      Although the application was also refused under Article 8, the  appeal
      was not advanced on that basis because removal directions had not been
      given.  Judge Ghaffar found that the EEA national had been  exercising
      treaty rights but that  the  appellant  could  not  benefit  from  any
      retained rights.  The appellant's daughter and the Hungarian  national
      were  not  divorced.   The  wording  of  Regulation  15  required  the
      appellant to be living with the EEA national or there to have  been  a
      divorce.

     2.  Permission to appeal is now sought on the basis that the  appellant
      was a family member in the ascending line of  the  spouse  of  an  EEA
      national by virtue of Regulation 7(1)(c).  Reference is made to a case
      of Moneke and Others (EEA - OFMs) (no citation given) which  contrasts
      the position of family members and other family members and says  that
      dependent family members may be dependent on either the union  citizen
      or (as here) the spouse/partner of such a  citizen.   It  is  arguable
      that in not considering the appeal on that basis the judge fell into a
      material error of law.  I can see no reason why an anonymity direction
      might be appropriate and no such direction is made".

   6. Following the grant  of  leave  the  respondent  produced  a  Rule  24
      response in the following terms:

         "1.  The respondent to this appeal is the Secretary  of  State  for
      the Home Department.  Documents relating to this appeal should be sent
      to the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department,  at  the  above
      address.

     2.  The respondent considers that the appellant may  well  be  entitled
      to a permanent residence card if her daughter is still married to  her
      husband and he is still exercising treaty rights.

     3.  However in light of the 2008 Procedure Rule 24(3)e  the  respondent
      does not accept that the finding of  the  judge  at  paragraph  17  is
      adequate in establishing that the appellant's  daughter's  husband  is
      exercising treaty  rights.   The  judge  has  misdirected  himself  in
      concluding that what is required  is  evidence  that  the  appellant's
      husband is not exercising treaty rights.

     4.  It is clear that the appellant must demonstrate to the  balance  of
      probabilities that the appellant's daughter's husband  was  exercising
      treaty rights.  The lack of evidence that he is not exercising  treaty
      rights is simply inadequate to demonstrate that he is.  The  judge  is
      using a lack of evidence to establish a precedent  fact  and  this  is
      simply wrong.

     5.  This issue is particularly pertinent  since  there  is  clearly  an
      ongoing contact with him via his son.  Paragraph 8 refers".

   7. Hence the matter came before me in the Upper Tribunal.

   8. In her oral submission Ms McCarthy emphasised that Regulations 15  and
      7 of the 2006 Regulations had been pleaded in the original grounds  of
      appeal.  Ms McCarthy explained that the EEA national,  Mr  Kovacs  had
      moved out of the house.  There is still contact between  him  and  the
      child of the family.  It is believed therefore that he is still in the
      United Kingdom.  He is contributing to the mortgage and the  inference
      is that he is therefore working, and  continuing  to  exercise  Treaty
      rights.  Ms McCarthy relied on the grounds seeking leave.  The  appeal
      should be allowed by reason of Regulation 7.

   9. Mr Richards relied upon the Rule 24 response and  indicated  that  the
      judge had not made findings.  He acknowledged that there was an  error
      of law contained in the determination by reason of paragraph 17 of the
      decision.  The question was whether or not that error was material.

  10. Ms McCarthy responded in that it was difficult to  obtain  information
      and evidence  because  Mr  Kovacs  did  not  cooperate.   It  was  not
      incumbent upon the judge to list every  piece  of  evidence.   He  had
      clearly taken into account what was contained in the  bundle  and  had
      found the sponsor to be credible (and indeed the appellant).

  11. At the end of  the  hearing  I  reserved  my  decision.   Ms  McCarthy
      requested that the Upper Tribunal remake the decision.

  12. It is common ground between the parties that the judge made  an  error
      of law in the  determination  of  2  July  2014.   The  respondent  is
      perfectly correct in paragraph 4 of the Rule 24 letter.  The  onus  is
      upon the appellant to demonstrate to the balance of probabilities that
      the Hungarian national is exercising treaty rights at the  appropriate
      time.  The lack of evidence that he is not exercising such  rights  is
      "simply  inadequate".   The  judge  was  clearly  wrong  to  reach   a
      conclusion by that route.

  13. In addition the appellant contends that the judge  was  wrong  in  law
      with regard to the Regulations to  be  applied  once  facts  had  been
      established.  Paragraphs 2 and 5 of the Rule 24  response  offer  some
      support to that contention.

  14. I therefore reached the conclusion that the errors  contained  in  the
      determination are clearly material by reason of the fact that they  go
      directly to the issue and therefore the  determination  cannot  stand,
      and must be set aside.

  15. Although finding the witness is credible the judge has, with  respect,
      made very little in the way of findings of fact.  This may  well  have
      been difficult because of the refusal by Mr Kovacs to cooperate.

  16. Be that as it may attempts must be made to establish facts  and  reach
      conclusions.  I consider that is a matter that falls within the Senior
      President's direction and is therefore appropriate for this matter  to
      be remitted back to the First-Tier Tribunal to be heard de novo  by  a
      judge other than Judge Ghaffar.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Poole


