
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: Ia/42587/2014
                                                               IA/42588/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 11 February 2016                  |On 3 March 2016                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER


                                   Between

                                     AP
                                     RP
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SecretARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A Al Arayn, Counsel, instructed by Farani-Javid-
Taylor Sols.
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is not subject to an  anonymity  order  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.  Neither  party
    has invited me to make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI  2008/2698)  and  I
    have not done so.

 2. The appellants appeal against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Reid) dismissing the appellants' appeal against a decision taken
    on 7 October 2014 to refuse the appellants'  applications  for  further
    leave to remain in the UK and to remove the appellants from the UK.

Introduction

 3. The first appellant is a citizen of  India  born  in  1980.  She  first
    arrived in the UK in 2009 as a Tier 4 student. The second appellant  is
    a citizen of India born in 1978; the husband of the first appellant and
    he first arrived in the UK in 2009 as a Tier 4 student  dependent.  The
    current applications were made in time on 7 July 2014.

 4. The Secretary of State decided that the first appellant had  failed  to
    provide a valid CAS and therefore was  not  satisfied  that  the  first
    appellant had a valid CAS. The applications were refused.

The Appeal

 5. The appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an oral
    hearing at Taylor House on 1 June 2015. They  were  represented  by  Mr
    Kannangara, Counsel. The  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the  first
    appellant did not meet the points requirement and could not answer  the
    questions at the oral hearing as to whether she intended to  study  for
    ATHE Level 6 Diploma in Management (as per her application) or the ACCA
    qualification (as per her oral evidence). She had  failed  the  English
    test which was a prerequisite for the application CAS. The judge  found
    that her plans  had  changed  and  that  a  fresh  application  to  the
    respondent with a CAS relevant to  the  ACCA  course  would  have  been
    required.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the
    basis that the First-tier Tribunal had  erred  in  law  by  failing  to
    consider relevant case law relating to  fairness.  The  respondent  had
    erred by not granting the  first  appellant  certified  copies  of  her
    passport. Without her passport the first appellant could not sit for an
    English test or obtain a CAS. There was a duty on the respondent to act
    fairly.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Simpson
    on 30 October 2015 on the basis that it was not  in  dispute  that  the
    first appellant did not  have  a  valid  CAS  when  she  submitted  her
    application because she had failed the English test. The judge  pointed
    out that the first appellant could ask the respondent for  a  certified
    copy of her passport to re-sit her English test. Given that finding, it
    was arguable that the judge ought to have allowed  the  appeal  to  the
    extent that the first appellant be granted a 60  day  grace  period  in
    which to re-sit the test.

 8. In a rule 24 response dated 12 November 2015 the  respondent  submitted
    that the first appellant did not have  a  valid  CAS  because  she  had
    failed the English exam. The requirements of the Rules were not met and
    it was open to the first appellant to seek  a  copy  of  her  passport,
    retake the test and submit a fresh application.

 9. Thus, the appeal came before me

Discussion

10. Mr Al Arayn conceded that the first appellant did not have a valid  CAS
    at the time of application but  she  was  unable  to  use  the  English
    language test for her later application and the respondent should  have
    given her certified copies of her passport.  The  common  law  duty  of
    fairness argument was not considered by the judge. The appeal should be
    remitted for a de novo hearing.

11. Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted that the respondent  does  not  have  to
    make  substantively  fair  decisions,  just  to  consider  common   law
    fairness. In this case there was no CAS and  the  first  appellant  had
    failed her English language test. She did not ask the respondent for  a
    copy of her passport. The fault lay entirely with the first appellant.

12. Mr Arayn responded that the unfairness in this case was withholding the
    certified copy of the passport but conceded that there was  nothing  in
    the witness statements or other evidence to confirm a request  for  the
    certified copy of the passport.

13. I have considered Patel (revocation  of  sponsor  licence  -  fairness)
    India [2011] UKUT 00211 (IAC). The  facts  of  that  case  were  wholly
    different but the general principle is  that  immigration  judges  have
    jurisdiction to determine  whether  decisions  on  variation  of  leave
    applications are in accordance with the law, where issues  of  fairness
    arise. In this appeal, the first appellant did not have a valid CAS  at
    the time of her application and did not request a certified copy of her
    passport in order to retake the English test. There is nothing  in  the
    case law which required  the  judge  to  allow  the  appeals  in  those
    circumstances.

14. I also have regard to the concession made in the rule  24  response  to
    the effect that it is still open to the first appellant to seek a  copy
    of her passport, retake the test and submit a fresh  application.  That
    must be a reference to an  in-country  application  because  the  first
    appellant would not need a copy of her  passport  if  she  were  to  be
    removed from the UK using her original passport as her travel  document
    and was then obliged to make any further application from India.

15. I am satisfied that  the  concession  cures  any  possible  unfairness,
    providing that any future application is  not  refused  simply  on  the
    ground that the first appellant has no leave to remain when she submits
    the fresh application. It would not be reasonable for the concession to
    be open ended and 60 days is a reasonable maximum period for submission
    of a fresh application.

16. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the  appellants'
    appeals did not involve the making of a  material  error  of  law.  The
    decision stands.

Decision

17. Consequently, I dismiss the appeals of the appellants.


Signed   [pic]    Date 26 February 2016
Judge Archer

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
