






Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
IA/42973/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |              Decision and Reasons      |
|                                  |Promulgated                             |
|On 15 June 2017                   |              On 28 June 2017           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                           Miss Janice Louise Wood
                        (no anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr D Jones, counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of South Africa, born on 22 October  1979.
      She appeals with permission against the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal dismissing her appeal against the decision of the  respondent
      dated 22 June 2016 refusing her leave to remain in the UK pursuant  to
      Paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules.


   2. In granting permission  to  appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Page
      concluded that it was arguable that the Judge erred in considering the
      weight to be given to the respondent's  policy  guidance  in  deciding
      whether there were exceptional circumstances entitling  the  appellant
      to succeed under paragraph 276A-D of the  rules  based  on  11  years'
      residence, despite a period of overstay between March 2007 and  August
      2009.






The appeal


   3. Mr Jones adopted the grounds of appeal for leave. He submitted that it
      was accepted by the parties that by reason of the respondent's refusal
      to regularise the appellant's leave on a valid in time application  to
      vary such leave from working holiday maker  to  student,  on  7  March
      2007, her eligibility under the long  residence  rules  was  dependent
      upon  an  acceptance  that  there   were   exceptional   circumstances
      justifying the waiver of the  irregularity  of  the  appellant's  stay
      thereafter.


   4. The appellant had contended before the Tribunal that the  respondent's
      refusal of student leave in March 2007 and at  all  points  thereafter
      had been wrong in law. The original decision to refuse was also flawed
      in that it improperly limited the appellant's access  to  a  statutory
      right of appeal limiting her facility to contest that error; that  the
      appellant had determinedly contested that refusal to her physical  and
      financial detriment; that on all the available indicators  she  was  a
      genuine student and had genuinely and effectively pursued  her  course
      of study, and that but for the respondent's error in  refusing  leave,
      her continuous lawful residence would have been unbroken.


   5. He noted that there  were  various  affirmative  findings.  The  Judge
      accepted that all the evidence adduced by the  appellant  was  genuine
      [33]. He also concluded that had she been granted leave as  a  student
      in 2007, she would have completed her BSc and, save for short  periods
      of time, would have remained lawfully in the UK throughout [39].


   6. The Judge also found in effect that the respondent erred in  declining
      to grant further leave to remain to the appellant in 2006  and/or  had
      acted unreasonably in failing to exercise discretion in her favour  so
      as to extend leave to remain as a student at that time [38].


   7. The respondent did not dispute that there existed facilities to  waive
      even a lengthy period of overstaying. The Judge concluded that  whilst
      the respondent's long residence instructions employed a high threshold
      with regard to the establishment of  exceptional  circumstances,  that
      threshold could be met inferentially as  a  result  of  administrative
      errors by the  respondent  arising  from  delays  from  unexpected  or
      unforeseen causes [44].


   8. The Judge observed at [53] that  had  the  appellant  been  granted  a
      student visa when she originally applied  she  would  have  been  here
      lawfully for 11 years.


   9. The Judge also accepted that had the  only  issue  been  the  original
      grant of leave to pursue her studies '..... I accept that  there  were
      exceptional circumstances to exercise  discretion  in  her  favour'  -
      [43]. He also accepted that it was arguable that the respondent  erred
      in failing to accord her a  statutory  right  of  appeal  against  the
      flawed decision making recorded in 2007 [44].


  10. Mr Jones submitted that  notwithstanding  those  findings,  the  Judge
      nevertheless concluded that there were not  exceptional  circumstances
      to inform a decision that the appellant should be  treated  as  having
      enjoyed continuous lawful residence  between  the  period  March  2007
      until August 2009.


  11. Mr Jones also submitted that there was a manifestly material error  in
      that the Judge proceeded on the mistaken belief that there had been  a
      break in the appellant's continuity of residence for a  period  of  14
      months [43-45]. The Judge noted the appellant's return to South Africa
      in May 2008, signalling the perceived break in continuity of residence
      as a factor which told against a finding that there  were  exceptional
      circumstances.


  12. Contrary to the Judge's understanding however, the appellant  did  not
      in fact depart from the UK until August  2009,  returning  with  entry
      clearance a few weeks later. That position was uncontroversial between
      the parties. Indeed it  was  confirmed  in  the  respondent's  refusal
      letter dated 22 June 2016, at Annex A, page 2, describing the accepted
      immigration history to include the departure in Summer 2009, an  entry
      clearance application on 6 July 2009 and re-entry  with  leave  on  17
      August 2009. She had accordingly remained outside the UK for a  period
      of a few weeks only and not well over a year.


  13. In addition, the circumstances were clearly set out in the appellant's
      skeleton argument before the Judge.  Mr Jones,  who  appeared  on  her
      behalf before the First-tier, confirmed that this was all set  out  in
      the skeleton. It had been submitted that she had been present  in  the
      UK continuously for a period in excess  of  ten  years,  having  spent
      substantially less than 18 months outside the UK during her stay.  The
      fact of her departure from the UK in order to secure  entry  clearance
      in 2009 did not operate so as to preclude the  establishment  of  such
      continuous residence, it being contended that the appellant fell to be
      treated properly as being in possession of extant leave. She  in  fact
      returned  within  a  matter  of  days  with  lawful  leave  to  enter.
      Accordingly that absence did not operate to break continuous residence
      in accordance with paragraph 276A(a) of the Rules. Mr Jones  submitted
      that the Judge's record was accordingly mistaken.


  14. Mr Jones accordingly submitted that continuity of  residence  had  not
      been an issue before the First-tier Tribunal but  whether  there  were
      exceptional circumstances justifying the waiver of the irregularity of
      the appellant's stay between March 2007 and August 2009.


  15. On behalf of the respondent, Ms Ahmad very fairly accepted that  there
      had been a material error regarding a break in the continuity  of  the
      appellant's residence, presumed to be for a period of 14 months, which
      was not correct. That moreover affected the conclusion that there were
      no exceptional circumstances justifying the waiver of the irregularity
      of the appellant's stay, which had been unlawful, between  March  2007
      and August 2009.


  16.  She  accepted  the  earlier  findings   by   the   Judge,   including
      administrative errors made and the failure to afford the  appellant  a
      statutory right of appeal against a flawed decision making recorded in
      2007.


  17. In the circumstances, both parties submitted that the decision  should
      be set aside and re-made by the Upper Tribunal.


     Assessment


  18. I find that Ms Ahmad's concession that there has been a material error
      of law was properly made. For the reasons referred to  above,  I  find
      that the Judge's misapprehension as to the period that  the  appellant
      was absent from  the  UK  affected  his  acceptance  that  exceptional
      circumstances existed justifying the waiver of the irregularity of the
      appellant's stay between March 2007 and August 2009.  She  had  always
      been a dedicated and successful student for that period and  continued
      to be a student after her return having obtained leave  to  enter  the
      UK.


  19. In the circumstances I set aside the decision and re-make it.


  20.  It  was  not  disputed  by  Ms  Ahmad  that  there  were  exceptional
      circumstances  justifying  the  waiver  of  the  irregularity  of  the
      appellant's stay after 7 March 2007.   I  find  that  there  are  such
      exceptional circumstances for the following reasons.  It  is  accepted
      that the respondent's refusal of leave in March  2007  and  thereafter
      had been wrong in law. The  original  decision  to  refuse  improperly
      limited her access to a statutory right of appeal limiting her ability
      to contest  that  error.   She  had  contested  that  refusal  to  her
      financial detriment. It was never contended that she was not a genuine
      and diligent student.  But for the error in  refusing  her  leave  her
      continuous residence would have been unbroken.


  21. I find that the provisions of  paragraph  276B(i)  have  been  met.  A
      decision under paragraph 276B(ii) remains outstanding.


  22. The parties accepted that I am entitled  to  assume  the  function  of
      primary decision maker for the purpose of  paragraph  276B(ii).  There
      are clearly defined terms set out in the Immigration  Rules.  In  that
      respect I have had regard to the decision of the Upper Tribunal in  MU
      (Bangladesh) [2010] UKUT 442.  The  discretion  to  refuse  indefinite
      leave on long residence grounds is exercisable by the Tribunal  if  it
      is the first instance decision maker.


  23. I accordingly consider with  regard  to  the  public  interest  issues
      raised under paragraph 276B(ii) whether there are any reasons  why  it
      would be undesirable for the appellant to be given indefinite leave to
      remain on the grounds of long residence.


  24. I take into account the appellant's age and strength of connections to
      the UK. I find that she has strong connections in the UK. She has been
      present here for a period well in excess of ten years, having  entered
      in March 2005 and having spent only a few weeks outside  the  UK  over
      that time.


  25. I have already set out the personal history of the appellant. There is
      nothing in  her  character,  conduct  and  associations  rendering  it
      undesirable for her to be given indefinite leave to  remain.  She  has
      overstayed  between  2007  and  2009.  However,  discretion  has  been
      exercised exceptionally so as  to  waive  the  period  of  overstaying
      between those dates. Moreover, she departed from the UK  in  order  to
      secure entry clearance in 2009.


  26. She has made a positive contribution to  the  UK  economy  during  the
      period that she has resided in the UK. She has invested funds  in  her
      education in the UK.


  27. It has  been  accepted  that  there  were  administrative  errors  and
      omissions made by the respondent.


  28. I have had regard to the  fact  that  the  appellant  has  remained  a
      genuine, dedicated and successful student over the years between  2007
      to date. A flawed decision making process during March  2007  affected
      her health, finances as well as her family and personal circumstances.




  29. Among the compassionate circumstances is the fact  that  her  ties  to
      South Africa have substantially diminished over  the  years.  She  has
      family members in the UK to whom she is close. She has also  developed
      a relationship and friends over time. It would be very  difficult  for
      her to be returned to South Africa, given her age and gender.


  30. Having regard to the circumstances as a whole, I find that  there  are
      no reasons why it would be undesirable for the appellant to  be  given
      indefinite leave to  remain  on  the  grounds  of  long  residence.  I
      accordingly  find  that  the  appellant  meets  the  requirements  for
      indefinite leave to remain under paragraph 276B of the Rules.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error of law and the decision is set aside. I re-make the decision and
      allow the appellant's appeal.


      No anonymity direction is made.









      Signed                             Date 27 June 2017


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer

