
IAC-AH-CJ-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/42135/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th May 2015                              |On 15th June 2015             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                           ms Leonora Maxine Nyawo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Tapfumaneyi (LR)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge North, promulgated on 9th  July  2014,  following  a  hearing  at
    Nottingham  on  27th  June  2014.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  Leonora  Maxine   Nyawo.    The   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female citizen of Zimbabwe born on 24th April  1979.
    She applied on 3rd October 2012 for a residence card as a third-country
    national upon whom a British citizen was dependent in the  UK,  relying
    on the decision in Zambrano.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that she is the  primary  carer  of  Ruvarashe
    Stephanie Nyawo, a British citizen child, who was born to her after her
    marriage with a British citizen husband by the  name  of  Farai  Nyawo.
    She came to the UK on 24th October 2010 on a spouse's visa to join  her
    British citizen husband, Farai Nyawo.  They had married in Zimbabwe  in
    September 2008.  She gave birth to a daughter on  23rd  February  2009.
    Her husband then went back to Zimbabwe after three months on  business.
    There he started living with a girlfriend in Harare.  The Appellant  is
    employed as a care assistant.  Her husband  does  not  look  after  her
    daughter or pay  maintenance.   He  lives  in  Zimbabwe.   She  attends
    primary school in the UK and the Appellant  is  her  sole  carer.   Her
    husband had in fact applied in Zimbabwe for a custody order before  the
    magistrates' court and on 11th  May  2012  his  application  succeeded,
    granting him access at weekends on a fortnightly basis.  However, it is
    she who is the child's primary carer.  This is why reliance  is  placed
    upon Zambrano.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge held that the Zimbabwe court had  ordered  the  child  should
    remain in the  custody  of  her  maternal  grandmother  and  had  given
    detailed reasons for this.  The judge went on to say that,

         "I find that it was in the child's  best  interests  to  remain  in
         Zimbabwe with her grandmother at that  time;  the  reason  for  her
         living there was that the Appellant had returned to the  UK  alone.
         The Appellant gives no reason  in  her  evidence  for  subsequently
         removing her daughter from Zimbabwe  to  the  United  Kingdom.   No
         credible reason for the child's removal at that time has  been  put
         forward and it has not been shown  that  removal  was  designed  to
         enhance her best interests rather than to enhance  the  Appellant's
         chances of obtaining leave to remain in the UK ..." (paragraph 10).



 5. The judge was also sceptical about the  Appellant's  relationship  with
    her husband, Farai Nyawo.  He said of the Appellant's account that,

         ".....her oral evidence was that they remained married,  that  they
         are not divorced and no formal separation is in process.   So  much
         is inconsistent with the Appellant's evidence that her relationship
         with her child's father has broken down irretrievably, and that she
         fears for her daughter's wellbeing as a result  of  incidents  that
         happened when she was spending time with him.  I am  not  satisfied
         that a clear and credible picture of the child's circumstances  has
         been given ..." (paragraph 10).

 6. It was in these circumstances that the judge then went on to hold that,
    "the Appellant has not demonstrated that the child's father is not in a
    position to care for her in the UK if the Appellant  were  required  to
    leave ..." (paragraph 11).

 7. Accordingly, the judge concluded that, given that the Appellant's  oral
    evidence was that "her husband had visited the UK since the Appellant's
    return and had last seen their daughter in Peterborough in March 2013",
    and given that "the  Appellant's  reluctance  to  commence  divorce  or
    separation", all of this was  "more  consistent  with  her  wishing  to
    continue in a relationship with her husband" (paragraph 12).

 8. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 9. The grounds of application state that the  Tribunal  erred  in  law  in
    having found at paragraphs  7  to  8  of  the  determination  that  the
    Appellant is the primary carer of her child and that the  father  lives
    in Zimbabwe.  On the facts the appeal should have been allowed  on  the
    basis of Regulation 15A because the Appellant's estranged husband lives
    in Zimbabwe and the Appellant is the sole primary carer of her  British
    child.

10. On 25th March 2015, permission to appeal was  granted  that  the  judge
    arguably erred in law in proceeding to consider  the  Appellant's  case
    under Article 8, even if his findings in relation to the  inconsistency
    and ambivalence in the evidence in relation to Regulation  15A  of  the
    EEA Regulations, was sustainable.

Submissions

11. At the hearing before me on 28th May 2015, Mr Tapfumaneyi  relied  upon
    the Grounds of Appeal.  He referred to the  Rule  24  response  by  the
    Respondent.  He submitted that given  that  the  child  was  a  British
    citizen there had been a failure to take  the  child's  best  interests
    into account and a failure to factor in Section 55 of  the  BCIA  2009.
    Second, the judge did  not  take  account  of  Article  8  at  all  and
    considered whether the decision to refuse the Appellant, as the primary
    carer of her child, was disproportionate.  In this regard my  attention
    was drawn to the Appellant's  representative's  skeleton  argument  (at
    page 2) at the hearing before the judge in the First-tier Tribunal.

12. For his part, Mr Kandola submitted that the Appellant  was  in  the  UK
    with no leave to remain, that leave having expired once the Appellant's
    spouse's visa had run out after her arrival in the UK.  If there was an
    Article 8 application to be made, that application should  be  made  so
    that it can properly be considered  on  the  evidence.   There  was  no
    removal decision in place and therefore Article 8 did not  fall  to  be
    considered automatically by the Respondent Secretary of State.

13. In reply, Mr Tapfumaneyi submitted that the Appellant  had  come  on  a
    spouse's visa, and had made her application during the currency of that
    leave, and in her letter of 3rd October 2012 she had explained why  she
    was applying for a derivative residence card, and she had now  been  in
    the UK for four and a half years.



No Error of Law

14. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

15. First, it is not the case that  the  judge  has  overlooked  the  "best
    interests of the child".  If anything, the judge  has  been  singularly
    most concerned with the best interests of this particular child.   What
    the judge has done is to expressly say that, "I find  it  was  in  that
    child's best interests to remain  in  Zimbabwe  with  the  grandmother"
    given that the court order was precisely that  the  custody  should  be
    with the maternal grandmother.  Detailed reasons were given  for  this.
    It was, as the judge rightly concluded, the decision of  the  Appellant
    herself to then remove her daughter from Zimbabwe to come  to  the  UK.
    She gave no credible reason for the child's removal.  If anything, what
    she is setting out to do was "to enhance her best interests rather than
    to enhance the Appellant's chances of obtaining leave to remain in  the
    UK".

16. Second, in terms of Article  8,  the  judge  did  have  this  provision
    specifically in mind because he  concluded  that,  "the  Respondent  is
    entitled to require the Appellant, if she wishes to pursue an Article 8
    application either  within  or  outside  the  Rules  to  make  such  an
    application in the required form" (paragraph 13).  As  Mr  Kandola  has
    submitted before me today there is  no  removal  decision  against  the
    Appellant and consequently no breach  of  Article  8  is  intrinsically
    raised.

17. On the facts, there would appear to have been, in any event, no  breach
    of Article 8 because the judge was  concerned  by  the  fact  that  the
    evidence in relation to this family was inconsistent and contradictory.
     The judge held, "I am not satisfied that a clear and credible  picture
    of the child's circumstances has been given ..." (paragraph  10).   The
    judge  further  held  that  no  clear  picture  of   the   "Appellant's
    circumstances" had been put forward (paragraph 11).  In relation to the
    Appellant's relationship with  her  husband,  Farai  Nyawo,  the  judge
    observed how the husband had  visited  the  UK  since  the  Appellant's
    return and had last seen their daughter in Peterborough in March  2013.
    The Appellant had been reluctant to commence divorce  proceedings.   It
    was true  that  the  Appellant's  husband  had  business  interests  in
    Zimbabwe, but the judge was not satisfied that he had severed his links
    with the UK (paragraph 12).

18. Accordingly, it is not clear how the decision of the Respondent impacts
    in Article 8 terms upon the Appellant.  This consideration is  all  the
    more important when it is remembered that it is for  the  Appellant  to
    stake her claim to Article 8 and to demonstrate how  it  is  infringed.
    Mr Tapfumaneyi, in his submissions before  me  today,  was  also  quite
    unable to explain what the Article 8 implications of the decision were,
    save to say that the Appellant was the  primary  carer  of  the  child,
    Ruvarashe Stephanie Nyawo.

19. However, the judge had expressly dealt with this  issue  by  explaining
    that the Appellant had deliberately put herself  in  this  position  by
    taking the child away from the grandmother's custody  in  Zimbabwe  and
    bringing her to the UK, without providing any  cogent  reason  for  why
    this course of action had been taken, leaving the clear impression that
    it was designed to enhance the Appellant's own rights to remain in  the
    UK,  rather  than  those  of   the   Appellant's   child.    In   these
    circumstances, the decision of the judge cannot be said to be one  that
    falls into a material error of law.

Notice of Decision

20. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  judge's  decision.   The
    determination shall stand.

21. No anonymity order is made.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    12th June 2015
