
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
IA/42344/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 22 January 2016                       |  On 17 March 2016                  |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                             mr khurram ghaffar
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Not represented
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Presenting Officer

                            NOTICE OF ABANDONMENT

 1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan, born 20 September 1986.  On 31
    August 2013, at a  time  when  he  had  extant  leave  to  remain,  the
    appellant made an application for further leave to remain as a  Tier  4
    (General) Student Migrant. The respondent refused that application,  in
    a decision of 4 October 2013, on the basis that  the  relevant  English
    language requirements of Appendix A to the Immigration  Rules  had  not
    been satisfied.

 2. In order to attract the necessary award of points for a Confirmation of
    Acceptance for Studies (CAS), a Tier 4 (General)  Student  Migrant  is,
    pursuant to paragraph 118 of Appendix  A  to  the  Rules,  required  to
    demonstrate competence in the English language to a specified standard.
     The Rules identify a number of  alternative  mechanisms  by  which  an
    applicant can meet this requirement, including the following:

         "118.    No points will be awarded for a Confirmation of Acceptance
                for Studies unless:

              ...

                (b)    One of the requirements in (i), (ii), (iii) below  is
                    met:

                    (i)    ...

                    (ii)   the course  is  a  degree  level  study  and  the
                        Confirmation of Acceptance  for  Studies  has  been
                        assigned by a sponsor which  is  not  a  recognised
                        body or is not a body in receipt of  funding  as  a
                        higher education institution from the Department of
                        Employment and Learning in  Northern  Ireland,  the
                        Higher Education Funding Council for  England,  the
                        Higher Education Funding Counsel for Wales, or  the
                        Scottish Funding Council, and:

                        (1)    ...

                        (2)    [the Applicant]  has  obtained  an  academic
                             qualification (not a professional or vocational
                             qualification) which is deemed by UK  NARIC  to
                             meet or exceed the recognised  standards  of  a
                             Bachelor's or Master's degree or a PhD  in  the
                             UK, from an educational establishment in one of
                             the following countries: Antigua  and  Barbuda;
                             Australia;  the  Bahamas;   Barbados;   Belize;
                             Dominica; Granada;  Guyana;  Ireland;  Jamaica;
                             New Zealand; St Kitts and Nevis; St  Lucia;  St
                             Vincent  and  the  Grenadines;   Trinidad   and
                             Tobago;  the  UK;  the  USA,  and  provides   a
                             specified document; set out in  paragraph  120-
                             SD(a) ..." (emphasis added)

 3. It has been the appellant's case throughout that by  reason  of  having
    obtained an  Edexcel  level  7  qualification,  which  he  contends  is
    equivalent to a UK Bachelor's degree, he satisfies the requirements  of
    paragraph  118(b)(ii)(2)  of  Appendix  A  to  the  Rules  and  is,  in
    consequence, entitled to the award  of  30  points  for  his  CAS.  The
    Secretary of State came to a contrary conclusion in her decision of  13
    February 2012.

 4. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Birrell  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal
    against the aforementioned decision concluding, inter  alia,  that  the
    consequence of the appellant's failure to  produce  evidence  that  the
    qualification he sought to rely upon had been deemed  by  UK  NARIC  to
    meet or exceed the recognised standard of a Bachelor's degree was  that
    he not meet the  'English  language  requirement'  of  the  Rules.  The
    appellant was not, therefore, entitled to the award of any  points  for
    his CAS.

 5. The appellant appealed this decision to the  Upper  Tribunal  but  that
    appeal was dismissed by Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun in a decision of  31
    March 2014.

 6. Undeterred by this, the appellant pursued the matter to  the  Court  of
    Appeal and on 2 June 2015 Lord Justice Underhill ordered that:

         "The appellant's application  for  permission  to  appeal  and  the
         resulting appeal (which challenges  the  application  of  paragraph
         118(b)(ii)(2) of  Appendix  A  of  the  Immigration  Rules  in  the
         appellant's case) be allowed by  remittal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
         (Immigration and Asylum Chamber), for reconsideration  pursuant  to
         Section 14 of the Tribunal, Courts and Enforcement Act ..."

 7. The Statement of Reasons attached to the Order reads:

         "6.  The respondent has considered the appellant's  arguments,  and
             concedes that there has been an error of law in  this  matter.
             The Upper Tribunal refused the appellant's appeal on the basis
             that the appellant was unable to provide confirmation from  UK
             NARIC that his Edexcel level 7 qualification was equivalent to
             a UK degree.  It did so ostensibly on the basis of submissions
             made by the Home Office Presenting Officer.

         7.   However, it should be noted that NARIC is not in fact mandated
             to provide such certificates in respect of UK  qualifications:
             UK NARIC only deems  qualifications  obtained  from  overseas.
             Accordingly,  para.118(b)(ii)(2)  of   Appendix   A   to   the
             Immigration Rules, would suggest that UK NARIC is able to deem
             whether a UK qualification is equivalent to a bachelors degree
             is defective.  Steps are being  taken  by  the  respondent  to
             consider how best to address this anomaly."

 8. The matter next came before the Upper Tribunal (Knowles  J  and  Deputy
    Upper Tribunal Judge Alis) on 28 July 2015,  but  was  adjourned  as  a
    consequence of the respondent not being in a position on that  date  to
    assist the Tribunal in its consideration of what was  said  to  be  the
    core issue in the  appeal,  i.e.  whether  paragraph  118(b)(ii)(2)  of
    Appendix A to the Rules is defective.

 9. At the outset of  the  hearing  before  us  Mr  Walker  indicated  that
    although the Secretary of State was still in the process  of  reviewing
    paragraph 118(b)(ii)(2) of Appendix A, in the instant  case  she  would
    withdraw her decision of 13 February  2012  and  "grant  the  appellant
    leave for an appropriate period, starting now."

10. As a consequence of the grant of leave to the appellant, which is  said
    to take effect immediately, the appellant's appeal falls to be  treated
    as  abandoned  pursuant  to  the  operation  of  s.104  (4A)   of   the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality  Act  2002.  There  is,  therefore,
    nothing further for the Upper Tribunal to consider.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 25 January 2016



