
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/43560/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 22.6.15                           |On 08.09.15                          |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

                          Mr CLAUDIUS KENUTE HENRY
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                        Appellant/Respondent

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                        Respondent/Appellant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jacobs, Counsel instructed by Solomon Solicitors
For the Respondents:   Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1     The Secretary of State appeals with permission  against  the  decision
    of the Fist tier Tribunal (FtT) (Judge of  the  FtT  Ghani)  dated  9th
    February 2015. We shall refer to the parties as they were in  the  FtT,
    that is that the  Appellant  is  Mr  Claudius  Kenute  Henry,  and  the
    Respondent is the Secretary of State for the Home Department.

2     The Appellant had appealed to the FtT  against  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent dated 9.10.14 to remove him administratively to Jamaica, his
    country of nationality, under s.10 Immigration and Asylum Act 1999. The
    Appellant's immigration history is set out at paragraph 10 of the FtT's
    determination and it is not necessary to repeat it all here.

3     The Appellant had resisted that decision on grounds that  his  removal
    would be contrary to immigration rules and would be unlawful under  s.6
    Human Rights Act 1998, on the grounds that his removal from the  United
    Kingdom would amount  to  a  disproportionate  and  therefore  unlawful
    interference with his rights to private and family life under Article 8
    of the European Convention on Human Rights.

4     The Appellant asserted that he had  a  family  life  with  his  family
    members, being:

    (i)    his wife,  Myrtle  Nerissa  Williams-Henry  (Nerissa),  Jamaican
         national, present in the UK  with  discretionary  leave  to  remain
         (DL), last granted from 10.9.13 to 10.9.16;

    (ii)   his son, Kadeem Kanal Naoir Henry (dob 25.5.91 therefore  23  at
         date of decision,  and  FtT  appeal  hearing),  Jamaican  national,
         present in the UK and last granted DL from  24.12.13  to  23.12.16;
         and

    (iii)  his daughter, Kelia-Gabe Shimmarie Ackiel Henry  (dob   21.4.96,
         therefore 18  at  date  of   decision,  and  FtT  appeal  hearing),
         Jamaican national, present in the  UK  and  last  granted  DL  from
         24.11.13 to 24.11.16).

5     The appeal came before the FtT on 14.1.15. The  Tribunal  allowed  the
    appeal.

6     A fair summary of the  Respondent's  grounds  of  appeal  against  the
    FtT's determination is that the FtT erred in law in:

    (1)    failing to have regard to the public  interest  in  removal,  in
         particular as specified  in  Part  5A  2002  Act,  s.117B,  and  in
         particular failing to have regard to:

         (i)      the need to maintain effective immigration control;

         (ii)     the fact that the Appellant's family life was  established
             when  he  was  present  either  unlawfully  or  at  best  with
             precarious immigration status; and

         (iii)    whether the Appellant was financially independent;

    (2)    failing to have regard to:

         (i)      the  Appellant's  past  dishonesty  in  use  of  a  forged
             immigration stamp and by maintaining a pretence that he had at
             one point separated from his wife;

         (ii)     the fact the family members themselves do not have settled
             status and his children are adults;

    (3)    misdirecting himself in law in considering whether it  would  be
         reasonable to expect the Appellant to return to Nigeria and/or  for
         the Appellant's wife to leave everything in the UK behind and start
         afresh; the relevant test being to consider where  there  would  be
         unjustifiably harsh consequences in doing so.

7     Permission to appeal was granted by FtT Judge Mark Davies  on  30.3.15
    on the grounds that:

         "2 The Judge appears to have had no regard whatsoever to the public
             interest when reaching his decision. That is clearly an  error
             of law.

         3  The grounds and the determination do disclose an arguable  error
             of law."

8     It was not indicated on what particular grounds permission  was  being
    granted. We treat permission as having been granted on all grounds.

9     We heard submissions from the parties. Ms  Pal,  for  the  Respondent,
    relied on the Secretary of State's grounds  of  appeal.  She  suggested
    that the issue of the Appellant's use of deception by use of  a  forged
    immigration stamp and letter had been raised  at  paragraph  5  of  the
    determination, but not actually considered or addressed  later  in  the
    determination, for example at paragraph 53 onwards where Article 8  was
    being considered. She accepted that the failure 'may' not have  made  a
    difference to the outcome, but that consideration  of  issues  such  as
    deception was central to the consideration  under  Article  8  ECHR.  A
    further deception point was the Appellant's admitted pretence  that  he
    had been separated from his family  for  a  period  of  time,  for  the
    apparent purpose of protecting the position of his family members after
    he had been refused leave to remain in the UK.

10    Ms Pal also averred that  there  had  been  no  consideration  of  the
    issues under s.117B Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002,  in
    particular,  whether  the  Appellant  spoke  English,  was  financially
    independent and whether any private or family life had  been  developed
    at a time when the Appellant's status in the UK had  been  unlawful  or
    precarious.

11    For the Appellant, Mr Jacobs argued that the determination  should  be
    read as a whole; the issue of use of deception had been dealt  with  at
    paragraph 5. He asserted that the Respondent's case appeared to be that
    she was insisting that  a  matter  dealt  with  at  one  point  in  the
    determination be repeated at the end of  the  determination;  this  was
    unnecessary. Mr Jacobs suggested  that  Ms  Pal  had  conceded  in  her
    submission that:

    (i)    the FtT had adequately set out the Secretary of State's concerns
         re: deception at paragraph 5;  and

    (ii)   any failure to revisit the deception issue was not material.

12    As to whether s.117B NIAA 2002 had  been  sufficiently  addressed,  Mr
    Jacobs referred to the headnote in Dube (ss.117A 117D) [2015]  UKUT  90
    (IAC) (24 February 2015), which provides:

         "(1)      Key  features  of  ss.117A  117D  of   the   Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 include the following:

             (a) judges are required statutorily to  take  into  account  a
             number of enumerated considerations. Sections  117A  117D  are
             not, therefore, an a la carte menu of considerations  that  it
             is at the discretion of the  judge  to  apply  or  not  apply.
             Judges are duty  bound  to  "have  regard"  to  the  specified
             considerations.

             (b) these provisions are only expressed as being binding on  a
             "court or tribunal". It may be that  the  Secretary  of  State
             will consider it in the interests of good  administration  and
             consistency of decision making on  Article  8  claims  at  all
             levels to have express regard to ss.117A  117D  considerations
             herself, but she is not directly bound to do so.

             (c) whilst expressed in mandatory  terms,  the  considerations
             specified are not expressed as being exhaustive: note  use  of
             the phrase "in particular" in s.117A(2): " In considering  the
             public interest question,  the  court  or  tribunal  must  (in
             particular) have regard- ".

             (d) section 117B enumerates considerations that are applicable
             "in all cases", which must  include  foreign  criminal  cases.
             Thus when s.117C (which deals with foreign  criminals)  states
             that it sets out "additional" considerations  that  must  mean
             considerations in addition to those set out in s.117B.

             (e) sections 117A 117D do not represent any  kind  of  radical
             departure from or "override" of previous case law on Article 8
             so far as concerns the need  for  a  structured  approach.  In
             particular, they do not disturb the need  for  judges  to  ask
             themselves the five questions set out in  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL
             27.  Sections 117A 117D are essentially a further  elaboration
             of  Razgar's   question   5   which   is   essentially   about
             proportionality and justifiability.

         (2)      It is not an error of law to fail to refer to ss.117A 117D
         considerations if the judge has applied the  test  he  or  she  was
         supposed  to  apply  according  to  its  terms;  what  matters   is
         substance, not form."

13    He argued that the specific text of s.117B therefore need not  be  set
    out by the FtT. He further argued that the issues that are to be  taken
    into account under s.117B NIAA 2002 did not  in  any  event  raise  any
    issue which was adverse to the Appellant, and had little  relevance  to
    the determination of the appeal; for example:

    (i)    s.117B(2) regarding the ability so speak English; the  Appellant
         was fluent in English (and in  any  event  we  observe  that  under
         Appendix FM he, as a national of Jamaica, he is not subject to  the
         English language requirement, as per GEN 1.6);

    (ii)   s.117B(3); the Appellant was financially independent,  at  least
         to the extent that  he  was  dependent  of  his  wife,  who  earned
         sufficient income for the family to be financially independent;

    (iii)  whereas s.117B(4) provides:

             "(4)      Little weight should be given to-

                  (a)  a private life, or

                  (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that
                  is established by a person at a time when the person is in
                  the United Kingdom unlawfully."

    Mr Jacobs argued that the present appeal did  not  principally  concern
    the Appellant's private life (s.117B(4)(a)), rather, his  family  life,
    and further, that the Appellant's family life was not formed at a  time
    when the Appellant was present unlawfully in the UK; rather, this was a
    family life which originated many years ago, back in Jamaica.

14    As to the Respondent's last  ground,  that  the  FtT  had  misdirected
    itself in law by asking whether it was reasonable for the  family  life
    to be enjoyed outside the UK; Mr Jacobs submitted  that  this  did  not
    represent a misdirection in law; the proportionality test still  raised
    the question of reasonableness, as per the House of Lords Judgement  in
    Huang ([2007] UKHL 11). In the present case, the FtT had  appropriately
    directed itself in law at paragraph 53, referring to Huang, and reached
    a conclusion at para 56 on the reasonableness test which was open to it
    on the evidence. If any further reference to the  public  interest  was
    needed at any point after paragraph 5,  Mr  Jacobs  asserted  that  the
    reference at the end of paragraph 56 to 'the public end  being  served'
    was an adequate reference.

15     Mr  Jacobs  averred  that  there  was  no  material  error   in   the
    determination, but that if, contrary to  his  submission,  the  present
    Tribunal found that there was, then he invited us to allow  the  appeal
    and remit back to the same Judge to address  any  shortcomings  in  the
    decision.

16    In reply, Ms Pal summarised her earlier submissions, and invited  this
    panel to re-make the decision itself, if we found any material error of
    law in the FtT's determination.

    Error of law ruling

17    We stood the matter down for a short period  to  discuss  the  matter.
    When we resumed the hearing, we informed the parties that  we  were  of
    the view that the FtT's decision did contain a material error  of  law,
    such that we intended to set aside the determination.

18     Our  reasons  for  so  finding  are  as   follows,   addressing   the
    Respondent's grounds of appeal as we have summarised them at  paragraph
    6 above.

    Ground 1

19    The Respondent's first ground  raises  the  question  of  whether  the
    Judge had adequate regard to the pubic interest in  removal.  s.117A(3)
    NIAA 2002 defines the public interest question as follows:

         "(3) In subsection (2), "the public interest  question"  means  the
         question of whether  an  interference  with  a  person's  right  to
         respect for private and family  life  is  justified  under  Article
         8(2)."

20    We note that the Judge did not refer to Part  5A  of  the  Nationality
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, ss.117A-D in his decision. However, as
    per Dube (ss.117A 117D) [2015] UKUT 90 (IAC), headnote 2: "It is not an
    error of law to fail to refer to ss.117A  117D  considerations  if  the
    judge has applied the test he or she was supposed to apply according to
    its terms; what matters is substance, not form."

21    Although the Judge could have addressed the public  interest  question
    as raised in Part 5A  NIAA  2002  in  more  detail,  we  find  that  in
    substance, the Judge has had sufficient regard  to  the  considerations
    set out in Part 5A. At paragraph 52 and 56, the Judge finds:

         "53      As far as proportionality is  concerned,  a  fair  balance
         must be struck  between  the  rights  of  the  individual  and  the
         interest of the Community and the severity and consequences of  the
         interference will call for careful assessment at this stage."

         56.      ... I find with the evidence before me that  many  factors
         weigh heavily in favour  of  the  Appellant  remaining  within  the
         family unit in the UK than factors in  favour  of  the  Appellant's
         removal. ... I find that the interference  cannot  be  said  to  be
         proportionate to the public end being sought to be achieved."

22    These passages suggests that  the  Judge  had,  in  referring  to  the
    interest of the Community,  the factors in favour  of  the  Appellant's
    removal, and the public end sought to be  achieved,  taken  the  public
    interest question into account.

23    In particular, the need to maintain effective immigration control  was
    refereed to at the end of para 52, and the  precarious  nature  of  the
    family's permission to be in the UK was referred to at the end of  para
    50.

24    As to whether the Judge had adequate regard to the  issue  of  whether
    the Appellant was financially independent, we note that Ms Pal for  the
    Respondent made no oral submission on this point and  did  advance  any
    argument as to what particular  level  of  financial  income  would  be
    required under Part 5A and/or the Immigration Rules for  the  Appellant
    to be treated being financially independent. However we have considered
    paras 14-18 of AM (S.117B) [2015]  UKUT  260  (IAC)  (17  April  2015).
    Paragraph 18 in particular provides:

         "The mere fact that the evidence in a particular  case  establishes
         fluency or financial independence to some degree, does not  prevent
         the Respondent from relying upon these matters as  public  interest
         factors weighing against the claimant. The Respondent would only be
         prevented from doing so if a claimant could demonstrate fluency, or
         financial independence, to the level of the requirements set out in
         the Immigration Rules."

25    Insofar as this is authority for the proposition  that  the  Appellant
    was required to meet the financial requirements for an application  for
    leave to remain under Appendix FM in order to  prevent  the  Respondent
    from relying on lack of financial independence  as  a  public  interest
    factor militating against the Appellant, then we would observe that the
    Judge considered at para 44 that the Appellant's wife  appeared  to  be
    earning �1500 per month after  tax.  This  was  clearly  based  on  her
    evidence  at  paragraph  38  of  her  witness  statement  dated  6.1.15
    (Appellant's  bundle  pages  125-132).  Having  taken  that   witness's
    (unchallenged) evidence into account, it would be artificial to  assume
    that the Judge had not also taken into account the  evidence  contained
    in the paragraph immediately preceding it,  in  which  the  Appellant's
    wife gave more particular evidence about her income, and in  which  she
    asserted that  her  overall  gross  income  exceeded  �18,600,  ie  the
    relevant level under Appendix  FM.  We  find  that  no  material  error
    established by the Respondent's first ground.

    Ground 2

26    Although we  have  observed  that  the  Judge  undertook  a  balancing
    exercise at paragraph 56 of the decision, we are of the view  that  the
    Appellant's past dishonesty has not been properly taken into account in
    the determination as a relevant consideration  in  the  proportionality
    exercise in the appeal. The dishonesty relied upon by the Respondent in
    her refusal letter of 9.10.14 was that the  Appellant  had  on  23.6.03
    submitted an application for the Respondent which included his  expired
    Jamaican passport, purporting to contain a  stamp  granting  indefinite
    leave  to  remain  (the  application  being  that  the  Appellant   was
    requesting that a similar endorsement  be  made  on  his  new  Jamaican
    passport).  That  stamp,  and  a  letter  purporting  to  be  from  the
    Respondent accompanying the original grant of ILR, were later (in 2007)
    found to be false. The Appellant later (2007) received a police caution
    in relation to these events.

27    Another matter relied upon by the Respondent was  that  the  Appellant
    had previously (in or around 2007) made false  representations  to  the
    Respondent that he had separated from his wife, whereas  the  Appellant
    later stated that  this  had  not  been  true  and  that  he  had  been
    encouraged to say this by his former representatives so  that  his  own
    precarious immigration status did not affect his family.

28     Notwithstanding  Mr  Jacob's  submission  that  these   issues   were
    adequately set out at paragraph 5 of the decision, it is clear that  at
    this part of the decision (paras 5-13) the Judge was merely setting out
    the Respondent's case, and at no point  in  those  paragraphs  was  the
    Judge attempting to engage with the issues. Regrettably, the Judge  did
    not  return  to  them  at  any  later  stage.  To  that  extent,  these
    'dishonesty' issues are therefore to be distinguished  from  the  other
    public interest considerations raised by the Respondent, and  addressed
    in our paragraphs 19-25 above, and in any event, we consider the making
    of false representations and the commission of criminal offences to  be
    of such  potential  importance  that  these  issues  demanded  specific
    consideration, which they did not receive.

29    Further, Mr Jacob's attempt to re-characterise  Ms  Pal's  observation
    that the Judge's failure to take into account  the  dishonesty  of  the
    Appellant 'may' not have been material  to the outcome of the appeal as
    a concession by her that the error was not material,  was  unwarranted.
    It seemed to us that at this point, Ms Pal was being conspicuously fair
    in the position that she took before the Tribunal, which was, it seemed
    to us, that the error was material  unless  one  could  say  with  some
    confidence that the error would not have made  any  difference  to  the
    outcome of the appeal. Her observation that it  may  not  have  made  a
    difference was not to say that it would not have made  any  difference.
    The Tribunal appreciated the distinction she made at that  point,  even
    if Mr Jacobs did not.

30    The Judge therefore made a material error of law. We return  below  to
    the effect of such  error.

    Ground 3 - misdirection in law.

31    The Judge directed himself in law as to the test to be applied in  the
    determination  of  the  proportionality  of  the  Appellant's  proposed
    removal by reference to Huang v SSHD 2007 UKHL11 at paragraphs  51  and
    53, and cited paragraph 20 of the House of  Lord's  Judgement  in  that
    case (although  the  Judge  mistakenly  attributes  the  quote  to  the
    judgment of the Court of Appeal in that case):

         "In an article 8 case where this question is reached, the  ultimate
         question for the appellate immigration  authority  is  whether  the
         refusal of leave to enter or remain,  in  circumstances  where  the
         life of the family cannot reasonably  be  expected  to  be  enjoyed
         elsewhere, taking full account of all  considerations  weighing  in
         favour of the refusal, prejudices the family life of the  applicant
         in a manner sufficiently serious to  amount  to  a  breach  of  the
         fundamental right protected by article 8. If  the  answer  to  this
         question is affirmative, the refusal is unlawful and the  authority
         must so decide."

32    The Judge also referred to and adopted at paragraphs 52 onwards the  5
    stage approach in Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27.

33    We would  observe  that  the  ratio  of  Huang  has  received  further
    consideration by the Supreme Court more recently,  in  Patel  &  Ors  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 72 (20  November
    2013), Lord Carnworth stated:

         "54. The difference between the two positions may not be  as  stark
         as the submissions before us have suggested. The most authoritative
         guidance on the correct approach  of  the  tribunal  to  article  8
         remains that of Lord Bingham in Huang.  In  the  passage  cited  by
         Burnton LJ Lord Bingham observed that the  rules  are  designed  to
         identify those to whom "on  grounds  such  as  kinship  and  family
         relationship and dependence" leave to enter should be granted,  and
         that such rules "to be administratively workable,  require  that  a
         line be drawn somewhere". But that was no more  than  the  starting
         point for the consideration of article 8. Thus in Mrs  Huang's  own
         case, the most relevant rule (rule 317) was  not  satisfied,  since
         she was not, when the decision was made, aged 65 or  over  and  she
         was not a widow. He commented at para 6:

             "Such a rule, which does not lack a rational basis, is not  to
             be  stigmatised  as  arbitrary  or   objectionable.   But   an
             applicant's failure to qualify under the rules is for  present
             purposes the point at which to begin, not  end,  consideration
             of the claim under article 8.  The  terms  of  the  rules  are
             relevant   to   that   consideration,   but   they   are   not
             determinative."

         55. Thus the balance drawn by the rules  may  be  relevant  to  the
         consideration of proportionality."

34    Following such a self-direction in law, in which  the  Judge  referred
    to Huang and Razgar, being the cases of highest domestic  authority  on
    the issue, we are of the view that there is no material misdirection in
    law within the determination.

    Relief

35    In the light of the Judge's error of  law  (failing  to  have  any  or
    proper regard to the Appellant's past dishonesty), we indicated to  the
    parties that we intended to set aside  the  FtT's  determination  under
    s.12(2)(a) TCEA 2007, which we now do.

36    By way of disposing of the appeal, Mr Jacobs invited us to  remit  the
    appeal under s.12(2)(b)(i) TCEA 2007 to the same FtT judge  to  address
    the shortcomings in his determination. For her part, Ms  Pal  requested
    that the appeal be decided by the Upper Tribunal by way  of  proceeding
    immediately to re-hear and re-decide the appeal.

37    Mr Jacobs said he was in some difficulty if the appeal as  to  be  re-
    heard, as he did not have full set of  papers.  This  was,  being  some
    considerable way into the hearing, the first time that he mentioned any
    such difficulty.

38    We indicated that there being no challenge by the  Respondent  to  the
    findings of fact made by FtT judge as to the family's circumstances and
    the existence of family life between the  various  family  members,  we
    were of the view that those findings should be retained, and that  this
    was not a case where a remittal  to  the  FtT  would  be  necessary  or
    appropriate under the relevant practice statement.

39    We allowed Mr Jacobs to take further instructions from  the  Appellant
    as to how he intended to pursue the appeal, and we  indicated  that  in
    any further decision, the present  Tribunal  would  wish  to  have  any
    relevant evidence brought  to  its  attention  as  to  the  issues  not
    properly taken into account by the FtT, i.e.  the  Appellant's  use  of
    deception, and indeed, his wife's knowledge of the same. We allowed  Mr
    Jacobs time to consider those matters and we  interposed  another  case
    which we then dealt with.

40    Upon the present appeal being called on  again,  Mr  Jacobs  indicated
    that he now been able to consider the relevant paperwork and  was  able
    to indicate to us the evidence relevant to the issue of the Appellant's
    false representations. That evidence comprised the Appellant's  witness
    statement dated 6.1.15 paragraph  13  to  14.  In  that  evidence,  the
    Appellant described that in 2002  an  administrator  at  a  college  in
    Collingdale, London, at which the Appellant had been studying,  applied
    to extend the Appellant's leave  to  remain  as  a  student.  When  his
    passport was returned there was a stamp in his passport saying that  he
    had indefinite leave to remain, and an  accompanying  letter  outlining
    what the Appellant was entitled to in terms of travel and benefits.  He
    also stated that his Jamaican passport in which that stamp  was  placed
    expired and he applied to the Home Office  for  the  ILR  stamp  to  be
    transferred to his new Jamaican passport. He denied  being  aware  that
    the stamp was 'bogus'. There are further passages at paragraph 22 as to
    how in 2007 he received a police caution in relation  to  this  matter.
    Paragraph 25-26 address the issue of how he came to assert (falsely, he
    claims) that he had separated from his wife in 2007.

41    Mr Jacobs suggested  that  when  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  an
    earlier decision of the Respondent dated 28.4.08 to remove him from the
    United  Kingdom  came  before  the  Asylum  and  Immigration   Tribunal
    (Immigration Judge Callow) on 16.6.08, Judge Callow  had  accepted  the
    Appellant's explanation about how he obtained the ILR  stamp  and  that
    this had not involved wrongdoing on  the  Appellant's  part,  and  that
    when that determination had been reconsidered by the  AIT  on  10.11.08
    (DIJ Shaerf), Judge Shaerf had not disturbed that finding.

42    In relation to the knowledge of the Appellant's  wife  Myrtle  of  the
    Appellant's false statement that he had separate  from  her  in  around
    2007, Mr Jacobs initially appeared to assert that the Appellant's  wife
    had not been aware that the Appellant was making an application on  the
    basis that he had separated from her. However, we  considered  in  open
    court the content of paragraph 30 of her witness statement dated 6.1.15
    in which she appears to accept that she was aware that her husband  the
    Appellant was making these assertions,  apparently  on  the  advice  of
    their former representative, and that it was her husband  who  was  the
    one who did not want to carry on the pretence and  had  given  evidence
    about this falsehood in court (which in the context of the  case  means
    at the AIT reconsideration hearing of 30.10.08).

43    At this juncture we also considered the content  of  an  interview  at
    page A2-A3 of the Respondent's bundle entitled 'Immigration  Service  -
    Record of Interview) dated  3.8.07  conducted  by  PC  Dave  Elcome  at
    Wembley Police Station, and a document at page 15  of  the  Appellant's
    bundle entitled 'Record of Formal Adult Caution'  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant, dated the same date, 3.8.07, signed by the same officer.

44    Mr Jacobs  having  drawn  to  our  attention  these  elements  of  the
    Appellant's evidence, he did not call or seek to  call  any  additional
    oral evidence from  the  Appellant  or  any  additional  witness.  Both
    parties made closing submissions as to the re making of the decision on
    Article 8 grounds;  the  Appellant  asserting,  in  summary,  that  the
    Appellant's removal would be disproportionate, and the Respondent,  the
    converse.

    Discussion in remaking the decision

45    We retain the following findings from the decision of  the  FtT  dated
    9.2.15, unaffected by the material error of law:

       < The determination of DIJ Shaerf was the starting point in terms  of
         assessment of the extent of family life [50];

       < Circumstances have moved on since that date [50];

       < The Respondent accepted that at least from 2010 to 2014  (when  the
         decision under appeal was taken) the Appellant had established that
         he and his wife had been cohabiting and they  have  reconciled  and
         continue to live as a family in the marital home [50]'

       < The children, although bot now adults,  continue  to  live  in  the
         family home. the Appellant daughter remains  financially  dependent
         on the Appellant's wife [50];

       < There exists an  emotional  bond  between  the  appellant  and  his
         children which cannot  be  said  to  have  been  severed  upon  the
         children attaining majority [50];

       < The Appellant has established private and family life with his wife
         and children [52];

       < The Appellant has not simply been a father to his two children  but
         a friend, a mentor and guiding force in their lives  [54,  and  see
         also remainder of that paragraph, and  paragraph  55,  wherein  the
         witness evidence of the Appellant's children and wife is set out as
         to the bonds that exist between them];

       < The Appellant plays a central part in the family [56];

       < It would not be reasonable to expect the Appellant's wife to  leave
         everything behind and start afresh in Jamaica [56];

       < The Appellant's wife works as  a  Dyslexic  Support  Tutor  at  the
         University of Bedfordshire and as a Special needs  Support  Teacher
         in a Secondary School in Dunstable. She has specialist training  to
         work with in this area and has sacrificed a considerable amount  of
         money and time in studying to become a specialist  in  this  field.
         This expertise would be lost [56];

       <  If  the  Appellant  were  removed,  this  would  inevitably  cause
         disruption and separate from the family unit.

46    If we were deciding the appeal on  the  basis  of  those  findings  we
    would be minded to allow the Appellant's appeal against removal on  the
    basis, overall, that the disruption to the family life existing between
    the Appellant and  his  family  members  was  disproportionate  to  the
    legitimate aim of maintaining immigration control.

47    However, the picture  presented  by  those  findings  of  the  FtT  is
    incomplete, without a proper consideration  of  the  dishonesty  issues
    raised by the Respondent.

48    The first  of  these  is  the  use  of  the  false  ILR  stamp  in  an
    application made to the Respondent on 23.6.03. It is necessary  to  see
    what offence, if any, was actually committed and  admitted  to  by  the
    Appellant.

49    In the first instance, we reject any suggestion by Mr Jacobs that  the
    AIT in its determination dated  14.7.08  (Judge  Callow)  absolved  the
    Appellant of wrong doing in this regard. It is  right  to  accept  that
    Judge Callow provided as follows at paragraph 15 of that determination:



         "Adverse to  the  Appellant  is  the  general  public  interest  in
         maintaining  a  consistent  and  effective  policy  of  immigration
         control, and in particular the circumstances that  the  immigration
         history of the appellant involved some deceit, albeit  without  his
         knowledge." (Emphasis added).

50    However, due to other errors of law within that determination,  Senior
    Immigration Judge Moulden held on 3.9.08 that:

         "16 Having found that there are material errors of  law  I  adjourn
         for a second stage reconsideration with all issues  at  large.  The
         flaws in the findings  of  fact  and  the  need  for  these  to  be
         augmented mean that a fresh fact-finding exercise is required."

51    In our view, Judge Callow's remark,  'albeit  without  his  knowledge'
    was little more than a passing remark,  which  did  not  in  any  event
    survive Judge Moulden's later error of law determination.

52    In the second stage reconsideration, Judge Shaerf did  not  appear  to
    make any particular findings as to the Appellant's culpability for  the
    possession of a false ILR stamp, considering instead,  and  in  detail,
    the issue of whether the  Appellant  had  continuously  remained  in  a
    relationship with his wife, notwithstanding the assertions made in  his
    name that he had separated from  her  (and  we  return  to  this  point
    below).

53    Therefore, there is no finding of fact  which  serves  as  a  starting
    point  for  our  consideration  of  the  Appellant's  culpability   for
    possession of the false ILR stamp and letter.

54    In fact, the evidence on this is rather thin. There  is  an  assertion
    by the Respondent in the refusal letter dated 9.10.14 (page  1  of  13)
    that in August 2007 the Appellant was  cautioned  in  relation  to  his
    possession of  the  stamp,  for  the  offence  of  obtaining  pecuniary
    advantage by deception.

55    The interview of the Appellant under  caution  conducted  by  PC  Dave
    Elcome on 3.8.07 does not shed much light on what offence the Appellant
    was being interviewed about; certainly, the interview that we have seen
    does not demonstrate that it was put to the Appellant at any point that
    he was guilty of any particular offence, or how  he  responded  to  any
    such allegation.

56    Finally, the Record of Formal Adult Caution dated 3.8.07  at  page  15
    of the Appellant's bundle does not specify the offence  for  which  the
    Appellant was being cautioned. At  the  prompt  'Title  of  offence(s)'
    there is a  typed  (and  we  think  computer-generated)  entry  reading
    'Error! Reference source not found'. That same  response  is  found  in
    answer to a number of questions posed on the form.

57    However, the copy of the  form  we  have  seen  has  some  details  in
    manuscript and bears the signature of PC  Elcome,  and,  following  the
    text 'I admit that I committed the offence(s) detailed above',  is  the
    Appellant's signature.

58    A police caution, as the record document itself makes clear, does  not
    amount to a criminal conviction, but, as is also clear from  the  form,
    involves  an  admission  from  the  person  cautioned  that  they  have
    committed a criminal offence. The principal difficulty in  knowing  how
    to treat this evidence is that the title of the offence is missing.  We
    have not seen any evidence supporting the Respondent's assertion in the
    refusal letter that the offence was of obtaining a pecuniary  advantage
    by deception.

59    Whilst noting the limitations of the evidence before us, we note  that
    it is not a  possibility  in  the  present  case  that  the  Respondent
    erroneously granted ILR to the Appellant following his application  for
    further limited leave to remain as a student, as the Respondent asserts
    that the documents were false, not that they were issued in error.  The
    Appellant has not disputed  this.  Further,  we  note  the  Appellant's
    admission that he did in fact  submit  the  letter  and  stamp  to  the
    Respondent with his application on 23.6.03, and he has not, as we  say,
    argued at any point that the documents were genuine.

60    If, as he  asserts,  the  Appellant  was  not  knowingly  involved  in
    procuring a false ILR stamp in his passport and the  associated  letter
    purporting to be from the Home Office, then the only other  explanation
    that we can think of for these events occurring  is  that  the  College
    administrator was involved in the criminal act  of  obtaining  a  false
    document for the  Appellant,  without  the  Appellant's  invitation  or
    knowledge. We think the probability of this occurring is very  low.  We
    find  that  the  Appellant's  protestations  made  within  his  witness
    statement that he was not involved in any  wrong  doing,  and  that  he
    agreed to receive the caution only 'under  protest'  (IJ  Callow,  para
    3(b)) do not ring true.  We find, on a balance of  probabilities,  that
    the Appellant was knowingly involved in obtaining a false ILR  document
    and accompanying letter in or around 2002, which he later used in  2003
    when applying for the ILR stamp to be transferred to his  new  Jamaican
    passport.

61     However,  these  events  were  12-13  years  ago.   The   Respondent,
    notwithstanding that they were provided with these documents on 23.6.03
    in support of the application to have the ILR  endorsement  transferred
    to his new passport, did nothing until  2007  when  the  Appellant  was
    interviewed under caution about these matters. Even  then,  the  police
    formed the view that  a  caution  was  an  appropriate  outcome,  which
    suggests, we think, that they were of the view that the evidence before
    them was insufficient to mount a prosecution or that the matter was not
    sufficiently serious to warrant a prosecution.  Given  the  passage  of
    time since both the obtaining of the false document in or around  2002,
    and the caution in 2007, we find that the police were better placed  in
    2007 than are we in 2015 to determine the level of seriousness of  this
    Appellant's criminal culpability. We  are  of  the  view  that  we  are
    entitled to take into account, as in indication of the  seriousness  of
    the Appellant's criminal behaviour, the  manner  in  which  the  Police
    dealt with the matter in 2007, which was merely  to  issue  a  caution,
    which, as we have observed, is not a conviction.

62    Given the passage of time since these events, and taking into  account
    the manner in which they were dealt with by the police in 2007,  we  do
    not find that the Appellant's wrongdoing, such as  it  may  have  been,
    remains, in 2015, a significant factor militating as a public  interest
    consideration against those  factors  which  are  relied  upon  by  the
    Appellant in support of  his  contention  that  his  removal  would  be
    disproportionate.

63    The other matter which  we  are  concerned  with  is  the  Appellant's
    apparent deception of making an application for leave to remain in 2007
    on the alleged basis that he had recently separated from his wife.

64    It is appropriate to consider the  findings  of  DIJ  Shaerf  on  this
    matter in his determination of 10.11.08, made much nearer  in  time  to
    the relevant events than we are today. His findings were  not  appealed
    by the Appellant to the Court of Appeal. Those finding included:

    (i)    "I do not find the  evidence  of  the  Appellant  and  his  wife
         relating to the subsistence of their marriage to be credible"  [D15
         para 38]

    (ii)   "I find the Appellant has failed  to  discharge  the  burden  of
         proof to the requisite standard, the balance of  probabilities,  to
         show he has continuously or at least for long  periods  lived  with
         his wife and children at 98 Gardenia Avenue and that  his  marriage
         is  subsisting.  Similarly,  I  do  not  accept   the   Appellant's
         explanation why he used 117 Gardenia Avenue as an address,  relying
         on advice given by his solicitors, which advice he  had  vehemently
         protested" [D15 para 39]

    (iii)  The Judge did not accept a reason advanced  by  the  Appellant's
         wife as to why she had not attended  the  earlier  hearing  of  the
         Appellant's appeal, on 16.6.08: "I conclude  that  the  Appellant's
         relationship with his children is  not  as  close  and  intense  as
         claimed" [D16 para 42]

    (iv)   "I find that he has contact with his children  but  not  of  the
         degree and  quality  claimed  at  the  hearing  or  in  his  wife's
         statement." [D16 para 43]

    (v)    "I am satisfied that the Appellant has established a private and
         family life with his estranged wife and their children"  [D17  para
         45]

    (vi)   "I have found  that  the  Appellant's  wife  and  children  have
         limited leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  whilst  the
         Appellant may not be completely estranged from his wife he has  not
         shown that his  marriage  was  at  the  date  of  the  application,
         decision or hearing subsisting." [D18 para 49].

65    The Appellant made the same assertions before DIJ Shaerf as he has  in
    the current proceedings, i.e. that he never in fact separated from  his
    wife, and that the assertions in his application in 2007 that  he  done
    so were in fact false, but had been made on  the  advice  of  his  then
    representative. His assertion,  then,  is  that  he  had  lied  to  the
    Respondent about having separated from his wife in 2007.

66    In fact, as may be seen from the findings of DIJ  Shaerf  above,  that
    account was not accepted. Judge Shaerf  found  that,  even  taking  the
    Appellant's explanations into account, that the  Appellant  had  become
    estranged from his wife, and that their relationship was not that which
    they asserted. The Appellant advances no different evidence now  as  to
    his circumstances pre 2008, than that which he relied upon before Judge
    Shaerf.

67    So, the Appellant did lie in 2007/2008. However,  the  nature  of  the
    lie was not that he had falsely asserted to have  been  estranged  from
    his wife and  children,  merely  for  the  sake  of  their  immigration
    applications; rather the nature of the lie was the converse: he had  in
    truth become estranged from his family, but he was pretending to be  in
    an ongoing relationship with wife, and he had given a false explanation
    to the AIT on reconsideration on 30.10.08 as to why he  had  stated  in
    his 2007 application for leave to remain that he had become estranged.

68    Those matters were considered by the AIT in 2008. The events  are  now
    nearly 7 years ago. For her part, the Respondent now  accepts  that  at
    least since 2010, the Appellant has been cohabiting with his  wife  and
    children. Our conclusion is that the  Appellant  has  remained  legally
    married to his wife throughout; that they had lived together in the  UK
    after his arrival here, but that at some point in time  (unknown)  that
    ceased to be the case. We follow the  findings  made  by  Judge  Shaerf
    that, at least by 2008, the Appellant was not in a subsisting  marriage
    (however awkwardly that sits with his  finding  at  para  45  that  the
    Appellant had established a private and family life with his  estranged
    wife and their children). At some point in time  thereafter  (no  later
    than 2010) the  Appellant's  relationship  with  his  wife  had  become
    resolved and  he  had  resumed  living  with  his  wife  and  children.
    Circumstances have, as Judge Ghani observed at his para 50, moved on.

69    The extent of the Appellant's family life ties were  observed  by  the
    FtT in the present appeal, and we have retained those findings of  fact
    (para 35 above), such findings not being infected by any material error
    of law.

70    Summarising the issue, therefore: in the light of Judge Shaerf's  (and
    our) finding, that the Appellant had by 2008 become separated from  his
    wife, but that

    (i)    he was pretending before the AIT in  2008  not  to  have  become
    separated, and gave a false explanation for his previous evidence; and

    (ii)   he continues in these  false  pretences  even  in  his  evidence
    today;

    has the Appellant engaged in making false representations militating in
    favour of the public interest in removing him from the United Kingdom?

71    Given that the recent preserved findings of the  FtT  are  that  there
    are clearly strong family bonds between the family members,  and  those
    findings were made in the full  knowledge  that  there  had  been  past
    adverse  finding  made  by  the  AIT  regarding  the  strength  of  the
    Appellant's family ties, we are of the view  that  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant has chosen to maintain something in later evidence which  had
    previously been disbelieved in 2008 does not  significantly  alter  the
    weight to be attached to his current family ties. He  may  have  better
    advised to say nothing more about those mattes in his witness evidence,
    but we do not treat the Appellant's evidence as being any less credible
    than did IJ Shaerf, whose findings as to the state of  the  Appellant's
    family ties have been surpassed by the passage of time,  and  by  Judge
    Ghani's findings.

72     We  therefore  find  that  neither  the  Appellant's  involvement  in
    obtaining a false ILR document in or around 2002 (the circumstances  of
    which  remain,  on  the  evidence  before   us,   unclear),   nor   his
    representations in 2007/8 that he maintained his relationship with  his
    wife  but  had  given  contrary  evidence  on  bad  advice,   represent
    significant reasons militating  in  favour  of  there  being  a  public
    interest in removing the Appellant. Much time has  passed  since  these
    events. Although these issues should have been properly  considered  by
    the FtT in the present appeal, they do not, after proper consideration,
    disclose  significant  public  interest  reasons  for   requiring   the
    Appellant's removal from the United Kingdom.

73    We ultimately concur with the FtT's view that the Appellant's  removal
    from  the  United  Kingdom  would  amount  to  a  disproportionate  and
    therefore unlawful interference with his right to  private  and  family
    life under Article 8 ECHR.

    Decision

74    (i)   We find a material  error  of  law  in  the  FtT's  decision  of
9.2.15;

    (ii)   we set aide that decision;

    (iii)  we remake the  decision,  allowing  the  Appellant's  appeal  on
         article 8  grounds  only,  against  the  Respondent's  decision  of
         9.10.14 to remove him from the United Kingdom.

    (iv)   the appeal (insofar as it  is  brought)  under  the  immigration
         rules is dismissed.

75    There being no application for anonymity, no order  for  anonymity  is
    made.


Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan
Date:

Deputy Upper Tribunal judge Rimington
Date:
