

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Numbers: IA/43961/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                               |Determination           |
|                                                   |Promulgated             |
|On 2nd July 2014                                   |On 11th July 2014       |
|                                                   |                        |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                  Between:

                                ATIF HUSSAIN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr R K Rai, instructed by Deccan Prime
Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on  24th  April  1998.  He
      appeals against the determination of the First-tier Tribunal dated 2nd
      January 2014 dismissing his appeal against the  Respondent's  decision
      of 14th October 2013 refusing further leave to remain  under  Appendix
      FM and the decision to remove him to Pakistan under section 47 of  the
      Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.



2.    Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Heynes
      on 2nd April 2014  on  the  grounds  that  the  Judge  was  under  the
      impression that the Appellant was seeking leave as a student which was
      not in fact the case. It was not arguable that the decision to  refuse
      to grant an adjournment amounted to an error of law.

3.    Although permission was expressly  refused  on  the  ground  that  the
      Judge had erred in  law  in  not  granting  the  adjournment,  Mr  Rai
      submitted that the Judge had acted unfairly and permission  should  be
      granted on  that  ground.  The  Appellant's  partner,  Mr  Kabir,  had
      attended the Tribunal to supply medical evidence. It was wrong for the
      Judge to proceed with the appeal in the Appellant's  absence  when  Mr
      Kabir had only attended to support the application for the adjournment
      and nothing more. He was forced to give evidence and the Appellant had
      not had a fair hearing.

4.    Ms Holmes submitted that the Judge's refusal to grant  an  adjournment
      was not unfair in the circumstances. The adjournment request had  been
      refused on paper and no  additional  evidence  had  been  supplied  to
      support the renewed application. There was  no  good  reason  for  the
      Appellant's and his solicitor's non-attendance.

5.    It was accepted by the parties that the Judge  had  not  misunderstood
      the nature of the application (paragraphs 18 and 19). It was  accepted
      that the Appellant could not meet the Rules and  the  application  was
      made on the basis that the Respondent considered the position to grant
      leave to remain outside the Rules. The  Judge  considered  the  appeal
      under Article 8.

6.    I am of the view that I cannot re-open the grant of permission. First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Heynes  specifically  refused  permission  on  the
      basis that the refusal to adjourn the appeal  did  not  amount  to  an
      error of law.

7.    In an event, the test to be applied is whether it was  unfair  in  the
      circumstances. First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox found that there  was  no
      evidence to show that  the  Appellant  could  not  attend  the  appeal
      hearing. The medical evidence produced related to a  back  injury  for
      which the Appellant was not receiving treatment, although he was unfit
      for work. The Judge had not acted unfairly in concluding that  it  was
      just and equitable to proceed with the hearing. The Appellant and  his
      solicitors had ignored the standard directions and there was  no  good
      reason for their non-attendance.

8.    The Judge made no error on any point of law which  might  require  the
      determination to be set aside. The appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
      dismissed.  The determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  dated  6th
      January shall stand.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
10th July 2014
