
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43069/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th February 2016                         |On 28th April 2016            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                               mr Gurpreet Rai
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Pipe (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Colyer, promulgated on 23rd June 2015,  following  a  hearing  at
    Nottingham Justice Centre on 21st May 2015.  In the determination,  the
    judge dismissed the appeal of Mr Gurpreet Rai, who subsequently applied
    for, and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  and
    thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of India, who was born on 29th May 1978.  He
    appealed against the decision of  the  Respondent  Secretary  of  State
    refusing his application for a variation of leave to remain in  the  UK
    dated 10th October 2014 and giving directions under Section 47 for  the
    Appellant's removal.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that the  Secretary  of  State  was  wrong  to
    conclude that the Appellant's exclusion from the UK  was  conducive  to
    the public good and there would not be any insurmountable obstacles  to
    him and his wife's settlement in India, following  his  conviction  for
    battery making it undesirable for him to remain in the UK.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge considered the essential background  to  this  case,  namely,
    that the Appellant had been in a relationship with Miss  Harpreet  Rai,
    but this relationship, which commenced in autumn 2008, had not  been  a
    continuous relationship as  there  had  been  significant  breaks,  for
    example when he had battered his wife, and the judge was not  satisfied
    that the relationship was as strong as the  Appellant's  wife  was  now
    representing before the Tribunal.

Submissions

 5. At the  hearing  before  me,  Mr  Pipe,  appearing  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant, drew my attention to paragraph 3 of the determination, where
    there had been a challenge to the suitability of the removal.  This  is
    because the judge recorded how the Respondent in the refusal letter had
    observed (see paragraph 22) that on 18th December 2012,  the  Appellant
    was  convicted  of  battery  and  was  sentenced   to   a   supervision
    requirement, a community  order,  and  unpaid  work  requirement.   His
    exclusion from the UK was conducive to  the  public  good  because  his
    character and conduct made it undesirable for  him  to  be  allowed  to
    remain in the UK.  He had failed to meet the requirements for leave  to
    remain because paragraph S-LTR.1.6 of Appendix  FM  applied.   Mr  Pipe
    submitted that if  the  Appellant  failed  his  appeal  on  suitability
    grounds then his case would have had to have  been  considered  outside
    the Immigration Rules.  This did not happen.  The judge, in fact,  made
    no finding on suitability either.   It  therefore  was  a  matter  that
    needed to go back to the First-tier Tribunal for a  decision.   If  the
    suitability findings were in the Appellant's  favour  then  this  would
    affect the whole tenor of the determination.

 6. For his part, Mr Mills submitted that there was no focus by  the  judge
    on  "insurmountable  obstacles".   There  had  to  be  a   finding   on
    "suitability" as well.  It was not a black and  white  case.   This  is
    because the Appellant's central claim was  that  his  removal  was  not
    conducive to the public good.  Only if the Appellant won on suitability
    grounds did EX1 come into operation and the "insurmountable  obstacles"
    question was then dismissed.  There was also doubt about the quality of
    the relationship, but this had not been properly considered.

Error of Law

 7. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My reasons  are  that
    there is no finding on insurmountable obstacles by  the  judge  in  any
    clear way as to whether the Appellant's wife could relocate to India.

 8. This is despite the fact that the quality of the  relationship  between
    the husband and the wife needs some probing.  But that is precisely why
    the finding on insurmountable obstacles needs all due attention.

 9. Secondly, the judge did not consider whether the  Respondent  ought  to
    have applied her transitional policy for  those  granted  discretionary
    leave to remain before 9th July 2012 because  the  Appellant  had  been
    granted leave to remain on the basis of his family life in the UK  with
    his wife, and the judge heard submissions before him that  family  life
    continued, even though the Appellant may not have had contact with  the
    children because they had been put up for adoption.

10. Accordingly, the matter needs to return back to the First-tier Tribunal
    for a proper determination of all  these  issues.   A  Punjabi/Gujarati
    interpreter will have to be located and the hearing should be at Stoke-
    on-Trent as requested.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law such that it  falls  to  be  set  aside.   I  set  aside  the
decision of the original judge.  I remake the  decision  as  follows.   This
appeal is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal at Stoke-on-Trent with  a
Punjabi/Gujarati interpreter to be allocated.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 26th April 2016

