










UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43963/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On: 31 October 2016                    |On:  29 November 2016               |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


                                   Between

                               Mr Shah Khalid
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr C Mannan, counsel (instructed by Britain
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant appeals with permission  against  the  decision  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge promulgated on 21 March 2016, dismissing his
      appeal against the respondent's decision refusing him further leave to
      remain in the UK as a spouse under  Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration
      Rules.


   2.  The  respondent  contended  that  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
      suitability requirements for consideration of limited leave to  remain
      in the UK as a partner or a parent. The Educational Testing Service  -
      ETS - confirmed that the  appellant's  report  test  scores  had  been
      obtained through deception. As a  result  the  validity  of  his  test
      results could not be authenticated and his scores from the tests taken
      on 21 August 2016 were cancelled.


   3. He was considered to be a person who has sought leave to remain in the
      UK  by  deception.  He  accordingly  did  not  meet  the   suitability
      requirements in S-LTR.2.2(a) for consideration  of  limited  leave  to
      remain in the UK as a partner under E-LTRP and/or parent under E-LTRPT
      and/or on the grounds of private life under paragraph 276ADE.


   4. Even if he did meet the suitability requirements, the respondent noted
      that the eligibility requirements would not be  met.   The  respondent
      also gave additional consideration to  the  criteria  of  Appendix  FM
      EX.1. There were no insurmountable obstacles  to  him  continuing  his
      relationship overseas.


   5. With regard to the eligibility under paragraph 276ADE,  he  could  not
      fulfil the criteria of paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the  Rules.   Nor  were
      there other exceptional circumstances.


   6. Mr Staunton for the respondent stated at the  outset  that  there  has
      been an error of law.  The First-tier Judge stated that  the  ETS  was
      irrelevant to the application appealed against, and that  it  was  not
      necessary to consider, as contended by the respondent, whether it  was
      obtained fraudulently.


   7. Mr Staunton noted however, that  this  was  a  central  point  in  the
      refusal. That assertion resulted in the respondent's  contention  that
      he failed to meet the relevant requirements under Appendix FM.


   8. Accordingly, the Judge should have made a finding on that issue  which
      formed the substance of the refusal. The respondent concluded that the
      appellant had not met the eligibility requirements as he had  not  met
      the suitability requirements - paragraph 14 of the Notice  of  Refusal
      dated 18 October 2014.


   9.  Mr  Mannon  accepted  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  that   in   the
      circumstances the appeal should be remitted to the first-tier tribunal
      for a fresh hearing.


  10. It was also contended by Mr Mannon that the Judge erred with regard to
      his findings in respect of the financial requirements as this had  not
      been an issue in the notice of  refusal.  In  granting  permission  to
      appeal, Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb, noted that the refusal letter  did
      not engage with the financial requirements. It is  not  apparent  that
      the appellant  was  given  an  opportunity  to  provide  the  required
      documentation, which he claimed existed. The Judge  nevertheless  made
      specific adverse findings in the absence of these documents.


      Assessment


  11. The Upper Tribunal had at an earlier  hearing  found  that  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Thankey had erred in  his  decision  promulgated  on  9
      April 2015 when he allowed the appellant's appeal on  the  basis  that
      the respondent's decision was not in accordance with the law.


  12. Judge Thankey stated that the appellant did not rely  on  the  English
      test certificate of 21 August 2012. He relied instead on  the  Trinity
      College London English Language Examination report dated 9 August 2014
      which he passed prior  to  the  submission  of  his  application.  The
      respondent failed to consider the more recent  English  language  test
      certificate. That was found not to be in accordance with the  law  and
      the matter was remitted to the respondent to make a lawful decision.


  13. Following that outcome,  the  respondent  was  granted  permission  to
      appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the basis that it  was  arguable  that
      the Judge erred in  finding  that  the  respondent  had  not  produced
      sufficient evidence to show that the appellant had used  deception  in
      his ETS tests. Upper Tribunal Judge Storey stated that he did not  see
      the grounds are any less arguable because the appellant sought to rely
      on a more recent Trinity English Language  Test,  as  the  Rule  under
      which he was refused (S-LTR.2.2) was based on past use of deception in
      tests taken on 21 August 2012.


  14. The matter was remitted for a fresh decision to be made on all issues.


  15. The respondent has contended in the refusal decision dated 18  October
      2014 that the appellant was considered to be a person who  has  sought
      leave to remain in the UK by deception following information from ETS.
      That resulted in his inability to meet  the  suitability  requirements
      for limited leave as the partner or a parent  or  on  the  grounds  of
      private life.


  16. Both parties agreed at the hearing before me that  the  central  plank
      relating to the alleged deception should have been considered  by  the
      first-tier  Tribunal.  It  was  a   finding   that   had   significant
      implications for  the  appellant's  current  as  well  as  his  future
      immigration status. In the circumstances  the  representatives  agreed
      that there has been a material omission, resulting in an error of law.
       I accept that submission.


  17. I accordingly set aside the decision  and  directed  that  the  appeal
      should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be re-heard.


  18. It was unfortunately not possible to fix an agreed hearing date at the
      hearing.






      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error of law and is set aside.


      The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (Hatton Cross) for the
      case to be re-heard on a date to be fixed before  a  different  Judge.
      The appellant has indicated that two witnesses are to be called,  with
      a time estimate of two and a half hours.


      No anonymity direction is made.





      Signed                             Date   26 November 2016
      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer
