
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43334/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20th October 2014                          |On 13th November 2014        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR HENNI SELMOUN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Shilliday, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss S Haji, instructed by Fletcher Day LLP


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State although I shall describe the parties as  they  were  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, that is the Secretary of State is  the  respondent
    and Mr Selmoun is the appellant.

 2. The appellant made  an  application  as  an  Algerian  national  for  a
    permanent registration card under the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006.  That application was refused by the respondent
    on 2nd July 2013 because the appellant had  not  provided  evidence  to
    show that his former wife, the EEA national, had resided in the UK  for
    a continuous period of five years or that he had retained  a  right  of
    residence under Regulation 10(5) following his divorce on 30th November
    2010.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Roopnarine-Davies allowed the appeal  on  7th
    July 2014 on Article 8 grounds.

 4. At the appeal she allowed the appellant to amend the grounds of  appeal
    to include paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules and  in  respect  of
    private life under paragraph 276ADE and Article 8.  This  was  recorded
    as accepted under paragraph 3 of the determination by Mr Wellings,  the
    Home Office Presenting Officer.

 5. In the application for permission to appeal the Home Office referred to
    Lamichhane [2012] EWCA Civ 260 which stated

         "I conclude therefore that the Secretary of State's contentions  as
         to the effect  of  Section  85(2)  are  well-founded  and  that  an
         appellant on whom no Section 120 notice has  been  served  may  not
         raise before the Tribunal any grounds for the  grant  of  leave  to
         remain different from that which was the subject of the decision of
         the Secretary of State appealed against."

 6. Alternatively, it was submitted that the Immigration Judge erred in law
    by failing to follow the guidance in Gulshan (Article 8 - new  Rules  -
    correct approach) [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC).

 7. At the hearing Mr Shilliday relied on Lamichhane  and  referred  to  MM
    Lebanon and Others R on the Application of the Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department [2014] EW Civ 985  on the basis that there  was  an
    alternative remedy, that it was open to the appellant  to  make  a  new
    application on Article 8 grounds. There was no jurisdiction to consider
    either Section 276ADE or Article 8.  Any concession made  by  the  Home
    Office Presenting Officer was an error in law and therefore  could  not
    be made.  Schedule 1 to the EEA Regulations 2006 excluded  reliance  on
    Section 84(1)(a) and 84(1)(f).  In Ahmed Amos  [2013]  UKUT  00089  the
    Upper Tribunal failed to deal with the  exclusion  of  the  Immigration
    Rules but the law had moved  on  and  Article  8  was  now  within  the
    Immigration Rules.   The facts in Lamichhane were not  distinguishable.
    It was open to the appellant  to  make  a  new  application  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

 8. It was  further  contended  by  Mr  Shilliday  that  Gulshan  had  been
    misapplied and it was necessary to show compelling circumstances.   The
    marriage and children were not compelling circumstances and this was  a
    material misdirection.

 9. Miss Haji submitted that there was no material error of law.  The judge
    did not allow it under the Immigration Rules and that Schedule 1 of the
    EEA Regulations only excluded consideration of the Section 84(1)(a) and
    (f) that was in relation to the Immigration Rules and  the  discretion.
    The contention here was that  the  decision  was  in  contravention  of
    Section 6 of the Human Rights Act with reference  to  Section  84(1)(c)
    and 84(1)(g).  Permission to amend the grounds had been allowed by  the
    judge.  The effect of the respondent's decision  was the removal of the
    respondent and JM (Liberia) confirmed that further to Section  83(1)(c)
    the appellant's human rights should be considered.

10. The facts in Lamichhane  were  different  in  that  the  appellant  was
    seeking to switch categories.  That was not the case here.

11. In this case it was not a near-miss but he had a very lengthy residence
    in the UK and two EEA national children. Further to the case  of  AG  &
    Othrs (Policies;executive discretions; Tribunal's powers) Kosovo [2007]
    UKAIT 00082 where there is relevant policy and  law  the  Secretary  of
    State should take that into account.  The Secretary of  State  had  not
    done so.  Later Miss Haji referred to the fact that she meant  in  fact
    that the Secretary of State had not  considered  the  policy  of  every
    child matters. She submitted that Ahmed  Amos  clearly  indicated  that
    they had jurisdiction to entertain an Article 8  appeal.   Further  the
    Section 55 every child matters had not been taken into account.

12. All the factors led to the proportionality and  to  the  assessment  of
    Article 8 in terms of compelling and  compassionate  circumstances  and
    this was clear from the determination.  Even the Presenting Officer had
    conceded the compelling grounds. The judge proceeded to do a  balancing
    act and considered that it was unreasonable to expect the appellant  to
    relocate.  The Immigration Rules were not a complete code.

13. Mr Shilliday submitted that if no Section 120 notice  had  been  served
    then Ahmed was wrong.  In JM (Liberia) there was a Section 120  notice.
    Further there was no policy in  respect  of  this  because  in  AG  the
    policies referred to were DP5/96.   That  was  not  the  case  in  this
    matter.  The Secretary of State  had  stated  that  the  appellant  had
    failed to make out the case in respect of Section 55.

Conclusions

14. The permission to appeal asserted that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    had allowed the decision under the appeal under paragraph  276ADE.   In
    fact this was not  the  case  as  identified  at  paragraph  7  of  the
    determination. Nor did the judge allow the appeal further to  Paragraph
    276B.  The judge allowed the appeal further to Article 8.   It  was  on
    this basis that I considered whether the judge had jurisdiction.

15. In Lamichhane the decision of AS Afghanistan v SSHD [2011]  1  WLR  385
    was cited as stating that the Tribunal had no jurisdiction to  consider
    the new matters in the absence of a section 120 notice. In  that  case,
    where no Section 120 notice  was  served  the  appellant  attempted  to
    switch his claim from long residence to that of  Tier  4  student.   In
    this case the appellant argued human rights stemming from  the  refusal
    of the EEA residence card.  Mr  Shilliday's  argument  was  that  human
    rights claims now resided in paragraph 276 ADE and thus  the  appellant
    should have made a claim under the Immigration Rules  and  by  claiming
    human rights the appellant was attempting to change his claim and  this
    rendered the appeal  similar  to  Lamichane.    Although  Mr  Shilliday
    argued that Lamichane was similar to this matter I do not accept  that.
    As stated in MM Lebanon v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 985 confirmed

    'Where the relevant group  of  IRs,  upon  their  proper  construction,
    provide a "complete code" for dealing with a person's Convention rights
    in the context of a particular IR or statutory provision,  such  as  in
    the case of "foreign criminals", then the balancing  exercise  and  the
    way the various factors are to be taken into account in  an  individual
    case must be done in accordance with that code, although references  to
    "exceptional circumstances" in  the  code  will  nonetheless  entail  a
    proportionality exercise. But if the relevant group of IRs is not  such
    a "complete code" then the proportionality test will be more at  large,
    albeit guided by the Huang tests and UK and Strasbourg case law'.

16. There was no suggestion that Paragraph 276ADE was in  fact  a  complete
    code and no authority that human rights may only  be  raised  where  an
    application further to Paragraph  276ADE  has  been  made.   The  human
    rights claim can attach to the EEA residence card refusal  and  further
    to Section 6 (1) of the Human Rights Act 1998 (1), it is unlawful for a
    public authority  to  act  in  a  way  which  is  incompatible  with  a
    Convention right. That applies to any decision made by the Tribunal.

17. Indeed at paragraph 9 of Lamichane records as follows:
    'However, after the hearing on reflection the Senior Immigration  Judge
    decided that the Tribunal did not have jurisdiction  to  consider  that
    claim, since there had been no section 120  notice  and  therefore  the
    statement making that claim was not a "statement under section 120". He
    said:
      "13. Section 120 of the 2002 Act leaves it  up  to  the  Secretary  of
      State whether or not she wishes a person who has received  a  negative
      immigration decision to make a statement of Additional Grounds. If  an
      appellant has not been required to do so, it is not open to him to put
      before the Tribunal  for  determination  matters  which  are  not  the
      subject of the immigration decision under appeal (save, no doubt,  for
      any asylum or human rights claim). Any statement raising such  matters
      is simply not 'a statement under section  120'  for  the  purposes  of
      section 85(2) and (3) of the 2002 Act, regardless of whether it  calls
      itself a 'Statement of Additional Grounds'.
      14. The Tribunal, to put it in a  nutshell,  has  no  jurisdiction  to
      consider under section 85(2) of the  2002  Act  a  matter  purportedly
      raised in a statement made under section 120, if  that  statement  was
      not in fact made under section 120. A  statement  will  only  be  made
      under section 120 if the Secretary of State in a  written  notice  has
      required the appellant to make it. The appellant cannot, by calling  a
      statement 'a statement of additional grounds', compel the Tribunal  to
      consider matters raised in that statement, if there has been no  'one-
      stop warning' or anything  else  constituting  a  requirement  by  the
      Secretary of State to make such a statement.
      15. In the instant case, the First-tier judge was mistaken in thinking
      that she had jurisdiction to entertain a Tier 4 application, and I too
      have no such jurisdiction."'

18. This does not suggest that a human rights claim would fall foul of  the
    lack of a Section 120 notice.

19. A human rights claim does not necessarily need to  be  considered  only
    under the Immigration Rules (although  the  Rules  may  be  a  starting
    point) and Lamichhane made no contradiction of the assertion that  this
    does not affect  a  human  rights  claim.  Indeed  the  submissions  in
    Lamichhane from the Home Office, which  were  accepted,  were  that  it
    followed from Section 85 (2) of the 2002 Act that  if  no  section  120
    notice had been served the Tribunal could not consider any matter  that
    might give rise to a right to variation of his leave  to  enter  or  to
    remain in the UK under a provision of the Immigration Rules other  than
    that which was the subject of the Immigration  decision  under  appeal.
    In this case I do not accept that the appellant is necessarily changing
    his application under the rules.  This  is  because  the  human  rights
    consideration stemmed from the refusal of the EEA residence card.

20. The issue was raised with respect to the need to make a  decision  with
    reference to Article 8 as the appellant was not about to be removed and
    thus did not face any violation of his Convention  rights.  JM  Liberia
    accepted that a human  rights  claim  is  justiciable  before  the  AIT
    notwithstanding that the decision under appeal was not  a  decision  to
    remove the appellant form the UK and did  not  necessarily  entail  any
    such decision.  It was decided that removal may at least be an indirect
    consequence of the refusal to  vary  leave.   Once  a  person's  appeal
    against his leave was dismissed  he  must  leave  the  UK.  Indeed  the
    refusal letter in this instance advised the appellant  that  he  should
    make arrangements to leave the United  Kingdom.  Indeed  as  stated  at
    paragraph 22 of JM Liberia

    'It is true, judging anyway from the terms of the decision letter, that
    article 8 had not at that stage distinctly, been raised; it was  raised
    later before the adjudicator. But article 8 issues might  readily  have
    been raised; and there  is  plainly  force  in  this  submission  that,
    depending on the particular  facts,  human  rights  issues  are  indeed
    likely to be integral to the process of deciding whether an immigrant's
    leave should or should not be varied'.

21. Although in JM Liberia a S 120 notice was served there  was  discussion
    as to whether Section 84(1)(c) suffices to allow a right of  appeal  on
    human rights grounds in every case where the  immigration  decision  in
    question would give rise to an imminent removal.  JM did refer  to  the
    fact that once a human rights point is properly before the AIT they are
    obliged to deal with it.  Indeed JM confirmed that further  to  Section
    86(3)(a) 'the tribunal must allow the appeal in so  far  as  it  thinks
    that a decision against which the appeal is brought or  is  treated  as
    being brought was not in accordance with the law (including immigration
    rules)'

22. I also accept that Ahmed Amos [2013] UKUT 00089 which also addressed an
    EEA appeal applies and that the effect of the respondent's decision was
    the possibility of removal. In Ahmed Amos there was no indication of  a
    Section 120 stop notice being served, the Upper  Tribunal  recorded  in
    the decision that the Article 8 issue was only raised at  the  hearing.
    The Upper Tribunal at paragraph 69 accepted that the decision  entailed
    the refusal of a residence card  as  'indicative  of  an  intention  to
    remove' and there was no principled basis for taking a  different  view
    from that taken in respect of human rights law  following  JM  Liberia.
    The Tribunal clearly stated that it was entitled to deal with Article 8
    in this type of appeal and this is a reported case.  In this  instance,
    it was clear that further to Schedule 1  of  the  EEA  Regulations  the
    appellant is able to raise the ground of Section 84(1)(c)  or  84(1)(g)
    and this was specifically permitted at the hearing  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and was recorded as a concession by the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer.

23. This was a matter  which  fell  to  be  determined  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  The material facts of the case did  not  alter  and  I
    find the judge was entitled to consider the matter under Article 8.

24. Further to the point in relation to Gulshan it is clear from a  reading
    of the decision as a whole that the judge found the very long residence
    of the appellant in the UK, that being over 21  years  or  thereabouts,
    and the fact that he had two children in the UK was sufficient to  give
    arguably good grounds that the matter should be considered outside  the
    Immigration Rules which is what the judge did.  The judge addressed the
    issues with respect to proportionality  and  found  in  favour  of  the
    appellant. Further to MM Lebanon I find that the judge was so entitled.

25. I find there is no error of law and the determination shall stand.




Signed                                  Date 12th November 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

