
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43380/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 30 September 2014                          |On 5 February 2015           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                            rocio gonzalez lopez

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Thoree of Thoree & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a national of Columbia.  She appealed to a  First-tier
    Judge against the respondent's decision of 5 October 2013 to remove her
    as an illegal entrant under section l0 of the  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 1999.

2.   The appellant came to the United Kingdom in 2001, overland  from  Spain
    in a lorry.  Her entry to the United Kingdom was illegal  and  she  has
    remained in the United Kingdom  ever  since.   She  came  to  join  her
    daughter, also a  Colombian  national,  who  had  arrived  some  months
    previously.  Her daughter is now naturalised as a British  national  as
    is her husband and they have two children aged respectively 12 and 8.

3.   In the decision letter it was said that the  case  was  not  considered
    under paragraph 317 of HC 395 as had been requested because  the  wrong
    kind of  application  and  fee  had  been  provided.   The  matter  was
    therefore considered under the relevant provisions of  the  Immigration
    Rules which came into force on 9 July 2012.

4.   The judge considered the decision in Edgehill [2014] EWCA Civ  402  and
    decided that paragraph 317 was applicable.  The judge  also  considered
    the matter in respect of Appendix FM and  in  relation  to  the  Razgar
    guidance as well as in respect of Article  8  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.

5.   The judge noted the appellant's evidence that  she  has  suffered  from
    epilepsy since she was around 25 years old (she was born on 4 September
    1960) and was a single mother and had the one child,  her  daughter  in
    the United Kingdom.  She had lived with her daughter in Colombia  until
    her daughter left in 2000 and  she  had  followed  her  to  the  United
    Kingdom a year later because she missed her.  She said that she entered
    the United Kingdom illegally on the back of a lorry and that as far  as
    she understood it this was how her  daughter  had  entered  the  United
    Kingdom in 2000 also.

6.   She had lived with her daughter and grandchildren throughout  her  stay
    in the United  Kingdom.   She  produced  evidence  in  respect  of  the
    epilepsy from which she suffers and  the  treatment  she  has  received
    while in the United Kingdom.  She had never worked while in the  United
    Kingdom and had been entirely supported by her daughter and  son-in-law
    and had always been part of her daughter and grandchildren's lives  and
    they had a special bond with one another.  She  took  the  children  to
    school and collected them every day  and  helped  them  regularly  with
    their homework.

7.   In 2007 her granddaughter Nicolle was diagnosed with  a  kidney  tumour
    and the appellant was there to  support  her  and  the  child's  mother
    emotionally.  She said that she did not have a home  to  return  to  in
    Colombia as the house she lived  in  prior  to  coming  to  the  United
    Kingdom was rented.  She had  no  family  in  Colombia  and  in  cross-
    examination she said she had no brothers or sisters and her parents and
    aunts and uncles were all dead.   There  would  be  death  certificates
    available but she had not obtained them.  It would not be practical for
    her to return to Colombia and for her daughter to send  remittances  to
    her and visit her from time to time because she had no home to go to in
    Colombia.  She had never been hospitalised on account of  her  epilepsy
    and the last time she was taken to hospital  following  a  seizure  was
    quite some time ago.  She had experienced her last convulsion  at  home
    as recently as the week before the hearing.

8.   The appellant's daughter said  that  she  had  always  lived  with  her
    mother apart from the few months when she came to  the  United  Kingdom
    ahead of her mother.  She  and  her  mother  were  heavily  emotionally
    dependent upon one another.  She was very worried about  the  prospects
    of her mother returning to Colombia.   In  cross-examination  she  said
    that she had come to the United Kingdom on a tourist visa and not as in
    her mother's evidence, illegally in a lorry.  When asked about this she
    said her mother did not know  and  that  her  mother  would  just  have
    assumed that was the way she came in and she was forgetful.

9.   The judge considered that there was  a  glaring  inconsistency  between
    the evidence of the sponsor and the appellant  as  to  the  manner  and
    purpose of the sponsor's original entry  into  the  United  Kingdom  in
    2000.  She said that the appellant was quite clear  that  her  daughter
    had entered illegally overland via a lorry and  that  was  entirely  at
    odds with her daughter's claim that she had come to the United  Kingdom
    on a tourist visa.  The judge considered that it was the  inconsistency
    between the two accounts which undermined both versions of events.  She
    considered that the Presenting Officer's questioning was to the  effect
    that it was not at all likely that a tourist visa  would  be  given  to
    somebody to visit the United Kingdom for a period of a  year  and  that
    that further undermined the sponsor's claim to have come to the  United
    Kingdom lawfully.  She  accepted  the  evidence  that  the  mother  and
    daughter were undoubtedly very close, and the idea that  the  appellant
    would not have known  the  journey  that  her  daughter  was  about  to
    undertake to the United Kingdom or had undertaken to the United Kingdom
    was regarded as nonsensical.   The judge therefore concluded that in  a
    very significant manner  both  appellant  and  witness  had  sought  to
    conceal the purpose and method of what she concluded was a  pattern  of
    unlawful migration to the UK  for  economic  betterment  and  in  those
    circumstances regretted that she must give little weight to  the  other
    features of the account such as the claim that there were no  relatives
    in Colombia which was a claimed fact which underpinned the entire basis
    of the appeal.

10.  The judge went on to say that  the  appellant  could  properly  advised
    have obtained from Colombia copies of the  death  certificates  of  the
    only relatives she claimed to have in Colombia and  any  evidence  from
    other relatives living abroad in Spain and the US and had not done  so.
    There was, the judge commented, an entire lack of documentary  evidence
    to show that the appellant would be without family members on return to
    Colombia, in circumstances where she would have expected at least  some
    efforts to have been made to demonstrate the truth of  this.   She  had
    concluded that  her  account  in  at  least  one  important  point  was
    unreliable and that it was highly unlikely that such evidence that  she
    had suffered such an unfortunate series of bereavements did  not  exist
    and therefore the claim that she had no one at all in Colombia to  turn
    to was at best an assertion and certainly was not shown to the required
    standard of proof.  The judge considered that she had been told  little
    of the appellant's life in the UK.  There were letters of reference but
    the people who wrote them did not explain how they knew  her  and  were
    usually short and simply reiterated her good qualities and her devotion
    to her grandchildren.

11.  The most recent substantive evidence from University  College  Hospital
    in March 2005 was to the effect that her  epilepsy  was  being  managed
    without seizures successfully with  drugs.   There  was  no  up-to-date
    medical evidence and the most recent report  of  May  2014  recorded  a
    stable medical condition with routine drugs taken daily.

12.  Thankfully there was no evidence of any recurrence of Nicolle's  cancer
    and it was more likely than not that she had been given the all clear.

13.  The judge went on to say at paragraph 81 that in the  circumstances  in
    which this family had chosen to live in exile from their  home  country
    and with the appellant financially dependent on the family  they  would
    have developed a closeness beyond that  which  perhaps  occurred  where
    adult relatives lived separately and without daily engagement  in  each
    other's  lives.   She  said  that  she  also  bore  in  mind  that  the
    appellant's evidence was less than reliable on certain aspects  and  it
    would undoubtedly  have  been  in  the  witnesses'  interests  to  have
    emphasised the mutual dependence of the adult family members.

14.  A matter on which the judge had no  doubt  at  all  was  the  undoubted
    affection which the appellant's grandson has  for  her  which,  as  the
    judge said was made plain by his courageous and emotional plea  to  the
    judge at the hearing.  He said that he believed that  her  presence  in
    his life was essential for his future wellbeing but the judge felt able
    to say that he was without doubt an able young man who would succeed in
    the future.

15.  With regard to the paragraph  317  issue,  the  judge  noted  that  the
    appellant's son-in-law had said that at his current level of income  he
    would be able to send remittances to his mother-in-law for her to  live
    in Colombia.  The judge considered that her health was managed well  as
    an outpatient and that the necessary drugs were available in  Colombia.
    She had not shown to a required standard of proof that she had no close
    relatives in her own country to whom she could turn.  The  claim  could
    not succeed under paragraph 317.

16.  As regards Appendix FM, the appellant  could  not  succeed  bearing  in
    mind the provision that an applicant had to be in  the  United  Kingdom
    with a valid entry clearance as an adult dependent relative.  Paragraph
    EX.1 was freestanding as had been held by the Upper Tribunal in  Sabir.
    She could not meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE,  and  had  not
    shown that she had no ties with the country to which she would have  to
    go.  Consideration was given to the  best  interests  of  the  children
    under section 55, and the judge concluded that the  best  interests  of
    the children were to remain  living  as  British  citizens  with  their
    British citizen parents and there was no suggestion they would have  to
    follow their grandmother to Colombia.  They would continue  to  have  a
    full family life with their parents and would remain  in  contact  with
    their grandmother and when finances permitted would no doubt visit  her
    as well.

17.  Finally the judge went on to consider  proportionality  in  respect  of
    the Razgar guidelines, and concluded  that  the  proposed  interference
    with the established family or private life would be proportionate.  On
    the one hand there was the strong relationship with the  grandchildren.
    On the other side there was the  considerable  pubic  interest  in  the
    maintenance  of  effective  immigration  control.    The   appeal   was
    dismissed.

18.  The appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal on the  basis
    that arguably  the  judge  had  provided  inadequate  reasons  for  not
    accepting that the appellant's claim to have no relatives  in  Colombia
    because she found that she and her sponsor had sought  to  conceal  the
    purpose and method of  what  the  judge  concluded  was  a  pattern  of
    unlawful migration to the United Kingdom.  It was noted  by  the  judge
    who granted permission that the determination  recorded  the  appellant
    had given evidence that she had entered the country unlawfully and that
    she thought her daughter had done the same and that it  was  not  clear
    upon what basis the judge had found that the appellant  had  sought  to
    conceal a pattern of unlawful migration.

19.  In his submissions Mr Thoree argued that the adverse  finding  did  not
    go to the heart of the claim and the issue in question would  not  have
    affected   the   appellant's   credibility.    There   had   been    no
    misrepresentation to the judge.  The finding had distorted the  judge's
    decision and hence there was an error of law.  The  evidence  was  that
    she had no family in Columbia and there was no one there to send  death
    certificates  to  her  and  her  son-in-law  and  daughter's   evidence
    corroborated what she said.   Again  this  had  distorted  the  judge's
    findings.  She would be returned in the most exceptional  compassionate
    circumstances bearing in mind that she would  be  alone  and  with  her
    illness and would have no one to look after her and this  would  amount
    to the most exceptional compassionate circumstances.

20.  There was no requirement under the  old  Rules  that  she  should  have
    entry clearance.  The judge had made findings, with regard  to  Article
    8, concerning the degree of closeness  of  the  family.   There  was  a
    Kugathas situation where relationships went beyond  the  normal  family
    ties.  If there were such a relationship then in the balancing act that
    would tip the balance in her favour.  There were also the  findings  in
    respect of the children.  There required to be a balance under Appendix
    FM between the legislative aim  of  economic  wellbeing  etc.  and  the
    individual circumstances.  She was not a criminal but had just remained
    in the United Kingdom unlawfully  and  had  sought  to  regularise  the
    situation.  There was a need to safeguard the welfare of the  children.
    Properly done the consideration of the best interests of children would
    have found that the impact on their best interests was  such  that  the
    appeal should have succeeded.  If a person did not meet the  Rules,  as
    held in  Gulshan,  it  was  necessary  to  decide  whether  there  were
    exceptional circumstances and  it  would  be  unjustifiably  harsh  for
    individuals or  their  family.   She  should  have  been  found  to  be
    credible.  The decision should be re-made and allowed.

21.   In  his  submissions  Mr  Nath  referred  to  the  references  in  the
    determination concerning the issue about entry and  there  had  clearly
    been detailed reference to the evidence given by the witnesses.   Those
    were the facts of the case and the judge had made a finding  which  was
    open to her.  The judge had noted the financial dependency.   If  there
    were no relatives in Colombia then that should be shown.  The judge had
    considered the medical evidence.  The appellant's condition was stable.
      Exceptional  circumstances  had  been  considered.   The  judge   had
    considered  matters  under  Appendix  FM  of  the  new  Rules  in   the
    alternative and also Article 8 outside the  Rules.   The  decision  was
    sound.

22.  By way of reply Mr Thoree argued that there had  been  no  concealment.
    They had said how they  came  so  it  was  wrong  to  make  an  adverse
    credibility finding on that.  The application had been made  in  August
    2009 and refused in 2010 and there had been significant  delay  due  to
    judicial review in the Home Office and that had cost the appellant  and
    she could have been dealt with under the older more generous Article  8
    provisions.  The decision in Shala was relied on in respect of delay.

23.  I reserved my determination.

24.  I consider first the credibility issue.  The judge at paragraph  27  of
    her determination noted the appellant's evidence that she  had  entered
    the United Kingdom illegally in the back of a lorry and that as far  as
    she understood it this was the manner in which her daughter had entered
    the United Kingdom  in  2000.   In  cross-examination  the  appellant's
    daughter said that she had come to the United Kingdom on a tourist visa
    and not illegally in a lorry and when she was asked about this she said
    her mother did not know and that her mother  would  just  have  assumed
    that this was the way she came in and was forgetful.

25.  In relation to this the judge commented that this was the most  glaring
    inconsistency in the evidence, and noted this in  the  context  of  her
    acceptance that the mother and daughter were  undoubtedly  very  close.
    She did not accept that the appellant would not have known the  journey
    that her daughter was about to undertake to the United Kingdom  or  had
    undertaken, considering that that was nonsensical.  She also noted that
    it was unlikely that a tourist visa would be given to someone to  visit
    the United Kingdom for a period of a year.

26.  It may have been going a little far to suggest as she did in  paragraph
    72 that it was in a very significant manner that both witnesses  sought
    to conceal the purpose and method of what she concluded was  a  pattern
    of unlawful migration to the United Kingdom  for  economic  betterment,
    but I consider that it was clearly open to her to find that there was a
    lack of credibility in their evidence in  account  of  the  discrepancy
    between the two accounts and to bear that in mind  when  assessing  the
    rest of the evidence, as she did.

27.  With regard to the issue of whether or not there were relatives in  the
    United Kingdom, the judge noted that it would have  been  open  to  the
    appellant to have obtained copies of the death certificates of the only
    relatives she claimed  to  have  had  there  and  evidence  from  other
    relatives living abroad in Spain and the United States of America,  and
    she had not done so.  Mr Thoree made the point that she had no one left
    in Colombia and that there was evidence given by her daughter and  son-
    in-law to support what she said, but again I  consider  the  judge  was
    entitled to attach weight to the absence of evidence of  a  documentary
    nature to prove the appellant's contention.  She was entitled  to  take
    into account in this regard the discrepancy noted  above  in  assessing
    the credibility of the appellant's claim.

28.  In light of this I consider it was clearly open to the  judge  to  find
    that the appellant could not succeed in  meeting  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 317 of HC 395 since she had  not  shown  that  she  would  be
    living alone in the most exceptional  compassionate  circumstances  and
    had no other close relatives in Columbia.  She had not  discharged  the
    burden of proof in that regard, as it was properly open to the judge to
    find.

29.  The judge went on to consider the position in respect  of  Appendix  FM
    and as she noted at paragraph 83(c), the appellant  could  not  succeed
    given that she was in the United Kingdom otherwise than  with  a  valid
    entry clearance as an adult dependant relative.  She rightly noted that
    in accordance with the decision in Sabir, the provisions of EX.1 do not
    operate as a freestanding provision but are  parasitic  upon  the  main
    Rule.  The judge properly concluded that the requirements of the  Rules
    could not be met in this case.  She went on also to consider Article  8
    outside  the  Rules  and  gave  this  issue  proper  consideration   in
    paragraphs 85 and 86 of the determination.  She took  account  of  both
    sides of the balance and concluded that the balance fell on the side of
    proportionality of  the  proposed  interference  with  the  established
    family or private life.  Again that was a conclusion that was  open  to
    her.  I do not think there is anything in the point  Mr  Thoree  raised
    late in the day about delay.  It is  true  that  there  was  a  gap  of
    several years between the application  for  leave  to  remain  and  the
    decision of 5 October 2013, that there was  a  judicial  review  of  an
    earlier decision and clearly that had some effect  on  the  passage  of
    time.  I do not consider delay to be a material  point  in  this  case.
    Accordingly, for the reasons above, I consider that the judge  has  not
    been shown to have erred in law and her decision dismissing this appeal
    is upheld.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

