
                                             [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/43020/2014
     IA/43023/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         | Decision & Reasons           |
|                                             |Promulgated                   |
|On 9 September 2015                          | On 28 September 2015         |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           SHAKEEL AKBAR CHOUDHRY
                               FAIZ UL HASSAN
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss. E Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr. M. Ilahi of Rana & Co Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Ievins promulgated on 1  April  2015  in  which  he
    allowed the  appeals  of  Mr.  Choudhry  and  Mr.  Hassan  against  the
    Secretary of State's refusal  to  grant  leave  to  remain  as  Tier  1
    (Entrepreneurs) under paragraph 245DD of the immigration rules.


 2. For the purposes of this decision, I refer  to  Mr.  Choudhry  and  Mr.
    Hassan as  the  Appellants  and  to  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
    Respondent, reflecting their positions as they were before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was arguable that
    the judge had failed to supply sufficient reasoning to explain  to  the
    Respondent why she had  lost  the  appeal.   The  grounds  argued  that
    insufficient regard had been paid to section 85A of the 2002 Act; there
    was an absence of reasoning as to  why  the  appeal  had  been  allowed
    outright taking into  account  post-decision  evidence  as  opposed  to
    holding that it was not in accordance  with  the  law  for  failure  to
    request the same;  there  was  absence  of  reasoning  as  to  why  the
    advertising material provided met the  requirements  of  paragraph  41-
    SD(e), or why the business website met the requirements.


Submissions


 4. Miss. Savage relied on the grounds of appeal.  She submitted that  this
    was a narrow point.  Section 85A had been misapplied.   The  judge  was
    not able to consider post-decision evidence.  She  submitted  that  the
    decision should have been allowed as being not in accordance  with  the
    law rather than being allowed outright.  She referred to paragraph [29]
    of the decision.   The  letter  from  Barclays  Bank  could  have  been
    considered by the Respondent under paragraph 245AA, had  she  requested
    it.  She accepted that the decision should have been  remitted  to  the
    Respondent for reconsideration of this evidence under paragraph  245AA.




 5. For the Appellants Mr. Ilahi submitted that the only point in issue was
    whether or not the decision should have been allowed to the extent that
    it be remitted for further consideration by the Respondent.  The  judge
    had considered all the evidence correctly, the decision was lawful  and
    the judge had  authority  to  allow  the  appeal  outright  instead  of
    remitting it back.


 6. In response Miss. Savage submitted that section 85A was clear that post-
    decision evidence could not be  considered.   It  was  clear  from  the
    decision that the judge had considered post-decision evidence [29].  In
    relation to paragraph 5 of the grounds, Miss. Savage submitted that, if
    the decision was not in accordance with the law, this ground fell away.
     The judge was bound to  have  found  that  the  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law for failure to properly apply section 245AA and
    he should have remitted it.


Decision

 7. I found that the decision involved the making of an error of law  on  a
    material matter.
 8. Section 85A of the 2002 Act  provides  that  in  an  appeal  where  the
    immigration decision concerned an application under  the  Points  Based
    System, the tribunal may only consider evidence which was submitted  in
    support of and at the time of  making  the  application  to  which  the
    immigration decision related (85A(4)(a)).  The further  evidence  which
    may be considered under section 845A(4) is not relevant here.


 9. In paragraph [29] of the decision the judge states:


         "I am satisfied that that evidence  can  be  considered  under  the
         provisions of paragraph 245AA(b)(iv) inasmuch as the business  bank
         statements were documents that did not contain  all  the  specified
         information.  The Respondent could, and should, have contacted  the
         Appellants to request the specified information."


10. It was accepted by Miss. Savage that the second sentence  of  this  was
    correct.  The Respondent should have  contacted  the  Appellants  under
    paragraph 245AA to request the specified information. For this  reason,
    the decision should have been allowed as being not in  accordance  with
    the law. However, the first sentence of this shows that the judge  took
    into account evidence which was provided after the date of the decision
    in  reliance  on  paragraph  245AA,  which  is  in  conflict  with  the
    provisions of section 85A.  Paragraph 245AA allows  the  Respondent  to
    request further documents but it does not permit a tribunal to consider
    further documents provided after the date of decision.


11. I find that, having found that the Respondent should have contacted the
    Appellants under paragraph 245AA, the correct course of action was  for
    the appeals to have  been  allowed  to  the  limited  extent  that  the
    refusals were not in accordance with the law, with a direction that the
    Respondent consider the applications again.  I find that the judge  was
    not entitled to take into account the post-decision evidence  to  which
    he refers in paragraph [29] and was therefore  not  in  a  position  to
    allow the appeals outright.


12. I found that the decision involved the making of an error of law  on  a
    material matter.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  a  material
error of law and is set aside.

The decision is remade as follows:

The appeals are  allowed  to  the  extent  that  the  refusals  are  not  in
accordance with the law.  The matter  is  remitted  to  the  Respondent  for
further consideration.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 25 September 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain


