

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/43324/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |               Decision and Reasons   |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On Tuesday 20 October 2015            |               On Thursday 22 October |
|                                      |2015                                  |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                              MR KWAME OTCHERE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr Waithe, Counsel
For the Respondent:          Mrs Williock-Briscoe, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I  find  that  no
particular issues arise on the facts of this case  that  give  rise  to  the
need for a direction. For this reason no anonymity direction is made.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

    1. The Appellant is  a  citizen  of  Ghana.   He  appeals  against  the
       Respondent's  decision  dated  14  October  2014  refusing   him   a
       derivative right  of  residence  under  regulation  15A(4A)  of  the
       Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  ("the  EEA
       Regulations") on the basis that he  is  the  primary  carer  of  his
       mother, Miss Wuwaa who is a British citizen.


    2. The Appellant's appeal was dismissed by  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Mays under the EEA  Regulations  and  on  Article  8  grounds  in  a
       decision  promulgated  on  19  June  2015  ("the  Decision").    The
       Appellant sought permission to appeal the Decision on the basis that
       the Judge has materially erred in  his  consideration  of  both  the
       application under the EEA  Regulations  and  in  his  assessment  of
       proportionality in relation to the Article 8 claim.

    3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-Tier Tribunal Judge Cox on
       17 September 2015 on the basis that the ground concerning Article  8
       was arguable, the ground concerning the EEA Regulations less so  but
       giving permission to argue both grounds.  The  matter  comes  before
       the Tribunal to determine whether the First-Tier  Tribunal  Decision
       involved the making of an error of law.


    Submissions


    4. Dealing first with the appeal under the EEA Regulations,  Mr  Waithe
       submitted that the Appellant is the only  surviving  child  of  Miss
       Wuwaa and the evidence is that he is her primary carer.  He came  to
       the UK lawfully (as a  visitor)  and  overstayed  only  because  his
       mother became unwell.  The Judge's finding  that  Miss  Wuwaa  could
       look to the local  authority  for  support  if  the  Appellant  were
       removed has no evidential basis as they have not  supported  her  to
       date save for providing some adjustments to facilitate her movement.
       There is no evidence  to  support  the  finding  that  Miss  Wuwaa's
       friends from church could support her. Mr Waithe submitted that  the
       local authority would be unable to care for Miss Wuwaa in  light  of
       the "austerity cuts" and submitted that the fact that the  Appellant
       is providing the care that the local authority  might  otherwise  be
       obliged to supply is a factor counting in the Appellant's favour  in
       relation to the proportionality of his removal as he would be saving
       money for the UK State.


    5. In relation to the Article 8 claim, Mr Waithe referred to section  2
       Human Rights Act 1998 as authority  for  the  proposition  that  the
       Tribunal should have regard to Strasbourg case law and then to cases
       such as Marcxx v Belgium.  It was  not  entirely  clear  to  me  the
       proposition which he sought to derive from the cases   since,  as  I
       pointed  out  to  him,  the  Judge  accepted  that  the  Appellant's
       relationship with his mother and her emotional dependency on him was
       sufficient to found a family life  which  required  respect.   There
       remained an issue whether the UK is required to permit the Appellant
       and Miss Wuwaa to enjoy that family  life  in  the  UK  and  whether
       interference would be proportionate.

    6. Mr Waithe submitted that there  were  exceptional  circumstances  in
       this case  which  the  Judge  should  have  considered  outside  the
       Immigration Rules.  I pointed out to him that at [45] to [60] of the
       Decision, the Judge had conducted that  very  exercise.   The  Judge
       considered the case outside the Rules but decided that  removal  was
       not disproportionate. Mr  Waithe  submitted  that  in  circumstances
       where the Judge  accepted  there  exists  family  life  between  the
       Appellant and his mother,  very  weighty  reasons  are  required  to
       displace that and to justify removal.  I pointed  out  that  section
       117B Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 is relevant as  is
       the fact that the Appellant is here unlawfully following the  expiry
       of leave as a visitor and has at all times  had  precarious  status.
       Mr Waithe continued to insist that the Judge did not properly factor
       in the assistance which the Appellant provides for  his  mother  nor
       the impact on her of his removal.  He submitted that "little weight"
       for the purposes of section 117B  does not mean "no weight".

    7. Mrs Williock-Briscoe reminded me that this is in fact an  appeal  in
       relation to an application under the EEA Regulations and,  following
       the decision in Amirteymour and others (EEA appeals;  human  rights)
       [2015] UKUT 00466  (IAC),  the  Judge  should  not  have  considered
       Article 8 at all.   There  is  no  removal  decision  in  this  case
       (although the Appellant  is  an  overstayer).   There  has  been  no
       section 120 notice served. Mrs Williock-Briscoe submitted  that,  on
       the basis that the Judge considered Article 8, this  amounts  to  an
       error of law since he had no jurisdiction to do  so  but  is  not  a
       material one since the outcome in relation to the appeal  under  the
       EEA Regulations is unaffected.  She submitted that, if the Judge did
       have jurisdiction to consider Article  8  contrary  to  her  primary
       submission, the Judge has carried out  a  comprehensive  assessment,
       finds there to be both family and private life which requires to  be
       weighed in the balance, considers the weight to be  applied  against
       the  public  interest  in   removal   and   applies   section   117B
       appropriately.  There is no error of law in  the  Decision  in  this
       regard.

    8. In relation to the appeal under the EEA Regulations,  Mrs  Williock-
       Briscoe submitted that the Judge has properly  directed  himself  in
       accordance with the  evidence  before  him.   He  accepts  that  the
       Appellant is Miss Wuwaa's son and primary carer.  The issue  is  the
       extent of care which the Appellant provides  and  whether  the  care
       could be provided by some other person.  In other words,  the  Judge
       was required to consider whether  Miss  Wuwaa  would  be  unable  to
       continue to reside in the UK if the Appellant were removed.  For the
       reasons set out at [42] to [43] the Judge does not accept that  this
       would be the position and for that reason holds that  the  Appellant
       is not entitled to a derivative right of  residence  under  the  EEA
       Regulations ([44]).

    9. Whilst Amirteymour  is  authority  for  the  proposition  which  the
       Respondent seeks to derive from it, I note no point was taken before
       the First-Tier Tribunal Judge as to  his  jurisdiction  to  consider
       Article 8 (although Amirteymour has only recently been promulgated).
        In any event, I consider it  appropriate  to  deal  also  with  the
       ground relating to Article 8 since permission to appeal was  granted
       mainly on this basis and in case the appeal  goes  further  and  the
       view is taken that the Judge did have jurisdiction to consider it.

Decision and reasons

   10. I deal first with the Decision under the EEA Regulations.  As  noted
       above, the Judge accepts that the Appellant is Miss Wuwaa's son [33]
       and that Miss Wuwaa is a British citizen [32].  In spite of  finding
       the Appellant an unimpressive and not  credible  witness  [36],  the
       Judge accepts in light of all the evidence  that  the  Appellant  is
       Miss Wuwaa's primary  carer  [40].   As  the  Judge  rightly  notes,
       therefore, the issue is  whether  there  would  be  anyone  else  to
       provide that care if the Appellant were removed.  At [42] the  Judge
       notes Miss Wuwaa's evidence that "there was not anything her son did
       for her which someone else could not do" (which evidence is recorded
       at [20]).  Miss Wuwaa's evidence therefore was that she would prefer
       her son to assist her because he "made her feel happy and  at  home"
       [42].


   11. The Judge notes that a local authority assessment has  been  carried
       out but Miss Wuwaa has objected to having carers because she prefers
       her son to carry out her personal care [42].   There  was  therefore
       ample evidence for the Judge's  finding  that  the  local  authority
       would provide that care; indeed would be statutorily obliged  to  do
       so [43].  The fact that the local authority does not presently do so
       arises from the fact that the Appellant is in the UK and Miss  Wuwaa
       would prefer that he provide care but there is no evidence that they
       would not do so if he were not here.

   12. The finding that Miss Wuwaa may be able  to  obtain  care  from  her
       friends from the church is put on a tentative basis only [42] but is
       limited to them facilitating  her  attendance  at  church  or  other
       events on  the  basis  I  presume  that  they  would  themselves  be
       attending and as friends might reasonably be expected to assist Miss
       Wuwaa to attend.  As such it is a finding  which  was  open  to  the
       Judge.

   13. The Judge accepts that the Appellant also provides Miss  Wuwaa  with
       emotional support but does not accept that without that support  she
       would be unable to remain in the UK.  Her evidence was  not  in  any
       event to that effect.  She accepted that there was nothing which  he
       does for her that others could not do.  She did not say in  evidence
       that she would leave the UK with him were he to be removed.

   14. There is no error of law therefore in the Judge's finding  that  the
       Appellant could not satisfy the EEA  Regulations  for  a  derivative
       right of residence as the primary carer of his mother.

   15. I have noted  at  [9]  above  that  the  Judge  may  have  erred  in
       considering Article 8 at all.   For the reasons there stated, if  he
       did err in doing so then such error cannot be  material.   It  could
       not  impact  on  the  lawfulness  of  the  Decision  under  the  EEA
       Regulations which I have found contains no error of  law.   However,
       also for the reasons stated at [9], I go on to consider the  Judge's
       consideration of Article 8.

   16. The Judge accepts at [47] that the Appellant and  Miss  Wuwaa  enjoy
       family life together which is deserving of respect.  He accepts that
       the Appellant will have  formed  a  private  life  also  in  the  UK
       although he has been here only since 2011 and there was no  evidence
       before the Judge as to that.   The Judge rightly notes at [50]  that
       the issue in this case is whether interference with that family  and
       private life would be proportionate.

   17. Paragraphs [51] to [55] set out the extent and nature of the  family
       and private life having due regard to the care which  the  Appellant
       is providing both physically and emotionally, the cost of the  local
       authority providing alternative care if the Appellant  were  removed
       (although noting that the Appellant is seeking  assistance  as  Miss
       Wuwaa's carer and might become dependent on public  funds)  and  the
       impact on their  family  and  private  life  in  the  event  of  the
       Appellant's removal.   The Judge has regard to  the  extent  of  the
       family and private life bearing in mind that  Miss  Wuwaa  left  the
       Appellant behind in Ghana when  he  was  aged  four  years  and  the
       Appellant has lived for twenty-five of his thirty-one years in Ghana
       apart from the occasional visit  to  his  mother  [54].   The  Judge
       expressly considers the impact on Miss Wuwaa's care and  support  if
       the Appellant is removed at [60].

   18. The Judge at [56] to [59] considers the  public  interest  including
       with regard to section 117B.  As the Judge notes, the Appellant  has
       been in the UK unlawfully since his leave as a visitor expired.   Mr
       Waithe sought to persuade me that this should not  be  held  against
       the Appellant because of the reason for the overstaying namely  that
       the Appellant was obliged to stay due to his  mother's  ill  health.
       That submission might attract some sympathy were it not for the fact
       that the Appellant's leave expired on 9 December  2011,  before  his
       mother collapsed (although she says she was sick before that);  also
       because he took no steps to regularise his status  until  June  2013
       after he had been arrested as an overstayer and long after his leave
       had expired.  The Judge was therefore entitled to  take  account  of
       his unlawful and precarious  status  when  weighing  his  (and  Miss
       Wuwaa's) family life and private life in the balance.

   19. The Judge's assessment of proportionality discloses no error of  law
       (save as noted above whether the Judge had jurisdiction to  consider
       this issue at  all  which  is  immaterial  to  the  outcome  of  the
       Decision).


   20. For the above reasons, I am satisfied that the  First-Tier  Tribunal
       Decision did not involve the making of an error of law.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision

Signed      [pic]Date  22 October 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Smith


