
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43305/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 6th May 2014                                 |On 16th May 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                              basharat hussain
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Iqbal of Equity Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, HOPO


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Hillis
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 4th February 2014.



Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 6th June 1969.  He  says
    that he arrived in the UK illegally since 1997 and has lived here  ever
    since. He applied, on 6th July 2012, for leave to remain on  the  basis
    of long-term residence in the UK under paragraph 276 of HC 395.  He was
    refused both on the  grounds  that  the  Secretary  of  State  was  not
    satisfied that he had established the period of  residence  claimed  in
    the UK, and because she was not  satisfied  that  there  would  be  any
    breach of the UK's obligations under Article  8  of  the  ECHR  by  his
    removal.

 3. The Appellant provided an ESOL certificate in order to demonstrate that
    he had sufficient knowledge of  the  English  language  and  sufficient
    knowledge about life in  the  UK  in  accordance  with  Appendix  KOLL.
    Accordingly the issue of his English language competence was not raised
    by the Respondent in the refusal letter.

 4. The judge formed the view, having  heard  the  Appellant  try  to  give
    evidence in English, that, whilst there was no persuasive evidence that
    the ESOL certificate was not genuine, having seen him  at  the  hearing
    and taken his testimony of how he entered the UK and his  unlawful  use
    of forged document and illegal work here, that he had  failed  to  show
    that the document was one on  which  any  evidential  weight  could  be
    attached.  He  said  that  the  ESOL  certificate  was  not  persuasive
    evidence to show that he had  sufficient  proficiency  in  the  English
    language.

 5.  The  judge  noted  that  the  Appellant  had  submitted  no   official
    documentation to establish that he had been in the  UK  since  1996  as
    claimed.  Three friends gave oral evidence on his behalf but they  were
    vague in their knowledge of when the Appellant arrived in the UK and he
    was not satisfied that he had been here for the length of time claimed.

 6. With respect to Article 8, he said that the Appellant had very  limited
    interaction with people here and had illegally entered the UK  to  work
    illegally. It was proportionate for  the  appeal  to  be  dismissed  on
    Article 8 grounds in addition to failing under the Rules.

The Grounds of Application

 7. The Appellant sought permission to  appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
    judge's reasoning was perverse.  The long residence Rule is effectively
    an amnesty for illegal entrants and to use the evasion  of  immigration
    control as a reason to dismiss  the  appeal  would  be  to  defeat  the
    purpose of the Rules (ZH Bangladesh [2009] EWCA Civ 8).

 8. The Appellant relies upon the ESOL certificate - the judge had given  a
    confusing account of why he had placed no evidential  weight  upon  the
    document. A credible certificate had been presented confirming the fact
    that the Appellant had achieved the  required  level  of  English.  The
    Secretary of State had accepted that the English language  requirements
    had been met and the judge accepted that the document was not forged.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Shaerf for the reasons stated
    in  the  grounds.   Judge  Shaerf  observed  that  notwithstanding  the
    permission the Appellant might wish to  consider  every  carefully  his
    position in the light of the dearth of evidence to support his claim.

Submissions

10. Mr Iqbal relied on his  grounds  and  essentially  submitted  that  the
    judge's error with respect to the English language certificate, and his
    emphasis on the Appellant's history  of  illegality,  had  tainted  his
    approach to the witness evidence which had been dealt with cursorily in
    the determination.

11. Mr Diwnycz stated that, according to the Presenting  Officer's  minute,
    she had raised the issue during the hearing. The judge was  at  liberty
    to assess whether  the  original  certificate  was  evidence  that  the
    Appellant could comply with the requirements of the Rule,  despite  the
    evidence of the tester.

Findings and Conclusions

12. It seems that the Presenting Officer did raise concerns about the  ESOL
    certificate at the hearing. At paragraph 43  of  the  determination  he
    said that there was no application for an adjournment due to the  issue
    having been raised.  Moreover the  judge  stated  that,  following  the
    hearing, the Respondent served documentation in  respect  of  the  ESOL
    certificate on the Tribunal and on  the  Appellant's  solicitors.   The
    judge said that he had heard nothing from the solicitors  and  did  not
    know whether they had seen the documentation. He decided that it  would
    not be fair to include it in his deliberations  and  therefore  set  it
    aside.

13. Accordingly it is clear that all parties were aware  that  this  was  a
    live issue in the appeal.

14. The judge  said  that  the  Appellant  elected  to  give  his  evidence
    throughout  in  Urdu  via  the  interpreter.   He  said  that  it   was
    immediately  apparent  to  him  that  he  was  wholly  reliant  on  the
    interpreter and had virtually  no  understanding  of  English  at  all.
    Following consultation with his solicitor the Appellant  said  that  he
    wished to give evidence in English where he could, and in Urdu via  the
    interpreter where he felt more comfortable.  He confirmed his  identity
    and date of birth in English and adopted his witness statement  as  his
    evidence-in-chief.  He also said that his father and siblings  were  in
    Pakistan and he remained in contact with them, in  English.  Thereafter
    made his replies in Urdu using the interpreter.

15. The judge concluded that there was no evidence which  established  that
    the ESOL certificate was not a genuine document.  However he said  that
    he could attach little evidential weight to it because

         "I have taken into account that  the  Appellant  would  be  nervous
         giving evidence at the hearing and that English is  not  his  first
         language but conclude, having seen him at the hearing and taken his
         testimony of how he entered the UK and his unlawful use  of  forged
         documents and illegal work in this country, that he has  failed  to
         show the document is one on which  any  evidential  weight  can  be
         attached."

16. The judge did not have evidence before him  from  ESOL  about  what  is
    expected  of  an  applicant  at  the  level  required  to  satisfy  the
    Immigration Rules.  He therefore had  no  benchmark  against  which  to
    measure the Appellant's struggle to give evidence in English.   Clearly
    the Appellant preferred to give his evidence in Urdu, no doubt  because
    it was very important to him to ensure that he was properly understood.
     The fact that he did so should not be used against him as a basis  for
    finding that the ESOL certificate could not be relied upon.  Still less
    could the judge rely upon his previous  use  of  forged  documents  and
    illegal work  in  the  UK.   The  judge  had  already  found  that  the
    certificate  was  not  a  forgery.  In  referring  to  the  Appellant's
    immigration  history  the  judge  took  into  account   an   irrelevant
    consideration and thereby erred in law.

17. That aspect of his decision is set aside.

18. Mr Iqbal's argument is that  that  error,  combined  with  the  judge's
    reliance upon the Appellant's illegal entry, tainted  his  approach  to
    the evidence of long residence in the UK.

19. The submission is not made out.  The  Appellant  bears  the  burden  of
    proof to establish the length of residence  claimed.   He  provided  no
    official documentation whatsoever.  The judge properly  considered  the
    oral evidence of the witnesses.

20. The first said that he first met the Appellant  on  7th  January  1996.
    The judge was wholly entitled to state that he could give no persuasive
    reason as to why he remembered the specific  date  after  such  a  long
    passage of time and on  that  basis  not  to  regard  the  evidence  as
    persuasive.

21. The second witness said that he had known the Appellant since March  or
    May 2000.  This application  was  made  in  July  2012.   The  date  of
    decision is 2013.  Mr Iqbal submitted that since this was a  in-country
    appeal evidence up to the date of hearing should be taken into account.
     That is correct.  However the issue before the judge was  whether  the
    Respondent had made a lawful decision at the time  that  it  was  made.
    That question can be decided by reference to  post  decision  evidence,
    but the Appellant can only succeed in this  appeal  if  he  establishes
    that the decision made was  not  in  accordance  with  the  Immigration
    Rules.  At the time the Appellant applied for indefinite leave  on  the
    basis of fourteen years, the second witness could only  confirm  twelve
    years' residence.  The judge was therefore wholly entitled to  discount
    it as evidence.

22. With respect to the third witness again the judge said that he gave  no
    persuasive testimony as to how he remembered  that  he  first  met  the
    Appellant in January 1997.  Furthermore the witness said that  he  went
    to Pakistan annually for periods of up to six weeks at a time and could
    not say that the Appellant was in the UK  during  those  periods.   His
    knowledge of the Appellant's personal circumstances was limited.

23. The judge was entitled to place little weight on the oral  evidence  of
    the witnesses and to comment on the fact that there was no  documentary
    evidence at all.  He properly considered what other evidence  had  been
    adduced to substantiate the claim.  He did not dismiss the  appeal,  as
    alleged, on the basis that the  Appellant  had  entered  illegally  and
    therefore his word could not be relied upon.

24. There is no basis for concluding that the mistake  in  respect  of  the
    ESOL certificate had any impact on his consideration of the evidence of
    long residence.

Decision

25. The appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


