

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43178/2013
                                                               IA/43179/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                                |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 17th December 2014                         |On 22nd January 2015         |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                 ASHRAF BIB
                                GHULAM RASHID
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Martin instructed by SKR Legal Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Miss C Johnstone Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


      1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Thorne promulgated on 22nd July 2014 following a  hearing  at
         Stoke, in which the Judge dismissed the appeals of  the  above  two
         Appellants who are citizens of Pakistan born on 28th February  1958
         and 1st January 1940. They are a wife and her husband respectively.


      2. On 4th September 2013 the Appellants applied to leave to remain  in
         the United Kingdom as they wish to stay with their son who they had
         come to visit. The  Respondent  refused  the  applications  as  the
         Appellants did not qualify under Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration
         Rules, for although  they  were  partners  neither  was  a  British
         citizen and they had entered on visit visas.  The Appellants  could
         not succeed under paragraph 276 ADE as they had not  been  resident
         in the United Kingdom for 20 years, were over the age of 18  years,
         and had not established that  they  had  lost  all  ties  to  their
         country of nationality.  It  was  also  said  that  no  exceptional
         circumstances  existed  sufficient  to   justify   the   grant   of
         discretionary leave to remain outside the Rules.


      3.  Judge  Thorne  considered  the  written  and  oral  evidence   and
         submissions and notes at paragraph 29 that it was not disputed that
         the Appellants could not succeed under Appendix FM,  and  therefore
         dismissed the appeals under the Immigration Rules.


      4. The Judge thereafter proceeded to consider the matter under Article
         8 ECHR and noted that the evidence indicated  the  First  Appellant
         had high blood pressure, diabetes and Alzheimer's dementia, and the
         Second Appellant suffered from  impaired  eyesight,  multiple-joint
         pains, back pain,  prostatic  symptoms  and  urinary  incontinence,
         although it was clear these symptoms existed before they  travelled
         to the United Kingdom and that they had received treatment for  the
         same in Pakistan.


      5. It was found the evidence indicates they still own the family  home
         in Pakistan and that their son was willing and able to provide them
         with all the financial support they needed and would be happy to do
         so "for the rest of their days". It was found there was  inadequate
         evidence to establish they could not pay for medical help, physical
         care in the home, or for his parents to enter a residential home in
         Pakistan if required [34].


      6.  The  Judge  rejected  the  evidence  regarding  the   ability   or
         reliability of care received from family in Pakistan or that  which
         could be expected in the future as lacking  credibility  which  was
         found to be "vague and contradictory" [35].  It was found there was
         inadequate evidence to establish  that  the  Appellants  would  not
         receive adequate medical help or physical care in the home or entry
         into a residential care home in Pakistan and there  was  inadequate
         evidence to establish that it is unreasonable  to  expect  them  to
         return and make an appropriate application  under  the  Immigration
         Rules if  they  wished  to  settle  in  the  United  Kingdom,  from
         Pakistan. The Judge found that as the Appellants  had  entered  the
         United Kingdom as visitors neither could claim to have a legitimate
         expectation that they would be permitted to remain [37] and it  was
         found that there was inadequate evidence that the  Appellants  will
         be caused undue hardship by being removed to  Pakistan.  Whilst  it
         may be the family's choice that the Appellants remain in the United
         Kingdom that does not engage the U.K.'s obligations under the  ECHR
         and does not constitute compelling circumstances  not  sufficiently
         recognised under the Immigration Rules.


      7. The Judge concluded that if Article 8 ECHR was being considered the
         decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  had  been  shown   to   be
         proportionate.


      8. This decision is challenged on grounds alleging:


         a.   That it is the Appellants case they will  be  unable  to  look
             after themselves if returned to Pakistan due to  their  severe
             medical problems.


         b.   The Judge failed to  give  the  evidence  of  Tajammal  Rashid
             sufficient prominence. It is submitted  the  evidence  gave  a
             picture of a severely housebound couple who needed  assistance
             in the majority of their usual daily activities necessary  for
             life.


         c.   The evidence before the Judge  was  that  one  of  two  people
             looked after the Appellants in Pakistan, one was a son and the
             other was the niece. The only evidence regarding the niece was
             from the Appellants' and family that she had moved away. It is
             said there was no reasonable grounds for disbelieving the  son
             was not in Pakistan as he gave evidence before  the  Tribunal.
             The grounds allege the Judge erred in law in the findings made
             in paragraph 35 regarding the level of care they could  expect
             to receive in Pakistan and it is submitted failed to take into
             account the absence  of  family  members  to  look  after  the
             Appellants on a day-to-day basis.


         d.   It was accepted some of their medical  conditions  existed  in
             Pakistan but said the evidence that they all existed and  were
             of similar severity was not clear from  the  medical  evidence
             before the Judge.


         e.   The Judge erred in believing the Appellants had landed in  the
             UK in March 2013, had returned to Pakistan,  and  subsequently
             looked after themselves as on arrival on  24th  November  2012
             they were refused entry but given temporary  admission  and  a
             right of appeal, had a court  hearing  before  the  First-tier
             Tribunal at Stoke on 12th February 2013  and  were  thereafter
             granted discretionary leave for six months  which  expired  in
             late September 2013.  It is stared that at no  point  did  the
             Appellants leave the United Kingdom.


         f.   The grounds submit that the position of the Appellants is such
             that they have good grounds for being granted leave to  remain
             outside the Rules because (a) they  suffer  a  combination  of
             medical problems requiring medication and day and  night  care
             to maintain a basic standard of living and (b)  although  some
             of the conditions may have existed in Pakistan there was clear
             evidence that the family carers had now moved  away  and  were
             predominantly in the UK.



Discussion


      9. Mr  Martin's  submissions  referred  to  a  previous  determination
         arising from the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  in  Stoke
         but accepted that a copy had not been provided to Judge Thorne.  As
         such the  Judge  cannot  be  criticised  for  not  considering  the
         previous findings of the tribunal or for  being  unaware  that  the
         Appellants had not returned to Pakistan.


     10. It was accepted by Mr Martin that time per se does not  entitle  an
         individual to succeed under Article 8 even if the  Appellants  have
         been in the United Kingdom since 2012.


     11. I find there is no arguable material  error  in  the  determination
         that justifies the decision being set aside.  Article  8  does  not
         give individuals the right to choose the country in which they wish
         to live in and the family and private life  relied  upon  has  been
         created  or  enjoyed  at  a  time  when  there  was  no  legitimate
         expectation that the Appellants will be granted leave to remain.


     12. The existence of medical conditions, so  far  as  set  out  in  the
         available evidence, was adequately  considered  by  the  Judge  and
         these  are  not  conditions  brought  on  by  the  United   Kingdom
         government. The grounds do  not  challenge  the  finding  that  the
         Appellants received treatment for their conditions in Pakistan  and
         it has not been shown that such treatment or assistance as  may  be
         required is not available now or  will  not  be  available  in  the
         future. There is no obligation upon the UK  government  to  provide
         medical treatment for the world especially as the cost of doing  so
         to meet  the  various  conditions  the  Appellants  have  could  be
         considerable for a cash strapped NHS.


     13. The assertion the Judge misled himself regarding  the  availability
         of support in Pakistan as the niece and a  son  who  provided  such
         care are no longer available to give  such  care  has  no  arguable
         merit in relation to proving material legal error.  The finding  by
         the Judge in paragraph 36 is that there was inadequate evidence  to
         establish that the Appellants would not  receive  adequate  medical
         help, physical care in the home or entry into  a  residential  care
         home in Pakistan. The Appellants  son  indicated  he  will  provide
         financial support for them and it was not shown that  such  support
         will not enable  them  to  access  the  care  they  require,  on  a
         residential basis if required, or to employ a carer to help them in
         their home environment.  They still possess the property  in  which
         they lived prior to coming to the United Kingdom which has not been
         shown to be unsuitable accommodation. The  evidence  regarding  the
         lack  of  care  available  in  Pakistan  was  also  found  to  lack
         credibility.


     14. It has not been established that there will be any impact upon  the
         Appellants physical and/or moral  integrity  sufficient  to  breach
         Article 8 and although they wish to remain in  the  United  Kingdom
         with family they have no right to do so  without  lawful  leave  to
         settle which has been refused. The Judge comments upon  an  ability
         to return and make an application and that is  an  option  open  to
         them if the requirements of the Immigration Rules can  be  met.  In
         relation  to  this  determination  the  Judge  considered  all  the
         available evidence with the required degree of anxious scrutiny and
         has given adequate reasons for findings made. The weight  given  to
         the evidence was therefore a matter  for  the  Judge.  Any  factual
         error regarding time in the United Kingdom based upon  the  failure
         of  the  Appellants  to  provide  the  Judge  with   the   previous
         determination has not been shown to be material. Finding  that  the
         decision  was  proportionate  when  weighing  the  rights  of   the
         Appellants against the legitimate aim relied upon by the  Secretary
         of State is within the range was findings the Judge was entitled to
         make on the evidence and, on the facts,  appears  to  be  the  only
         realistic option open to the First-tier Tribunal.  The  purpose  of
         Article 8 is not to permit a  person  to  by-pass  the  Immigration
         Rules. It is to prevent unwarranted interference by  the  State  in
         family and private life rights  which  exist.   In  this  case  any
         interference was found  to  be  justified  as  being  proportionate
         (Article 8(2)).  Mere disagreement with the outcome or  the  desire
         for a more favourable decision does not establish arguable material
         legal error.


Decision

     15. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


    Anonymity.


     16. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
         45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
         2005.


         I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 21st January 2015

