
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  IA/43845/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 18th November 2014                |On 19th November 2014                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Mrs Georgina Obengwaa
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER not MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     The Appellant and Sponsor in person
For the Respondent:    Mr M Shilliday (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Secretary of State   in relation to a Determination of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Scott-Baker) who, in  a  determination  promulgated  on
    September 2014 remitted the appeal to the  Secretary  of  State  for  a
    decision  to  be  made  taking  into  account  the  findings   in   her
    determination.

 2. Mrs Obengwaa (who I shall call henceforth the  applicant)  was,  before
    the First-tier Tribunal and until the date of the  hearing  before  me,
    represented by Malik and Khan, Solicitors.  10  minutes  prior  to  the
    start of the hearing I was given a fax from Malik and  Khan  explaining
    that they would not be representing the applicant at  the  hearing  and
    that she and her husband had opted to attend the hearing in  person  to
    represent themselves. The same letter indicated that the applicant  and
    her partner required a Twi interpreter. The  Upper  Tribunal  sent  out
    directions which are standard in such cases and the contents  of  which
    will be well known to the solicitors. Those clearly  indicate  that  no
    interpreter will be booked by the Upper Tribunal unless  the  applicant
    is unrepresented and requests an interpreter no less than 7 days before
    the hearing. It is far too late, 10 minutes before to expect one to  be
    provided.


 3. The  applicant,  a  Ghanaian  national,  had  made  application  for  a
    residence card as confirmation of a right of residence  under  the  EEA
    Regulations on the basis of her marriage to a German national.

 4. The Secretary of State refused the application on the basis that it was
    a marriage of convenience and in the alternative that the  couple  were
    not in a durable relationship.

 5. In the determination  Judge  Scott-Baker  notes  that  the  couple  had
    produced a customary marriage certificate indicating that the applicant
    had been married in Ghana and the certificate suggested  both  she  and
    her husband had been present at the ceremony. As the Judge pointed  out
    this was quite simply not possible because  both  their  passports  had
    been produced and neither contained corresponding entry stamps.


 6. The Judge went on to find for reasons which have not  been  challenged,
    at paragraph 63 that the marriage was  not  valid,  and  that  a  proxy
    marriage was not recognised in Germany.

 7. The Judge then pointed out that the Secretary of State had gone  on  to
    consider, before refusing the application, whether the couple were in a
    durable relationship and concluded  that  they  were  not.  The  Judge,
    having heard evidence came to the conclusion at paragraph  68  to  find
    that although the couple were in a relationship there was  insufficient
    evidence to satisfy her that it was a durable relationship.

 8. None of those findings have been  challenged  and  there  is  no  cross
    appeal on the Appellant's behalf. Thus far there is no error of law  on
    the part of the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. The Judge  however,  having  reached  this  conclusion  then  found  at
    paragraph 69 that the Secretary of State had not established  that  the
    marriage was a sham marriage or a marriage of convenience and  remitted
    it on that basis. This, with respect , makes no sense. If there was  no
    marriage then it can neither be sham nor a matter  of  convenience.  On
    that basis therefore and in so far as the First-tier  Tribunal  allowed
    the appeal and remitted it to the Respondent for another decision I set
    it aside. However, I have no  reason  to  set  aside  the  unchallenged
    findings made by the Judge up to and including paragraph 68 and on  the
    basis of those findings the appeal cannot succeed.  The  applicant  has
    not shown any basis upon which she is entitled to a residence  card  as
    either the family member or extended family member of a  qualified  EEA
    national. Furthermore, in light of the Judge's findings, Article  8  is
    not engaged. This appeal cannot possibly succeed.

10. The applicant told me that she spoke no English but her husband who was
    present in court with her did understand English. I  explained  to  him
    the nature of the error of law made by Judge  Scott-Baker  and  I  also
    explained to him that on the basis of Judge Scott-Baker's findings  the
    appeal was not winnable and it was  for  that  reason  I  proceeded  to
    remake the decision and dismissed the  appeal.  He  confirmed  that  he
    understood.


11. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed such that  the  applicant's
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State  to  refuse  to
    issue her with a residence card is dismissed.





Signed                              Date 18th November 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
