
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43357/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |   Decision & Reasons          |
|                                             |Promulgated                    |
|On 6 November 2015                           |   On 18 November 2015         |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                              Mr Said Annewetey
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Ms Emma Savage, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Metzer (Judge Metzer) promulgated on  16  June  2015  in
    which he dismissed the Appellant's appeal.  That  appeal  was  in  turn
    against the decision of the  Respondent,  dated  10  October  2014,  to
    remove him from the United Kingdom by way of directions  under  section
    10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

 2.  The  Appellant  had  arrived  in  this  country  in  August  of  2003.
    Thereafter he had leave to remain in the first instance  as  a  student
    and then as a Tier 1 Migrant with certain gaps in that leave  occurring
    during the relevant period.  Three unsuccessful attempts for  residence
    cards under the EEA Regulations had been made by the Appellant.  On  23
    April 2014 he made a human rights application to the Respondent.   This
    was then refused.  The  Respondent  considered  the  application  under
    paragraph 276ADE of the Rules, Appendix FM to the Rules and in addition
    she found that there were no compelling circumstances.

Judge Metzer's decision

 3. The Appellant  then  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   He  was
    unrepresented before Judge Metzer and appears unrepresented  before  me
    today.  Judge Metzer accepted that the Appellant was in a  longstanding
    relationship with a  Polish  national,  TK,  despite  some  periods  of
    separation.  He found that the Appellant and TK had a daughter, M,  who
    was born on 26 October 2008.  He accepted that there  was  family  life
    between the Appellant, TK and M for the purposes of Article 8.   It  is
    stated in Judge Metzer's decision that the Appellant accepted that  his
    case could not  succeed  under  the  Rules  themselves.   Judge  Metzer
    therefore considered the case outside of the Rules.

 4. Judge Metzer found that M was not a British citizen and had  not  lived
    continuously in the United Kingdom for a period of seven years or more.
     He found that the Appellant had relatives in Ghana and was  a  healthy
    individual.  The judge concluded that there were not  very  significant
    obstacles to the Appellant, TK and M going to live in either Poland  or
    Ghana.  Alternatively the Appellant could go to Ghana alone and  family
    life could be maintained  by  visits.   Finally,  and  in  the  further
    alternative,  the  Appellant  could  return  to  Ghana  and   make   an
    application for entry clearance to return to the United Kingdom.

The grounds of appeal

 5. The Appellant drafted his own grounds of appeal citing  Section  55  of
    the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

 6. First-tier Tribunal Judge Astle granted permission by a decision  of  8
    September 2015.  She cited the best interests of M as  being  the  core
    issue.

The hearing before me

 7. At the hearing before me the Appellant acknowledged  that  the  limited
    documentary evidence that I have on file was, together with photographs
    in his possession, the only evidence produced before Judge Metzer.   He
    told me that at that time TK was a student but was in fact  on  a  work
    placement as part of her university degree course.  She was  living  up
    in Leeds with her mother whilst the Appellant  was  living  in  London.
    They would visit each other regularly.  At the time M was in Year 1  of
    her primary school education.  He confirmed that M was healthy.

 8. For the Respondent Ms Savage submitted that there was no error in Judge
    Metzer's decision in that he took all relevant  matters  into  account,
    albeit that he did not expressly state the term "best  interests".   In
    any event she submitted that if there an error it was immaterial  given
    the lack of evidence before Judge Metzer on M's circumstances.

 9. I raised the possibility that the Appellant may have  had  a  right  to
    reside in the United Kingdom under the  2006  EEA  Regulations  on  the
    basis of a durable relationship with TK.  I accept Ms Savage's response
    that this had not been raised before Judge Metzer  and  of  course  the
    application made to the Respondent was not an EEA application  but  one
    based upon Article 8 only.

10. Having considered the evidence, the submissions  made  to  me  and  the
    decision of Judge Metzer, I find that there are no material  errors  of
    law in his decision.  Although his findings at  paragraphs  11  and  12
    could perhaps have been expressed more clearly, I find that he did take
    into account relevant matters relating to M and her  position  in  this
    country.  These were expressed perhaps albeit briefly  but  nonetheless
    in a sustainable way.  He had information before him and in my view was
    aware of her nationality (that being Polish) and the time that she  had
    lived in the United Kingdom.

11. If I am wrong about that and there  was  an  error  in  Judge  Metzer's
    determination I would nonetheless find  that  it  was  not  a  material
    error.  This is because of the distinct lack  of  evidence  before  him
    relating to M's circumstances in this country.  I do not criticise  the
    Appellant for this but it is just a fact: there was nothing in  respect
    of social ties beyond her school life; no evidence of any  ill  health;
    and no evidence from her school and no suggestion in  fact  that  there
    were any educational difficulties.

12. There were no other circumstances, or at least there  was  no  evidence
    before Judge Metzer  of  any  circumstances,  that  could  properly  be
    described as compelling in respect of this case succeeding  outside  of
    the Immigration Rules.

13. In my view Judge  Metzer  did  not  err  in  failing  to  consider  the
    possibility of an EEA dimension to this appeal, the matter never having
    been raised at any stage, and  although  there  was  some  evidence  to
    suggest that such an issue may be relevant his failure to  address  the
    point substantively was not a material error in all the  circumstances.



14. Therefore the decision of Judge Metzer shall stand and the  Appellant's
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal must be dismissed.

15. I note that on the face of it at least the Appellant may be said to  be
    in a durable relationship with TK, a Polish national who  may  possibly
    be a qualified person under  the  2006  Regulations.   It  is  possible
    therefore for the Appellant to make a specific EEA application  to  the
    Respondent providing relevant information relying  on  the  finding  by
    Judge Metzer that there is a family life between him  and  TK  and  his
    child M, and providing relevant evidence as to TK's  current  situation
    as a student in this country.  He would of course be  advised  that  he
    would need to satisfy the various requirements of the EEA  Regulations,
    in particular TK's situation as a student, and he would do well to look
    at the Regulations himself or perhaps to  take  legal  advice  on  this
    particular issue.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The Appellant's appeal is dismissed  and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal stands.



No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date: 16 November 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                                  Date: 16 November 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


