
[pic]
IAC-PE-AW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43644/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 22nd May 2015                         |On 15th June 2015                   |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                      mr Stanley Joshua Owuraku kudolo
                          (ANONYMITY not retained)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Otchie of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Kandola


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 3rd  July  1968  is  a  citizen  of  Ghana.   The
    Appellant who was present was represented by Mr Otchie of Counsel.  The
    Respondent was represented by  Mr  Kandola  a  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer.



Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had entered the United Kingdom on 18th December 2001 as a
    visitor and remained unlawfully  thereafter.   He  was  encountered  by
    immigration officials on 29th September 2013 and served with  a  notice
    of his liability for removal.  On 2nd October 2013 he applied for leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom under Article  8  of  the  ECHR.   That
    application was refused by the Respondent on  8th  October  2013.   The
    Appellant had appealed that decision and his appeal was heard by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Mailer sitting at Richmond on 15th September  2014.
    The  judge  had  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  under  both   the
    Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.   Permission  to  appeal
    was sought and permission granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Simpson
    on 2nd April 2015.  It was said that it was surprising that  the  judge
    did not appear to have made any findings as to whether the relationship
    between a British national and the Appellant was genuine and subsisting
    and whether it amounted to a durable relationship.  It  was  said  that
    disclosed an arguable error.  Directions were issued for the matter  to
    be heard by the Upper Tribunal firstly to decide whether  an  error  of
    law had been made or not and the matter comes before me  in  accordance
    with those directions.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellant

 3. It was firstly said that the Chikwamba principle applied in  this  case
    and the judge had failed to deal with that  matter.   Secondly  it  was
    said that the Appellant had made application under EX.1 and  there  are
    had been no finding by the judge in terms of  insurmountable  obstacles
    or whether this was a durable relationship.

Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent

 4. It was firstly submitted that Chikwamba could  no  longer  survive  the
    2014 Act in particular given the appalling immigration history of  this
    Appellant.  It was submitted the judge had looked at  the  question  of
    insurmountable obstacles.

 5. At the conclusion I reserved my decision to  consider  the  submissions
    made.  I now provide that decision with my reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 6. The Appellant had entered the United Kingdom as a visitor in  2001  and
    had remained thereafter unlawfully.  He came to  light  when  found  by
    immigration officials in September 2013 and only then made  application
    to remain under Article 8 of the ECHR.

 7. The judge had provided in  considerable  detail  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant at paragraphs 16 to 61.  He was  clearly  aware  of  all  the
    salient features in this case.  He had also at paragraphs 4 to  15  set
    out in detail the Respondent's position within the refusal  letter  and
    at paragraphs 63 to 85 again provided in detail the submissions made on
    behalf of both parties.

 8. The judge had looked at the case briefly under  the  Immigration  Rules
    and had confined that examination to paragraph  95  when  he  had  said
    "Even assuming that the provisions of EX.1 apply I do not find for  the
    reasons set out below in  the  Article  8  assessment  that  there  are
    insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing with  Miss  Douglas-
    Squire in Ghana".  Thereafter at paragraphs 96 to 133 he dealt with the
    position  under  Article  8.   That  is  hardly  surprising  given  the
    Appellant's case was brought under Article 8 of the ECHR.

 9. Permission granting appeal expresses surprise that the  judge  did  not
    make findings as to whether the Appellant and Miss Douglas-Squire  were
    in a durable relationship.  Whilst it is true the judge  does  not  say
    explicitly one  way  or  the  other  whether  they  are  in  a  durable
    relationship, a proper and careful reading of the  determination  as  a
    whole  plainly  demonstrated  that  the  judge  accepted  the  evidence
    provided by the Appellant and his partner  as  to  their  relationship,
    found that they  were  in  a  durable  relationship  and  much  of  his
    consideration under Article 8 of the ECHR was predicated on  the  basis
    that  the  Appellant  could  make  application  from  Ghana  for  entry
    clearance to the UK to continue that relationship.

10. Paragraph 4 of the Respondent's letter opposing the appeal  dated  16th
    April 2015, acknowledged that a reading of the determination as a whole
    revealed that family life was accepted as being genuine and subsisting.
     I agree with that proper concession.

11. On the basis of the judge's findings that there was  indeed  a  genuine
    and subsisting durable relationship it was necessary for him to firstly
    consider whether the Appellant fell within the terms of the Immigration
    Rules prior to seeing whether it was necessary to  consider  Article  8
    outside of the Rules.

12. The Respondent had considered this aspect of the  Appellant's  case  at
    paragraph 6 of the refusal letter.   The  Respondent  had  referred  to
    examining R-LTRP, S-LTR, E-LTRP and D-LTRP.  The  Respondent  concluded
    the Appellant failed to meet:

         R-LTRP.1.1(d) because he failed in turn to meet:

         (i)  E-LTRP.2.1 and

         (ii) E-LTRP.2.2.

13. That was because the  Appellant  was  unlawfully  in  the  UK,  was  an
    immigration offender and had been served with a notice under IS151A for
    removal as an overstayer.

14. Those findings that the Appellant  did  not  meet  certain  eligibility
    requirements were  not  challenged.   In  looking  at  paragraph  EX.1,
    EX.1(a) did not apply as there were no children in this case.  In terms
    of EX.1(b) that is not a standalone paragraph.   At  paragraph  95  the
    judge made no definitive finding on whether EX.1 applied but put it  in
    terms of "even assuming EX.1 applies".  To fall for consideration under
    EX.1 the Appellant must meet the requirements of  R-LTRP.1.1(d).   That
    means:

      i) He must not fall for refusal under S-LTR.

     ii) He meets the requirements of E-LTRP.1.2 to 1.12 and E-LTRP.2.1 and

    iii) Paragraph EX.1 applies.

15. In this case the Appellant did not meet the requirements of  E-LTRP.2.1
    and accordingly EX.1(b) did not apply to the Appellant's case.  Had  it
    done so it could be said the judge  had  erred  in  his  assessment  of
    EX.1(b) in that he had  only  looked  at  insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family life continuing with a partner outside of the UK on a  temporary
    basis of perhaps three months or so.  It would seem logical  that  when
    looking at indefinite leave to remain under  the  Immigration  Rules  a
    reference in EX.1(b) to insurmountable obstacles to the continuation of
    family life would suggest that in contemplation  is  the  permanent  or
    long-term removal of the applicant out of the UK and whether that would
    present insurmountable obstacles.

16. The judge had considered Article 8 of the ECHR outside  of  the  Rules.
    He had concluded  that  it  was  not  disproportionate  to  remove  the
    Appellant because essentially the Appellant could return  to  Ghana  to
    make an application which would take perhaps two to  three  months  and
    Miss Douglas-Squire could either accompany him for that  period  of  if
    she remained in the UK the period of separation  was  not  significant.
    He gave clear and detailed reasons for those conclusions.

17.  It  is  said  his  decision  essentially  breaches  the  principle  in
    Chikwamba.  That case was  a  very  fact  specific  case  although  the
    principle  stated  therein  is   adopted   with   frequency   in   many
    applications.  The case of Thakral [2015] UKUT  00096  noted  that  the
    Chikwamba principal is only engaged if in the terms of paragraph  30(a)
    of Hyatt the Respondent has refused the application in question on  the
    procedural ground that the policy requires that  the  applicant  should
    have made the application from his home State.

18. Paragraph 30(a) of Hyatt states:

         "Where an applicant  who  does  not  have  lawful  entry  clearance
         pursues an Article 8  claim,  a  dismissal  of  the  claim  on  the
         procedural ground that  the  policy  requires  that  the  applicant
         should have made the application from his home State may  (but  not
         necessarily will) constitute a disruption of family or private life
         sufficient to engage Article  8  particularly  where  children  are
         adversely affected."

19. Further paragraph 30(b) states:

         "Where  Article  8  is  engaged  it  will  be  a   disproportionate
         interference with family or private life to enforce such  a  policy
         unless there is a sensible reason for so doing."

20. Paragraph 30(c) stated inter alia:

         "Whether it is sensible to enforce that policy will necessarily  be
         fact sensitive."

21. The Respondent had not refused the Appellant's case on  policy  grounds
    only.  The Respondent had considered in  detail  the  Appellant's  case
    within the Immigration Rules and outside of the Rules under  Article  8
    of the ECHR and had provided substantial reasons for refusal that  were
    not connected to policy.  The Respondent's decision therefore  did  not
    fall within the Chikwamba principle (see paragraph 11 Thakral [2015]).

22. In terms of the  judge's  decision  it  could  be  argued  that  having
    accepted a durable relationship existed and other  features  explicitly
    or implicitly accepted his decision that removal should take place  was
    in terms of maintenance of policy only and therefore  could  bring  the
    case within the Chikwamba principle.  Even if  that  was  the  position
    this judge provided an informed and balanced exposition of  matters  at
    paragraphs 111 to 132.  He had also taken account in his Article 8 ECHR
    assessment Section 117B of the 2002 Act (which he was bound to so  do).
    That statutory consideration postdates the decision in  both  Chikwamba
    and Thakral.

23. As  indicated  above  Chikwamba  itself  was  very  fact  specific  and
    sensitive.  Hyatt [2012] is not a proposition for stating that it would
    always be disproportionate to remove where policy  alone  applies.   It
    refers to the presence of  "sensible  reasons"  and  "necessarily  fact
    sensitive".  That case is referred to and adopted in Thakral [2015].

24. It cannot be said that the judge's assessment of Article 8 of the  ECHR
    even assuming a  Chikwamba  principle  applied  because  of  his  other
    positive  findings  meant  that  his  findings  and  conclusions   were
    unreasonable or not open to him.  There were no  children  involved  in
    this case.  He had  given  careful  and  proper  consideration  to  all
    material facts and was entitled to reach the conclusion that he did and
    such conclusion could not be said to either disclose material errors of
    law or be outwith the bounds of reasonableness.

Decision

25. There was no material error of law made by the judge in this case and I
    uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

26. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever


