
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43195/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th October 2018                 |On 25th October 2018                 |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                          Adebunmi iretiola onanuga
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Okunowo, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appealed against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Oliver promulgated on 9 May 2017, in which the Appellant's appeal
    against the decision to refuse her application  for  an  EEA  Residence
    Card as the family member of an EEA national exercising  treaty  rights
    in the United Kingdom dated 14 November 2014 was dismissed.

 2. I found an error of law in Judge Oliver's decision promulgated on 9 May
    2017 following the first hearing of this appeal on 6 August 2018.   The
    background to this appeal is set out  in  the  error  of  law  decision
    contained in the annex  and  will  not  be  repeated  here  save  where
    reference to the background facts is needed.  This decision is the  re-
    making of the appeal.

The appeal

Applicable law

 3. Pursuant to Regulation 17 of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 (the "EEA Regulations"), an extended family member  of
    an EEA national exercising treaty rights  in  the  United  Kingdom,  as
    defined in Regulation 8 of the same, may be  issued  with  a  Residence
    Card.

 4. Regulation 8 of the  EEA  Regulations  provides  for  'extended  family
    members' as follows:

    "(1)     In these Regulations 'extended family member' means  a  person
         who is not a family member of  an  EEA  national  under  regulation
         7(1)(a), (b) or (c) and who satisfies the conditions  in  paragraph
         (2), (3), (4) or (5).


    ...


    (5)  A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if  the  person
         is the partner of an EEA national (other than a civil partner)  and
         can  prove  to  the  decision  maker  that  he  is  in  a   durable
         relationship with the EEA national."


Explanation for refusal

 5.  In  the  decision  letter  dated  14  November  2014,  the  Respondent
    considered the Appellant's claim  to  be  in  a  relationship  with  an
    Italian national (the "Sponsor") exercising treaty rights in the United
    Kingdom.  The Respondent  referred  to  an  unannounced  visit  to  the
    Appellant's home address where it was noted that person(s) were present
    in the premises  but  refused  to  open  to  the  door  to  immigration
    officers.  The Respondent considered that either the  address  provided
    was not the Appellant's address, or there was a refusal to open to  the
    door to immigration officers.

 6. Further to the attempted visit, the Respondent  invited  the  Appellant
    and the Sponsor to a marriage interview  (although  the  Appellant  has
    never claimed  to  be  married)  on  4  November  2014  to  verify  the
    authenticity of the relationship.  The Respondent considered that there
    was a  litany  of  discrepancies  between  the  answers  given  by  the
    Appellant and the Sponsor and  a  view  taken  as  a  result  that  the
    relationship was solely for the purpose of facilitating the Appellant's
    stay in the United Kingdom.  After the interview, the Sponsor  admitted
    to immigration officers that the relationship was not  genuine  and  it
    was solely for immigration purposes to help a friend.  On  this  basis,
    the application was refused as the relationship  was  found  to  be  an
    unmarried relationship of convenience  for  the  sole  purpose  of  the
    Appellant remaining in the United Kingdom.



The Appeal

 7. The Appellant appeals essentially on the basis that she is in a genuine
    and subsisting relationship with the Sponsor.

The Written Statements

 8. In her written statement which was signed but  undated,  the  Appellant
    set out her immigration history and that she met the  Sponsor  in  late
    2009 or early 2010 and started their relationship  towards  the  second
    half of 2010.  The couple have cohabited since 2011.

 9. The Appellant takes issue with the Respondent's repeated references  to
    marriage and a sham marriage in the refusal letter when she  has  never
    claimed to be married, only to be in a relationship.

10. As to the interview on 4  November  2014,  the  Appellant  states  that
    towards the end of her own interview, the  interviewer  left  and  came
    back within 2  minutes  with  immigration  officers  who  arrested  and
    detained her for being involved in a sham marriage, which  was  outside
    the remit of the interview.  Whilst in  detention,  the  Appellant  was
    informed that the Sponsor had confessed it was a sham marriage which is
    totally untrue.  The Sponsor could not have said this because there was
    no marriage and because their relationship was genuine.

11. The interview record was not signed by the Appellant nor given  to  her
    at the time.  It has now been served but noted that it was  not  signed
    by the interviewing officer.  The Appellant states  that  most  of  the
    answers given were similar and the interview supports the existence  of
    the relationship.  Particular  reference  is  made  to  the  answer  to
    question 5 being incorrect as to when the relationship started.

12. The Appellant states that  following  the  interview,  her  arrest  and
    detention, the couple were exposed to ferocious hostility  from  family
    members who did not  approve  of  their  same  sex  relationship.   The
    Sponsor's mother threatened to report the  Appellant  to  the  Nigerian
    authorities  and  the  Appellant's  family,  including  her   brothers,
    deserted her.  The exposure of their relationship also did not go  down
    well with the Church that they have since left.

13. The Appellant and the Sponsor are now forced to meet  secretly  because
    of the reaction to their relationship and this is why  the  Sponsor  is
    not attending the appeal hearing.

The Oral Evidence

14. The Appellant attended the oral hearing, adopted her written  statement
    and gave oral evidence in English.  She stated that she  last  saw  her
    partner some days ago and although she was aware of the appeal hearing,
    she could not be involved because her mother would not  let  her.   The
    Sponsor's mother does not approve of the relationship and threatened to
    report the Appellant to the Nigerian authorities  if  the  relationship
    continued or the Sponsor supported the appeal.

15. The Appellant maintained that she  was  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with the Sponsor who was currently working  in  Greggs  in
    Camden.

16. In cross-examination, the Appellant stated that the Sponsor  no  longer
    lives with her, she has moved back with her parents to care  for  them.
    They lived together until about a year and a half ago,  although  after
    the interview their cohabitation was on and off because of  the  family
    difficulties and that the Sponsor could not admit she was staying  with
    the Appellant.

17. The Sponsor's mother was said not to be  coping  with  discovering  her
    daughter's sexuality in addition to her son being gay.  The Sponsor was
    always honest and her mother checks things so it would not be  possible
    for the Sponsor to support the Appellant in this appeal because of  her
    mother whose needs come first.

18. The Appellant was asked why there was no evidence of  the  relationship
    said to have been existing for 8 years or any evidence of cohabitation.
     She stated that she had taken photos, bills and so on to her  marriage
    interview but not provided them to the Tribunal on an  assumption  that
    everything would be on file.

19. With reference to the answers to question 13 of the interview in  2014,
    whereby it was recorded that both the Appellant and Sponsor stated that
    the Sponsor's parents knew that  they  were  a  couple;  the  Appellant
    stated that that was incorrect and they did not know what the  lady  in
    interview was  typing  but  thought  just  recorded  what  she  wanted.
    Numerous errors in the interview were claimed  but  the  Appellant  had
    only addressed the mistakes raised by the Home Office.

20. The Appellant had not asked her  brother  or  any  friends  to  make  a
    statement or come to the Tribunal to  support  her  claim  because  she
    didn't know this was needed.

Closing submissions

21. In closing on behalf of  the  Respondent,  Mr  Wilding  relied  on  the
    reasons  for  refusal  letter  and  made  submissions  on  the  current
    circumstances.   It  was  submitted  that  the  burden  of   proof   of
    establishing a durable relationship with an EEA  national  was  on  the
    Appellant and she had failed to provide  any  credible  evidence  of  a
    relationship at all.  In these circumstances  the  Respondent  did  not
    need to go further and show that the relationship was a sham.

22. The Respondent relies on the interview record which contained  a  large
    number of differences in the answers given by  the  Appellant  and  the
    Sponsor as well as the Sponsor's confession that this was not a genuine
    relationship.  In any event, there is  no  evidence  at  all  from  the
    Sponsor as to the relationship or to dispute the confession made to the
    Respondent.  The lack of evidence is all the more  peculiar  given  the
    claimed length of relationship  and  time  since  the  interview.   The
    Appellant's statement and evidence  gave  very  little  detail  of  the
    relationship.

23. The reason given by the Appellant for the  lack  of  support  from  the
    Sponsor for her appeal is inconsistent with both of  their  answers  in
    interview  in  2014  that  the  Sponsor's   parents   knew   of   their
    relationship.  The Appellant had not previously challenged the accuracy
    of the transcript on this point and only did so when asked about it  in
    cross-examination.

24. There was also a striking absence of  any  other  evidence  as  to  the
    relationship, from the Appellant's brother whom the  couple  previously
    lived with or from any friends.  The only documentary evidence is  that
    submitted with the initial application, none  of  which  addresses  the
    interview or confession and none post-dates 2014.  In  any  event  that
    evidence did not at the time, nor does it now corroborate the existence
    of a relationship.

25. Overall it was submitted that the Appellant was not credible and  there
    was nothing to support the claim of a  relationship  at  all  with  the
    Sponsor.  Further, there is no evidence that the Sponsor is a qualified
    person exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom.

26. On behalf of the Appellant, it was accepted that there was a paucity of
    evidence as to the claimed relationship but I was invited to  find  the
    Appellant to be a credible witness who had given an explanation  as  to
    why up to date evidence and evidence from  the  Sponsor  could  not  be
    obtained for this hearing.  Reliance was placed on mistakes made by the
    Respondent (eg references to a marriage when there  as  none)  and  the
    lack of detailed evidence or a signed confession from the  Sponsor  and
    insufficient evidence of the unannounced home visit by the Respondent.

Findings and reasons

 1. There is no legitimate basis upon which the Appellant's appeal could be
    allowed on the facts and evidence before this Tribunal.   There  is  an
    almost complete lack of evidence of the existence of  any  relationship
    at all with the Sponsor as claimed; nothing that post-dates 2014 and in
    any event no evidence at all that the Sponsor is  even  in  the  United
    Kingdom at present, let alone exercising treaty rights here.

 2. The Appellant's explanation for the lack of any evidence  at  all  from
    her  Sponsor,  either  directly  (through  any  written  statement   or
    attendance at the  hearing)  or  indirectly  (through  any  documentary
    evidence in relation to her or the relationship) is wholly  incredible,
    particularly taking into account  the  lack  of  any  other  supporting
    evidence.  The explanation given contained a number of inconsistencies.



 3. First, in interview, both the Appellant and  Sponsor  are  recorded  as
    saying  at  question  13  that  the  Sponsor's  parents  knew  of   the
    relationship when part of her explanation for the Sponsor's absence was
    the difficulties caused when  the  relationship  was  discovered  after
    interview.  The Appellant has taken  issue  with  other  parts  of  the
    interview record previously but not this answer and only  did  so  when
    challenged on the inconsistency in cross-examination.  The Appellant is
    legally represented and prepared a written statement in advance of  the
    hearing that dealt with another aspect of the interview record  and  it
    lacks credibility that she omitted to deal  with  a  claimed  error  in
    response to this question just because the Respondent had not mentioned
    this  particular  point  previously.   In  addition,  the   Appellant's
    solicitor confirmed  that  there  has  never  been  a  request  to  the
    Respondent for the interview tape against which to check the transcript
    and no complaint about its accuracy raised with the Respondent.

 4. Secondly, the Appellant stated that the Sponsor's mother had threatened
    to report her to the Nigerian authorities if the relationship continued
    or if  the  Sponsor  supported  the  appeal.   In  oral  evidence,  the
    Appellant stated that the Sponsor was always honest with her mother  so
    she would be unable to even write a letter of support.   That  approach
    is inconsistent with the Sponsor not previously being honest  with  her
    mother about  her  sexuality  or  in  continuing  the  relationship  as
    claimed.

 5. Even if I had accepted the Appellant's explanation for the lack of  any
    evidence from the Sponsor, there was no credible explanation as to  the
    lack of evidence from any other sources, including herself.  There  was
    nothing submitted of the sort that you could reasonably  expect  to  be
    readily available to a person claiming to  be  in  a  relationship  for
    eight years - no photographs (even pre-dating the interview  in  2014),
    no greetings cards, no tokens of affection, no phone records, no  joint
    bills (only a joint tenancy agreement for six months in 2014  which  at
    its highest shows they lived in the same property  but  not  that  they
    were cohabiting as a couple) and so on.   The  evidence  given  by  the
    Appellant gave only the most basic of details of the relationship as to
    the year in which they met, started their relationship and cohabited.

 6. The Appellant's bundle submitted the day before the hearing did contain
    a number of photographs which were entirely unexplained (in her written
    statement or in oral evidence).  There was  no  identification  of  the
    people in the photographs, the events at which they were taken  or  how
    in  any  event  they  supported  the  Appellant's  claim  to  be  in  a
    relationship with the Sponsor.  These are not  supporting  evidence  of
    the claimed relationship.

 7. There was also no evidence from any friends or the Appellant's  family,
    in particular, her brother whom she states the couple lived with on two
    separate occasions.

 8. The  Appellant's  reliance  on  the  similarity  of  answers  given  in
    interview in 2014 between her and her  Sponsor  as  evidence  of  their
    relationship is wholly inadequate given the  discrepancies  which  were
    also contained  therein  and  the  subsequent  events  and  intervening
    period.  The limited evidence submitted with her  original  application
    did not support the existence of the claimed relationship  and  is  now
    more than four years old.

 9. The Appellant's appeal was heard twice in the First-tier  Tribunal  and
    again for re-making before me in the Upper Tribunal.  Recent  decisions
    have referred to the paucity of evidence on file and there  is  nothing
    to suggest the Appellant or her legal  representatives  have  not  been
    served with the Respondent's bundle to know the contents of it and that
    it doesn't include any of the material she stated in oral evidence  was
    taken to the interview in 2014.  In any event, there is nothing at  all
    covering the last four years and  it  lacks  credibility  to  claim  an
    unawareness that any evidence was needed.  It is for the  Appellant  to
    establish her claim and in this case she has failed to  establish  that
    she is, or ever has been, in a relationship at all with the Sponsor and
    in any event has failed to establish that  the  Sponsor  is  exercising
    treaty rights in the United Kingdom.  I find the Appellant to be wholly
    lacking in credibility.

Notice of Decision

For the reasons given in my decision promulgated on 10 September  2018,  the
making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making  of
a material error of law.   As  such  it  was  necessary  to  set  aside  the
decision.

The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside  and  re-made  as
follows:

Appeal dismissed under the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations
2016.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        [pic]        Date     19th October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson
ANNEX

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43195/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6th August 2018                   |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                          adebunmi iretiola onanuga
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Okunowo, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Oliver promulgated on 9 May  2017,  in  which  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the decision to refuse her application  for  an  EEA  Residence
    Card as the family member of an EEA national exercising  treaty  rights
    in the United Kingdom dated 14 November 2014 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria,  born  on  6  March  1981,  who
    applied for an EEA Residence Card on 14 May 2014 on the basis that  she
    was in a genuine relationship  with  an  Italian  national,  exercising
    treaty rights in the United Kingdom.

 3. The Respondent refused the application on 14 November 2014 on the basis
    that it was not accepted that  the  Appellant  was  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship, that the claim to be in any such  relationship
    was a sham and therefore the application was refused  under  Regulation
    17(4)(b) of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006.
    The reasons given included that an unannounced visit was  made  to  the
    Applicant's address, with an indication of persons inside  but  no  one
    opened the door.  From this  the  Respondent  considered  two  possible
    alternatives, first that the address  provided  was  not  actually  the
    address of the Appellant and/or her EEA national sponsor; or,  secondly
    either the Applicant and/or  her  EEA  national  sponsor  were  at  the
    address but refused to answer the door.  Following this the  Respondent
    invited both to a marriage interview  to  verify  the  authenticity  of
    their relationship, which  was  conducted  on  4  November  2014.   The
    Respondent considered that there were a 'litany  of  discrepancies'  in
    the answers given in interview regarding  the  circumstances  of  their
    claimed relationship and considered the claim to be one made solely for
    the purpose of facilitating the Appellant's stay in the United Kingdom.
     During what the Respondent describes as a debrief with  the  Appellant
    and the EEA national sponsor, the  sponsor  told  enforcement  officers
    that the relationship was not genuine and was  purely  for  immigration
    purposes.  She stated that she had only agreed to adopt the  facade  to
    help out  a  friend  and  no  financial  gain  was  received  from  the
    arrangement.

 4. The Appellant's appeal against refusal first came before the First-tier
    Tribunal in 2015 and was dismissed in  a  decision  promulgated  on  22
    October 2015.  That decision was set aside by the Upper Tribunal on  28
    August 2016 and remitted for a fresh hearing.

 5. Judge Oliver dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated  on  9  May
    2017 on  the  basis  that  there  was  a  lack  of  evidence  from  the
    Appellant's claimed partner and no reasonable explanation for the  lack
    of  such  evidence.   On  the  whole  it  was  found  that  there   was
    insufficient evidence of a genuine relationship.

The appeal

 6. The Appellant appeals on the grounds that the decision was  incorrectly
    based on her having entered a sham marriage/civil partnership, but  she
    had never made any claim to be married; that she had given evidence  as
    to her relationship as well as an explanation for the  absence  of  her
    partner at the appeal hearing which had not been  properly  taken  into
    account by the First-tier Tribunal.  In addition, the Appellant  relied
    on the absence of any signed statement from the Respondent  as  to  her
    partner's alleged confession about  the  lack  of  genuineness  of  her
    relationship and that this was not taken into account by the First-tier
    Tribunal either.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Osborne on 30 May 2018 on all
    grounds.

 8. At the oral hearing, it was submitted on behalf of the  Appellant  that
    the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  lacked  clarity  and  it  was  not
    expressly clear what evidence was accepted and what was rejected.   The
    Respondent had relied heavily upon a claimed immigration visit  to  the
    Appellant's address but there was a distinct lack of evidence  of  this
    visit and  no  signed  statement  in  relation  to  it.   None  of  the
    allegations in relation to this visit were put to  the  Appellant  when
    she was later interviewed.  There was  also  no  statement  as  to  the
    confession claimed to have been made  by  the  EEA  national  from  the
    Respondent and the Appellant has denied, with reasons, why this did not
    happen.  These points were not properly considered  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, who proceeded on the incorrect footing that this was  a  sham
    marriage when there has never been any claim of  a  marriage  or  civil
    partnership and the lack of consideration of these points and  lack  of
    clear reasons were material because there  was  some  evidence  of  the
    claimed relationship, including  relatively  consistent  answers  being
    given in the marriage interview.

 9. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Tarlow expressed concern about the lack
    of reasoning in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and although he
    noted a distinct lack of evidence as to the relationship claimed before
    the First-tier Tribunal, he accepted that there were inadequate reasons
    given to dismiss the appeal.

Findings and reasons

10. The First-tier Tribunal's decision is relatively brief  with  the  oral
    evidence being set out in paragraphs  8  to  10  and  the  totality  of
    findings made in paragraphs 12 to 14 which states as follows:

    "12. The answers that the appellant and her  claimed  partner  gave  an
    interview  do  not  reveal  the  wide  discrepancies  claimed  by   the
    respondent, but the explanation for the correspondence in  the  answers
    may lie simply the fact that they have lived  together  and  have  been
    close friends.  Questions and answers are poorly set out in the record.

    13.  I do, however, find that the immigration officers  report  of  the
    admission made by the appellant's friend is unchallenged in the absence
    even of a witness statement from the friend.  I do not accept that  the
    claimed partner had any reason  to  fear  the  consequences  of  giving
    evidence at the hearing or at  least  making  such  a  statement.   The
    partner was given 30 days to leave the United Kingdom but is still here
    according to the appellant.

    14.  In the event the appellant has failed to show that  she  is  in  a
    relationship with  her  claimed  partner.   There  are  no  exceptional
    circumstances wanting consideration outside the rules."

11. It was entirely appropriate in the circumstances of this appeal for  Mr
    Tarlow to accept that there was a lack of adequate reasoning  given  in
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.   As  can  be  seen  from  the
    paragraphs quoted above, which  are  the  entirety  of  the  so  called
    findings on which the  appeal  was  dismissed,  no  clear  or  adequate
    reasons were given for the finding that there was  no  relationship  as
    claimed.  Paragraph 12 undermines the Respondent's initial reasons  for
    refusal based on discrepancies in  the  interview  and  in  fact  is  a
    finding in the  Appellant's  favour.   Paragraph  13  is  not  entirely
    accurate given that the Appellant challenged the  immigration  officers
    report of the admission, although it is not in dispute that  there  was
    no evidence directly from the EEA national and there is a rejection  of
    the explanation given for the lack of such evidence.  The relevance  or
    otherwise of the EEA national being given 30 days to leave  the  United
    Kingdom stated at the end of this paragraph is not at all clear and  it
    does not  seem  to  be  expressly  relevant  to  the  question  of  the
    relationship.  Paragraph 14 contains no further reasons on only  states
    the conclusion.  It is not sufficiently clear from these paragraphs why
    the appeal was dismissed and what evidence in particular  was  accepted
    or rejected.

12. In spite of the distinct lack of evidence from  the  Appellant  of  her
    claimed relationship before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  I  accept  that
    there was a material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision
    for the reasons set out above and accepted by the Respondent, such that
    it is necessary to set it aside.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.

Directions

The Appellant and the Respondent are  at  liberty  to  file  and  serve  any
further evidence that they wish to rely on, no later  than  14  days  before
the relisted hearing - by 4pm on 4 October 2018.

The re-making of the appeal is listed at 10am on 18 October 2018 before  UTJ
Jackson.

Signed   [pic]             Date     3rd September 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson


