
IAC-AH-SAR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43279/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 February 2015 & 21 April 2015  |On 28 April 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL G A BLACK


                                   Between

                      MRS ALEXCY MARIBEL MENDOZA LOPEZ
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Brown, Counsel instructed by Farani Javid
Taylor Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Avery (Senior Home office Presenting Officer)


                               RESUMED HEARING
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Further to my decision  and  directions  dated  26th  February  2015  a
    resumed hearing  took  place  in  order  for  submissions  to  be  made
    following Singh & Khalid 2015 EWCA Civ 74. I rely on  my  decision  and
    reasons  dated  26th  February  2015  for  the  background  facts   and
    discussion of error of law.

2.   The appellant' claim was based on her long residence in the UK and  her
    close relationship with her adult son. In summary the  FTT  found  that
    the Appellant failed to meet the "new" Immigration Rules  in  force  as
    from 9th July 2012.  The  error  of  law  issue  raised  was  that  the
    appellant's application ought to have been considered  under  rules  in
    force pre 9th July, although this was not a matter raised  at  the  FTT
    hearing.  The appellant relied on the decision of Edgehill [2014]  EWCA
    Civ  402  and  further  argued  that  the  Article  8  assessment   was
    inadequate.

Submissions

3.   Ms Brown acceded that  the  recent  decision  of  Singh  &  Khalid  had
    effectively rendered the  appellant's  argument  void.   The  Court  of
    Appeal had significantly restricted in  time  any  application  of  old
    rules that the decision maker was to apply and thus the Appellant could
    no longer rely on Edgehill.  Ms Brown  renewed  her  submissions  under
    Article 8 ECHR and argued that the Upper Tribunal could proceed to hear
    further evidence as to the service of the enforcement  notice  in  2007
    which was a relevant matter that the  FTT  failed  to  consider.   This
    would in turn illuminate the findings as to  length  of  residence  and
    that could be taken into account in the Article 8 assessment.

4.   Mr Avery relied on the reasons for refusal letter  and  submitted  that
    the decision made by the FTT under Article 8 should stand.

Discussion and decision

5.   Whilst acknowledging that in my previous decision I indicated a  degree
    of support for the arguments put by the appellant as to the application
    of the "old rules".  However, in light  of  the  judgment  in  Singh  &
    Khalid, the  scope  of  any  Edgehill  argument  is  now  significantly
    restricted. Accordingly I am satisfied that it can have no  application
    in this appeal and it cannot therefore be said that  the  FTT  decision
    was vitiated by an error of law.

6.   As a consequence I confirm my decision that I find little merit in  the
    grounds advanced as to the FTT's consideration of Article 8 ECHR.   The
    FTT properly assessed Article 8 by following the  5  questions  put  in
    Razgar.  It found that  the  decision  was  proportionate  taking  into
    account the length of residence and the appellant's  relationship  with
    her adult son [16 & 17].  I see  no  reason  to  hear  further  factual
    evidence on the service of the Notice of Enforcement, which is now  not
    material to the appeal.

Notice of decision

7.   There is no material error of law in the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. The decision shall  stand.  The  appeal  is  dismissed  under
    immigration and human rights grounds.

No anonymity order is made.



Signed        Date 25.4.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
