
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43426/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10th July 2014                               |On 2nd September 2014      |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                              mr hassan Buyondo
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss L Bashow, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mrs K Heaps, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Uganda born on  6th  January  1988.   The
    Appellant states that he is the unmarried partner of  his  Sponsor  who
    has Hungarian and Romanian  nationality.   It  is  contended  that  the
    Appellant and the Sponsor met in August 2010 and  have  lived  together
    since 2011.  On 29th January 2013 the Appellant applied for  an  EEA  2
    residence card on the basis that he was the unmarried partner of an EEA
    national who is exercising treaty rights.  That application was refused
    on 1st October 2013.  In refusing  the  application  the  Secretary  of
    State noted that  the  Appellant  had  not  provided  firstly  a  valid
    national passport issued in his name and that the  ARC  card  submitted
    with the application was not acceptable as evidence  of  his  identity.
    Secondly the document submitted by the  Appellant's  purported  partner
    was not accepted as being a Hungarian identity card that could be  used
    for travel and thirdly it was noted that the Appellant  claimed  to  be
    the unmarried partner of his  Sponsor  and  it  was  not  accepted  the
    Appellant and Noemi Timea Majoros were  cohabiting  in  a  relationship
    akin to marriage.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Brookfield sitting at Manchester on 1st April 2014.   The
    Immigration  Judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  for  want   of
    jurisdiction.

 3. On 16th October 2013  Grounds  of  Appeal  were  lodged  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Those grounds contended:-

      i) That  the  Immigration  Judge  had  failed  to  properly  interpret
         Regulation 26 of the 2006 EEA Regulations.

     ii) Had failed to properly interpret Regulation 29A and the meaning  of
         "circumstances beyond his control".

    iii) Had shown unfairness in the proceedings particularly with regard to
         the Appellant not having the opportunity to give oral  evidence  as
         to why he was unable to produce a passport which may have persuaded
         the judge  that  he  was  unable  to  produce  a  passport  due  to
         circumstances beyond his control.

 4. On 19th May 2014 First-tier Tribunal Cox granted permission to  appeal.
    He considered the grounds were arguable having regard in particular  to
    Barnett and others (Jamaica) [2012] UKUT 142 (IAC).  He considered that
    it was arguable that the judge had misdirected herself  to  the  proper
    interpretation of Regulations 26 and 29A and  that  the  points  raised
    were ones of some general importance.

 5. On 9th June 2014 the Secretary of State responded  to  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule  24.   Whilst  noting  that  the  Grounds  of  Appeal
    criticised the Immigration Judge's interpretation of Regulation 26  and
    made reference to the authority of Barnett stating that it was unlawful
    to simply refuse to issue a residence  card  because  no  passport  was
    produced it reminded the Tribunal that the refusal letter listed  three
    reasons for refusing the application including the Appellant's claim to
    be the unmarried partner of his Sponsor.  The Secretary of State  noted
    that  ground  2   raised   concern   over   the   Immigration   Judge's
    interpretation of Regulation 29A but that paragraphs 12(ii) and 12(iii)
    clearly explained why the judge did not consider the Appellant to be in
    "circumstances beyond his control" regarding  proof  of  his  identity.
    The Secretary of State pointed out that it was  for  the  Appellant  to
    establish his position in this regard and he had failed to satisfy  the
    judge.  Further it was contended in the Rule 24 response that the judge
    had found correctly in paragraph 12(iv) that  no  immigration  decision
    had been issued and that there was no right of appeal.

 6. It is on this basis that the appeal comes  before  me.   The  Appellant
    appears by his  instructed  legal  representative  Miss  Bashow.   Miss
    Bashow is very familiar with this  matter.   She  appeared  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal on the Appellant's  behalf  and  she  is  also  the
    author of the Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   The  Secretary
    of State appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mrs Heaps.

 7. The initial issue is whether or not the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred
    in law in finding that the Appellant had no right of appeal.  It brings
    into question the two relevant Rules.  It is important that the correct
    version of the Rules are considered.  These are:

     Regulation 26(2)(A)

     If the person claims to be  in  a  durable  relationship  with  an  EEA
national, he may not   appeal under these Regulations unless he produces:-

     (a) A passport and either

          i) an EEA family permit or

         ii) sufficient evidence to satisfy the Secretary of State that  he
             is in a relationship with that EEA national.

    Regulation 29A

    Where a provision of these Regulations requires a  person  to  hold  or
    produce a valid identity card  issued  by  an  EEA  state  or  a  valid
    passport the Secretary of State  may  accept  alternative  evidence  of
    identity and nationality where  the  person  is  unable  to  obtain  or
    produce the required document due to circumstances beyond  his  or  her
    control.

    Both these provisions came into force on 8th November 2012.   They  are
    recited at paragraphs 8  and  9  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    determination.

Submissions/Discussions on Error of Law

 8. Miss Bashow submits that the judge is required to look at Regulation 26
    to proceed by way of Regulation 29A and  that  the  judge  took  a  too
    literal approach to the reading of  Regulation  26  pointing  out  that
    Regulation 26 was amended to  include  the  provision  that  a  durable
    partner must provide a passport in order to appeal and the judge should
    have  considered  Barnett  and  others  (EEA  Regulations:  rights  and
    documentation) Jamaica [2012] UKUT 142 as this dealt with the situation
    where identity documents are required for the  purposes  of  issuing  a
    residence card.  However Miss Bashow does concede that that  was  under
    Regulation 17 or 18.

 9. Mrs Heaps is  most  helpful  in  her  approach  to  this  matter.   She
    acknowledges that the First-tier Tribunal Judge has not taken  evidence
    from the Appellant and that it may well have been prudent for her to do
    so and on that basis the Secretary of State will not press too strongly
    if I set aside the decision and proceed to rehear it.

Findings on Error of Law

10. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not take evidence from the  Appellant
    and I accept the submissions that are made to me that what is necessary
    to be construed in this  case  is  what  constitutes  a  "circumstances
    beyond his control" under Regulation 29A.  The Grounds  of  Appeal  set
    out examples of what those  circumstances  beyond  his  control  should
    include but of course they have  never  been  tested  and  the  correct
    approach is therefore to set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and to find that there should have  been  evidence  taken  and
    that an appeal should take place.   I  gave  due  consideration  as  to
    whether the correct approach was to remit the matter back to the First-
    tier  Tribunal  but  the  general  view   expressed   by   both   legal
    representatives was that the matter should be retained within the Upper
    Tribunal and heard by myself.  A substantial  bundle  of  documentation
    has been filed in readiness for this hearing and on that basis both  in
    the interests of justice and of the economic disposition of this matter
    I proceed to rehear the matter.

Evidence

11. The Appellant attended court and confirmed his name and address and his
    witness statement.  That witness statement dated 5th June 2014 seeks to
    clarify the reason that he does not have  a  passport  namely  that  he
    arrived in the UK as a child and the person who brought him had all  of
    his documents in his possession.  The agent who  brought  him  did  not
    leave them with him and that that is the reason why  he  cannot  get  a
    passport.  He then sets out at  paragraphs  3  and  4  of  his  witness
    statement why he is not able to obtain  a  passport  from  the  Ugandan
    Embassy and confirms at paragraph 9 of his witness statement that there
    has never been a dispute about his nationality or identity and that  he
    has previously been issued with an immigration status document  and  he
    has an ARC card which he submitted to the  Home  Office  with  his  EEA
    application.

12. Mrs Heaps cross-examined the Appellant.  She enquired as to whether the
    Appellant had any proof of his identity other than the ARC card and  he
    replied that he did not. She enquires as to whether he  has  ever  used
    any previous name and he says that he has not.  He is asked  if  it  is
    correct that he has previous convictions in the UK and he confirms that
    he does.  He is asked what they were for  and  he  replies  for  having
    false documents and claiming benefits whilst working  and  using  false
    papers in order to obtain employment.

13. Mrs Heaps returns to cross-examine on the Appellant's witness statement
    enquiring that the Appellant appears to be stating  he  has  telephoned
    the Ugandan Embassy and that they have set out the basis upon  which  a
    passport would be issued to him.  He confirms that that is correct.  He
    confirmed that he told them he was born in Uganda  and  that  he  asked
    them the procedure that needed to be followed.  Mrs Heaps  enquires  as
    to whether any questions were asked of the Appellant and he states that
    he does not remember.

Submissions

14. Mrs Heaps maintains the contention that there is no  right  of  appeal.
    She reminds me that Regulation 26 requires the person who claims to  be
    in a durable relationship for the production of  a  passport  and  that
    that is qualified by Regulation 29A(i)  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006.   She  points  out  Regulation   29
    indicates that the Secretary of State MAY accept alternative  evidence.
    In this case the Appellant has simply produced an ARC card  and  having
    used his papers to obtain employment in the UK then  the  Secretary  of
    State must exercise extreme caution in accepting alternative  evidence.
    She submits that the authority in Barnett can easily  be  distinguished
    and should not be followed.  She points out firstly that Barnett was  a
    case dealing with Regulation 17/18 and not Regulation 26  and  29A  and
    secondly it  was  a  case  involving  someone  applying  for  permanent
    residence and that it was in any event  the  EEA  national's  documents
    that were the issue and not the applicant for a residence card.

15. There is also before me a supplemental bundle including an opinion from
    the Aire Centre which I have given due  consideration  to.   Mrs  Heaps
    points out that this is an opinion nothing more  nothing  less  that  I
    should give it no more than read through  consideration.   She  submits
    that the correct approach is to find that there is no right  of  appeal
    in this matter and to uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

16. Miss Bashow submits that it is appropriate to go back to Regulation 26.
     She accepts that that Regulation stipulates  that  a  durable  partner
    must provide a passport in order to appeal but maintains the contention
    that Barnett is a  good  example  of  how  that  Regulation  should  be
    interpreted.  She submits that there is evidence of living together  in
    the bundle and seeks to  refer  me  to  extracts  from  authorities  in
    particular Von Coulson and another v  Land  Nordrhein-Westfalen  [1984]
    EUECJ 14/83 at paragraph 26 and paragraph 23 of Litster  and  others  v
    Forth Dry Dock and Engineering Co  Ltd  [1988]  UKHL  10  as  being  of
    assistance as to interpretation within the Regulations.  She then  goes
    on to point out that the Appellant has never had a dispute  as  to  his
    identity and that it is open to this Tribunal to accept his ARC card.

17. In addressing the issue of circumstances beyond his control she submits
    that  the  Appellant  still  has  a  subjective  view  of  the  Ugandan
    authorities and that he is entitled to have his fear of the authorities
    and he cannot be expected to go to them.   She  points  out  there  are
    practical reasons why he did not have a passport when  he  entered  and
    that he entered with an agent.  She refers me again to the  information
    necessary for him to obtain a passport and the problem  that  he  would
    face in going to the embassy.  In relying on  commentary  from  Y  (Sri
    Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 362
    she submits that due to  the  subjective  reality  and  fear  that  the
    Appellant would face in going to the embassy than  considerable  weight
    should be given to that factor.





Findings

18. With the greatest of respect to Miss Bashow who has provided me with  a
    wealth of jurisprudence the issue is a relatively  straightforward  one
    namely whether or not the judge was entitled to conclude that there  is
    no jurisdiction for a ground of appeal.  The error that the judge  made
    and why I reheard the issue solely therefore on whether  there  was  an
    error of law was as to whether or not the judge should  or  should  not
    have taken evidence from the Appellant.  It is effectively conceded  by
    the Secretary of State that she should.  I have now had the benefit  of
    having heard that evidence and  I  have  heard  substantial  additional
    submissions from Miss Bashow and more limited ones from  Mrs  Heaps  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State.

19. The starting point relates to the interpretation of Regulations 26  and
    29A.  Regulation 26 requires that if a person claims to be in a durable
    relationship with an EEA national he may not appeal unless he  produces
    a passport and an EEA family permit or sufficient evidence  to  satisfy
    the Secretary of State that  he  is  in  a  relationship  with  an  EEA
    national.  That is the starting point.  The word  "and"  is  mandatory.
    He has to  provide  a  passport.   However  there  is  a  qualification
    provided by Regulation 29A(i) which would enable  alternative  evidence
    to be provided when the person is  unable  to  obtain  or  produce  the
    required document due to circumstances beyond his or her control.

20. It is of critical importance.  It has to be remembered that there is  a
    discretion for  the  Secretary  of  State  to  accept  the  alternative
    evidence.  There is specific reference to the word "may".  Consequently
    there is no obligation on the Secretary of State to do so or of  course
    on the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  Much is made by Miss Bashow  of  the
    decision in Barnett.  Barnett can  very  easily  be  distinguished  for
    reasons set out above namely

      i) it is to do with Regulations 17 and 18 and not Regulations  26  and
         29;

     ii) the case involves someone applying for permanent residence not just
         for a residence card; and

    iii) the documents referred to therein that were required were those  of
         an EEA national and not someone merely  applying  for  a  residence
         card.

21. In addition it is appropriate to look at the approach  adopted  by  the
    Secretary of State.  The Appellant has a criminal conviction.   He  has
    used false papers to obtain work.  The Secretary of State was  entitled
    to exercise extreme caution in accepting alternative evidence.  It  has
    to be remembered that the starting point here is  the  claim  that  the
    Appellant is in a durable relationship and that is not accepted by  the
    Secretary of State.  A very extensive  bundle  of  documents  has  been
    produced running to  some  484  pages  by  the  Appellant's  instructed
    solicitors.  Nowhere within  those  documents  is  there  any  evidence
    relating to a  durable  relationship.   The  documents  solely  address
    issues of income and of even  greater  importance  no  evidence  either
    written or oral has been produced with regard to that purported durable
    relationship.

22. In such circumstances I am satisfied firstly  that  the  Appellant  has
    failed to provide evidence that will  comply  with  Regulation  26  and
    secondly that even taking into account the discretion available to  the
    Secretary of State and to the Tribunal  under  Regulation  29A(i)  that
    there is no evidence that has been produced to show that the  Appellant
    is unable to produce the required document.  To merely contend that  he
    has phoned the Ugandan Embassy and cannot go and get the  documentation
    for the reasons he sets out is effectively no reason at all.   For  all
    the  above  reasons  this  is  an  Appellant  who  does  not  meet  the
    requirements of Regulations 26 and therefore does not have a  right  of
    appeal and the approach to seeking discretion pursuant to paragraph  29
    has been properly exercised by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  and  the
    Secretary of State.

Decision

The appeal under the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006
is dismissed.

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule 45(4)(i)  The
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.  No  application  is
made to vary that order and none is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


