
[pic]
IAC-TH-WYL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43632/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Taylor House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 October 2015                    |On 13 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M LEWIS


                                   Between

                           henry takyi wiafe kissi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Kannangara of Counsel instructed by Jade Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The History of the Appeal

1.   The Appellant, a citizen of Ghana, appealed against the refusal of  the
    Respondent to grant him an EEA residence  card  as  confirmation  of  a
    right to reside in the UK as  the  unmarried  partner  of  Miss  Juliet
    Boadaa, an Italian national.  His appeal was heard on 11  May  2015  by
    Judge Aziz sitting at Hatton Cross.  In a decision of 17th, promulgated
    on 19th, May, the  judge  allowed  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted to the Respondent on 15 July  2015  by
    Judge Davidge in the following terms:-

         "1.  The application is in time.

         2.   The grounds assert a material error of law  by  the  judge  in
             allowing an EEA national's  extended  family  member's  appeal
             outright as opposed to the limited  extent  of  remitting  the
             matter back to the Respondent  to  consider  the  exercise  of
             discretion.

         3.   The application reveals an arguable material error of law."

3.   The Appellant and Miss Boadaa attended the error of law hearing  before
    me, which took the  form  of  submissions,  which  I  have  taken  into
    account.

4.   Both representatives agreed that, in  the  light  of  Ihemedu  (OFMs  -
    Meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00340 (IAC), the application  fell  to  be
    allowed to the limited extent of remitting  it  to  the  Respondent  to
    enable the exercise of discretion under Regulation 17(4)(b) of the 2006
    Regulations as to the issue of a residence card to an  extended  family
    member who was not an EEA national.  This  I  accordingly  do,  in  the
    light of the judicial findings of  Judge  Aziz,  which,  as  Mr Tarlow
    accepted, are not challenged by the Respondent.

Decision

5.   The first decision erred in law in allowing the  appeal  outright.   It
    is set aside to the limited extent that the application is remitted  to
    the Respondent for the exercise of discretion under Regulation 17(4)(b)
    of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006.   This
    discretion is to be exercised in the light of the judicial findings  of
    Judge Aziz, which are not challenged.


Signed   Dated: 13 October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Lewis

