
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43650/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 1st July 2014                                |On 26th August 2014        |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                         MR Constantone Hendric Dias
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr David Williams (LR)
For the Respondent:    Mr Nigel Bramble (HOPO)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Kanagaratnam, promulgated on 10th April 2014, following  a  hearing  at
    Hatton Cross on 14th March  2014.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal of Mr  Constantone  Hendric  Dias.   The  Respondent
    Secretary of State, applied for, and was granted, permission to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Portugal who was born  on  27th  December
    1974.  He appealed against the refusal  of  a  residence  card  by  the
    Secretary of  State  in  a  decision  dated  10th  October  2013  under
    Regulation 20 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge had regard to the basic facts before him.   These  were  that
    the Appellant was born in India, had come to the  United  Kingdom,  and
    obtained a false Portuguese passport, given that he was  born  in  Goa.
    While obtaining a national insurance number, he had been  arrested  and
    charged with possessing a false identity document.  He was sentenced to
    imprisonment.  He was recommended for  deportation  to  Goa.   However,
    having subsequently registered as a Portuguese  citizen,  a  Portuguese
    passport was issued to him on 10th March 2010.  He attempted to  return
    to the United Kingdom in June 2010.  He was questioned  by  immigration
    officials.  His deportation order was then  revoked  on  26th  February
    2013.  He was then able to return to the United Kingdom.  He then  made
    an application in accordance with the Rules.  He had expressed  remorse
    for committing the offence of being in possession of a  false  identity
    document.  The false name that he  had  previously  used  was  that  of
    "Michael Dias".  Presently, however, he had made his application  under
    his correct name, Mr Constantone Hendric Dias.

 4. In deciding the appeal, the judge had  regard  to  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant could not be refused a  residence  card  on  the  grounds  of
    public policy, public security, or public health, given that he  was  a
    Portuguese national, and was entitled to a residence  card,  and  given
    that the deportation order had been revoked.  In the judge's words,  "I
    cannot imagine the policy considerations which allow the revocation  of
    the deportation  order  of  this  Appellant  different  from  those  in
    granting him a residence card" (paragraph 9).  The judge held that  the
    Appellant was entitled to a residence card.

Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds of application state that the judge erred in law because in
    cross-examination, the Appellant had confirmed that he had used a false
    identity when conducted in the Crown Court for possessing  a  false  ID
    card.  The judge did not know what the reasons were for the  revocation
    of the deportation order.

 6. On 8th May 2014, permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the
    judge was not placed in a position to reach proper conclusions  because
    he did not know what  the  reasons  were  for  the  revocation  of  the
    deportation order.

Hearing

 7. At the hearing before me, Mr Nigel Bramble, appearing on behalf of  the
    Respondent Secretary of State, said that he would rely upon the Grounds
    of Appeal.  Second, however, he would  make  the  following  submission
    which was that although there was a error  in  the  judge  deciding  at
    paragraph 9 that the Appellant was entitled to a residence card by mere
    virtue of the fact that the deportation order had been revoked, without
    knowing  what  the  reasons  for  the   deportation   revocation   was,
    nevertheless, this was not a material error.  This is because the  Home
    Office file, which Mr Bramble was in possession  of,  did  contain  the
    reasons for the revocation of the deportation order.  Clearly under the
    EEA Regulations,  and  as  a  Portuguese  citizen,  the  Appellant  was
    entitled to a residence  card.   Therefore,  the  error  could  not  be
    material.

 8. For his part, Mr  David  Williams  submitted  that  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing the Respondent's file had not been  disclosed  to  the
    Appellant and they did not know what the reasons for the revocation  of
    the deportation order was.  It was now clear that there  was  a  reason
    and this reason was on the Respondent Home Office's file.   Given  that
    this is the case, he would have to agree with Mr Nigel Bramble.

No Error of Law

 9. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    those that had been set out by Mr Nigel Bramble.  This is a case  where
    the deportation order had been revoked.  It had  been  revoked  without
    there being any evidence of fraudulent conduct or wrong  doing  in  any
    quarter.  Nor was there any evidence of there having  been  a  mistake.
    The order was withdrawn because in February 2013 it was found that  the
    Appellant had no propensity to commit any further crimes and this was a
    relevant consideration.  Once this had crystallised there could  be  no
    basis for a conclusion that the Appellant posed a serious threat to the
    fundamental interests of society.  Once the position  as  set  out  had
    crystallised, the judge was entitled to conclude that  that  which  was
    relevant to the revocation of  the  deportation  order  would  also  be
    relevant to the grant of a residence card to this  EEA  national  which
    was rightfully his due given that he was  a  citizen  of  Portugal  who
    qualified also as a EEA national.  This being so,  there  could  be  no
    material error of law.

Decision

10. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

11. No anonymity order is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 8th July 2014


