
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/43525/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 30 October 2015                  |On:  3  November  2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

                             MR Kingsley UDABOR
                       (anonymity directionS not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Adjarho, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Ms N Wilcocks-Briscoe, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant,  a  citizen  of  Nigeria,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the respondent dated 14  October  2014
    to refuse his application for further leave to remain as a spouse of  a
    person present and  settled  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal dismissed the appellant's appeal in a determination  dated  30
    December 2014.  Permission to appeal was initially refused by Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge on  15  May  2015  and  after  a  renewed
    application, was subsequently granted by Upper Tribunal Judge, Kebede.

 2. Thus the appeal came before me.

The findings of the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The First-tier  Tribunal  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  for  the
    following reasons, which I summarise. The appellant and  his  solicitor
    were both advised by letter that  any  documentation,  further  written
    evidence or submissions should be  forwarded  to  the  Tribunal  by  17
    December 2014. On 22 December 2014, a fax was sent to the Tribunal from
    the appellant's solicitors Chancery CS,  amounting  to  14  pages.  The
    first page was an index of the documents claiming to be sent. The  only
    documents received were the  statements  from  the  appellant  and  his
    spouse, which were numbered as pages 1 to 10 of the  bundle.  No  other
    documentation arrived with the fax or under separate  cover.  There  is
    therefore no evidence before me  to  support  the  appellant's  written
    statement or that of his wife. It is noted  that  both  statements  are
    couched in very similar terms and have obviously been copied  from  one
    to the other.

 4. The submission of the fax containing the statements indicate  that  the
    appellant was aware of the  need  to  lodge  further  documentation  in
    support of his appeal. Without that  documentation,  it  has  not  been
    established  that  the  appellant  meets  the   requirements   of   the
    Immigration Rules. There is no support documentation of the  claims  he
    has  made  within  his  statement  either  in   connection   with   his
    cohabitation with a spouse or in respect of his  income.  There  is  no
    evidence of any job prospects he has or of his degree from  University.
    His future income is of  no  relevance  when  considering  his  current
    position in respect of his ability, as of today's date, to be  able  to
    maintain himself without recourse to public funds.  The  appellant  has
    not  established  on  the  balance  of  probabilities,  he  meets   the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.

 5. The appellant claims that by  returning  him  to  Nigeria,  the  United
    Kingdom would interfere with this family and private  life  in  such  a
    manner  that  it  is  disproportionate   when   weighed   against   the
    implementation of immigration laws designed to implement  an  effective
    system of immigration control within the United Kingdom  and  that  his
    removal would also be an interference with his wife's right  to  family
    life with him.  Her  private  life  would  also  be  disproportionately
    affected.

 6. The appellant has not established that he  meets  the  requirements  of
    appendix FM paragraph are LTRPT 1. 1. or our LTRPT 1. 1, including EX 1
    as he has not demonstrated there are insurmountable obstacles to family
    life with this partner continuing outside of the  United  Kingdom.  The
    appellant stated in his statement that he currently receives  financial
    support from his parents in Nigeria,  in  particular  his  mother.  His
    application indicates he has siblings in Nigeria. The appellant has  no
    children to consider. The appellant has not demonstrated he  meets  the
    requirements of paragraph EX1. The appellant also  does  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276 ADE of the Immigration Rules  in  respect
    of his private life.  The  appellant  entered  the  United  Kingdom  in
    September 2010 when he was 26 years old and has not,  therefore,  lived
    in the United Kingdom for 20 years. He has visited Nigeria  during  the
    four years he has been studying in the United  Kingdom  and  still  has
    family members there. There are no reasons put forward  as  to  why  he
    could not reintegrate into society on his return or seek employment  in
    the same manner he claims he will be able to do in the United  Kingdom.
    There  are  no  exceptional  circumstances  preventing  his  return  to
    Nigeria. The appellant has not demonstrated that he  has  a  legitimate
    right to remain in this country and that the decision to refuse to vary
    his leave to remain is  unlawful.  The  appellant's  removal  from  the
    United Kingdom would be proportionate response to the legitimate aim of
    proper immigration control. The Judge dismissed the  appeal  under  the
    immigration rules and human rights grounds.

The grounds of appeal

 7. The appellant's grounds of  appeal  are  in  summary  as  follows.   It
    appears that the Judge believed that the appeal before the court was an
    oral hearing on 17 December 2014 as  against  a  paper  appeal.  It  is
    obvious  from  the  determination  at  paragraph  2  and  3  that   the
    appellant's bundle was sent by way of fax on 19 December 2014  and  not
    on 22  December  2014  as  erroneously  stated  by  the  judge  in  his
    determination. Hence the Judge  made  an  error  of  law  to  state  at
    paragraph 5 that the appellant should provide an explanation as to  why
    the bundle upon which he seeks to rely on, was served after rather than
    before the hearing. This is  a  perverse  and  irrational  finding  and
    matters that were material to the outcome of the  appellant's  case  is
    the matter was determined on 30 December  2014,  no  hearing  date  was
    fixed for 17 December  2015  but  rather  it  was  the  date  that  all
    documents should be delivered to the court being a paper appeal.

 8. No explanation or reason has been provided in the determination  as  to
    why the appellant's bundle was not considered which  was  received  via
    recorded delivery by the court eight clear days before the date of  the
    determination on  30  December  2014.  The  Tribunal  letter  dated  19
    November 2014, the court  directed  the  appellant  and  respondent  to
    submit to the Tribunal by 17 December 2014 all documents to  be  relied
    on. The respondent should by the same dates should also have  submitted
    the documents which she seeks to rely on. Up to  date,  the  respondent
    did not comply with this direction. The appellant was waiting  for  the
    respondent to serve her bundle to  enable  him  to  respond  to  issues
    raised therein but when it was obvious that they did not comply  by  17
    December 2014. The appellant prepared his own bundle which was faxed to
    the Tribunal on 19 December 2014 and posted by recorded delivery  which
    was received by the court of 22 December 2014.

The hearing

 9. At the hearing and I heard submissions from both parties as to  whether
    there has been an error of law.  Miss Wilcocks-Briscoe  submitted  that
    there was no error of law in the determination. She submitted that  the
    documents have to be considered by the respondent and she is  not  able
    to make the calculations required as to whether the threshold of income
    support has been met.



Decision on Error of Law

10. Having considered the determination as a whole, I find that the  issues
    raised by the appellant is  procedural  fairness  by  not  taking  into
    account the appellant's bundle of documents which was served after  the
    deadline referred to in the directions issued in form IA35, and not  in
    the Judge's position at the time she was allocated the case,  but  were
    nevertheless received by the Tribunal eight days prior to the  date  of
    publication of the Judge's decision.

11. As the Judge reasoning for dismissing the appellant appeal was  on  the
    absence of supporting evidence, there is therefore an error of  law.  I
    therefore take into account whether the additional documents would have
    any material effect on the outcome of the appeal. The documents clearly
    show evidence of cohabitation and maintenance.

12. The appellant cannot be compromised  because  the  documents  were  not
    considered by the Judge, although I hasten to add that it  is  not  the
    fault of the Judge for not considering documents that were  not  placed
    in the file because it is clear the Judge did not  have  sight  of  the
    documents when she made her decision.

13. It  is  important  that  the  primary  decision  maker,  which  is  the
    respondent, should have sight of the documents. I therefore direct that
    the file be placed before the Secretary of State  awaiting  her  lawful
    decision taking into account all the evidence in this appeal.

14. I find that there is a material error of law in  the  determination  of
    the Judge in respect of procedural fairness and the  Judge's  decision,
    is set aside in its entirety.

DECISION

For the reasons given above, the determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
is set aside.

The appeal be remitted to the Secretary of State.


Signed by

Mrs S Chana
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                               This 2nd day of November 2015
