
[pic]
IAC-HW-MP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/43258/2013
                                                               IA/43259/2013
                                                               IA/43260/2013
                                                               IA/43262/2013
                                                               IA/43263/2013
                                                               ia/43264/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th October 2014                         |On 5th November 2014          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                         Mr J O N (FIRST APPELLANT)
                        mrs a M N (SECOND APPELLANT)
                        miss h e n (third appellant)
                       master j e n (fourth appellant)
                     master j j e j n (fifth appellant)
                       Master J e n (sixth appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr D. Olawanle, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

1.   The First Appellant who I shall refer to as the Appellant is a  citizen
    of Ghana born on 21st February 1973.  The Second Appellant is his wife,
    born on 25th June 1979.  She is a  citizen  of  the  United  States  of
    America as are the Third, Fourth, Fifth and Sixth  Appellants  who  are
    the  couple's  children.   They  appealed  against  decisions  of   the
    Respondent dated 1st October 2013: (i) to refuse their applications for
    leave to remain which had been made on the grounds that  refusal  would
    breach this country's obligations under Article 8 (right to respect for
    private and family life) of the European Convention on Human Rights and
    (ii) to give directions for the Appellants' removal under Section 10 of
    the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  Their  appeals  were  allowed  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Abebrese sitting at  Taylor  House  on
    3rd June 2014.  The Respondent  appeals  with  permission  against  his
    decision to allow the appeals.

2.   The  First  Appellant  last  entered  the  United  Kingdom  with  entry
    clearance as a student on 19th  August  2000.   This  was  subsequently
    extended in various capacities until  17th  October  2009.   The  other
    family members were granted leave in line with this but none  have  had
    leave since 17th October 2009.  The present proceedings  arose  out  of
    the refusal of an application made by the family on 28th June 2012  for
    leave to remain on the basis of their family and private lives and  the
    service of removal papers on 1st October 2013.

3.   The Judge heard oral testimony from the  First  and  Second  Appellants
    and noted that the Third Appellant who was born on 12th May 2005 had by
    that stage been in the United Kingdom for a period of eight  years  and
    four months and therefore met the requirements of paragraph EX.1(a)(i).
    He found that it would be unreasonable to remove the remaining  members
    of the family leaving the Third Appellant behind.  The Third  Appellant
    was entitled to British citizenship.  It would not be proportionate  to
    remove the Appellants as they were a family unit, the First and  Second
    Appellants were credible and consistent in  their  evidence  and  there
    would be medical difficulties for the family in  either  Ghana  or  the
    United States especially for the Sixth Appellant.

4.   The Respondent appealed against this  decision  on  two  grounds.   The
    first was that the Judge had not considered paragraph  EX.1  adequately
    as he should have gone on to consider  whether  it  was  reasonable  to
    expect the Third Appellant to leave the  United  Kingdom.   The  second
    ground was that the Judge had not made clear why there were  compelling
    factors in the case such that the Appellants' appeals should be allowed
    outside the Immigration Rules.  The reasons the Judge did give were not
    sufficiently  compelling.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ford   granted
    permission to appeal on 19th August saying that it  was  arguable  that
    Judge Abebrese had confined his consideration to  paragraph  EX.1(a)(i)
    and not considered EX.1(a)(ii).  However the Respondent's second ground
    was not arguable.

5.   At the hearing before me it was argued that the Judge had  embarked  on
    a freestanding Article 8 consideration of the sort  disapproved  of  in
    the case of Gulshan.  Financial inability to pay for  health  insurance
    in the United States was not a matter which should  have  any  bearing.
    For the Appellant it was argued that the Judge had not made  any  error
    in law and found the Appellants to be credible.  It would  take  up  to
    two years before the First Appellant would be able to rejoin his family
    if the remaining family members were returned  to  the  United  States.
    The First Appellant had done charitable work  in  the  community.   The
    Judge had looked at all  the  circumstances.   The  Judge  should  have
    applied the Rules in force after July 2012.

6.   I consider that the Judge made two errors of  law  in  this  case  such
    that his decision falls to be set aside.  The first is that he has  not
    adequately considered paragraph EX.1.  The adult applicants undoubtedly
    had a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with the  child  who
    had lived in the United Kingdom for at least  seven  years  immediately
    preceding the date of application.  That satisfies EX.1(a)(i)  but  the
    second limb of the test, whether it would or would not be reasonable to
    expect the child to leave the United Kingdom, was not adequately  dealt
    with by the Judge or at all.  The Judge  proceeded  on  the  assumption
    that it was unreasonable that the Third Appellant had to remain in  the
    United Kingdom and therefore it  was  a  question  of  whether  it  was
    unreasonable to expect the others to leave the Third Appellant  behind.
    That was the wrong test.  The test was whether  it  was  reasonable  to
    expect the Third Appellant to go with the other Appellants.

7.   The second material error made by the Judge was  in  his  treatment  of
    the weight to be afforded to the fact that none of the  Appellants  had
    leave to remain and were seeking leave  outside  the  Rules.   I  would
    disagree with the Judge who granted permission that the  argument  made
    by the Respondent under the case of Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640  was  not
    arguable.  There appears to be little or no  reference  to  the  public
    interest in the removal of the Appellants in the  balancing  act  which
    the Judge had to consider under Article 8.  The case law of Gulshan and
    the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM  were   relevant   in   this   case
    notwithstanding that the applications made by the Appellants were  made
    before July 2012, see the recent case of  YM  Uganda  [2014]  EWCA  Civ
    1292.

8.   At the conclusion of the hearing the  Appellants'  solicitor  indicated
    that if the matter were to proceed to a  re-hearing,  further  evidence
    under Article 8 would be submitted by the Appellants which would relate
    to medical difficulties of another one of the child Appellants.

9.   The law has changed again since 28th July 2014 and  therefore  the  re-
    hearing of this case will now be dealt with under the law as it is now.
     I will therefore be taking into account, along with the other  factors
    in this case,  the  effect  of  Section  117B(6)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  inserted  by  Section  19  of  the
    Immigration Act 2014.  All further  evidence  upon  which  the  parties
    propose to rely should be filed at court and served on the other  party
    at least fourteen days before the forthcoming hearing.  As  the  matter
    is to be reheard in the light of the new legislation and in view of the
    shortcomings I have found in the reasoning applied by the Judge none of
    the Judge's findings will be preserved and the matter will be heard  de
    novo.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  a  material
error of law and I have set it aside.  The decision will be  re-heard  on  a
date to be fixed with a time estimate of two hours.

No anonymity direction is made.

No fee was payable and there can be no fee award made.


Signed this 3rd day of November 2014


.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft


