
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43675/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 6th May 2014                                 |On 19th May 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                             Nkosilathi Dlamini
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Z Preston, Immigration Legal Advice Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, HOPO


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. These are cross appeals against the  decision  of  Judge  Hindson  made
    following a hearing at Bradford on 21st February 2013.



Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe born on 25th June 1979.  He made
    an application for leave to remain on the  basis  of  his  UK  ancestry
    which was refused on 7th October 2013.  He had  provided  a  Zimbabwean
    birth certificate as evidence that he had a grandparent who was born in
    the UK but enquiries by the Respondent revealed that it  was  a  forged
    document. The application was refused under paragraph 192(i)  and  (iv)
    because he had failed to show the necessary family  history  and  under
    paragraph 322(1A) because he had submitted a false document.

 3. At the hearing the Appellant accepted that the document was false.   He
    came here initially as a student in 2002 and when his leave  was  about
    to expire he sought the assistance of an  agency  in  order  to  secure
    further leave.  He said that he did not appreciate that they  had  done
    anything dishonest.  When that leave was about to expire he asked  them
    to seek a renewal and he was advised that he could do so himself.  They
    sent him the documents which they had used in his previous  application
    and only then did he discover that they had used  the  false  document.
    Notwithstanding that discovery he went on to apply for an extension  of
    his leave using it.

 4. When that leave was about to expire he made the application  which  was
    the subject of the appeal before the judge again knowingly  relying  on
    the false instrument.

 5. The judge said that the Appellant was a dishonest man and he found  the
    account of how  he  got  his  first  ancestry  visa  to  be  inherently
    implausible.  Even if he was telling the truth  he  accepted  knowingly
    using the false birth certificate on two occasions.  He  dismissed  the
    appeal under the Rules cited in the refusal.

 6. The Appellant met his partner in 2008 and they married in 2011.   Their
    daughter was born in 2012.  His wife is a British citizen  and she  has
    never been to Zimbabwe.

 7. The judge accepted that the Appellant was well thought of by his family
    and friends and had letters of support to that effect.  He works  as  a
    care assistant and has undertaken a number of  courses  in  the  UK  to
    improve his prospects.  He also undertakes caretaker duties at a church
    hall which is a condition of his being able  to  rent  a  cottage  from
    them.  If the Appellant was to be removed, it was likely that his  wife
    and daughter would not be allowed to continue to rent the  property  as
    she would be unable to manage the obligatory caretaking work.

 8. He noted that the Appellant's wife had some health  difficulties.   She
    has joint problems which require special insoles to help her walk,  and
    chronic nephritis which periodically causes her to have  blood  in  her
    urine.  She complains of chronic tiredness and her ability to  work  is
    limited, although she is not currently having any treatment  but  takes
    over-the-counter supplements.

 9. The judge accepted that if the Appellant was removed his wife will lose
    the main source of income into the family and would have to turn to the
    State for support.  He found that as a white  British  woman  his  wife
    would be at risk of harm in Zimbabwe as would his daughter as  a  mixed
    race British child.

10. He wrote as follows:

         "I have considered the position of the Appellant  with  respect  to
         leave to remain as a partner and as a parent.  I am satisfied  that
         he cannot meet the Rules for either because both  require  that  he
         has made a valid application for the relevant leave  which  he  has
         not.

         He also falls foul of  S-LTR2.2  which  provides  that  leave  will
         normally be refused if the applicant has relied on a false document
         though I accept that refusal on this ground is discretionary."

11. The judge concluded that the Appellant  could  not  succeed  under  the
    Rules but, so far as Article 8 was concerned, he stated:

         "I have considered the five questions posed  in  Razgar  and  I  am
         satisfied that the first four can be answered in  the  affirmative.
         So far as proportionality is  concerned  I  have  weighed  the  not
         insignificant  consequences  to  the  family,  in  particular   the
         Appellant's wife and daughter,  of  the  interference  against  the
         interests  of  the  wider  community.   They   would   lose   their
         husband/father, their home and their  financial  independence  from
         the state.  I note that it is likely that the economic wellbeing of
         the country will in fact be maintained by the  Appellant  remaining
         and working legally to support his family.  If he was  returned  to
         Zimbabwe his family would inevitably have to turn to the state  for
         support.  I do not consider it reasonable to expect the  family  to
         go to live with him in Zimbabwe."

The Grounds of Application

12. Both the Appellant and  the  Respondent  sought  permission  to  appeal
    against the decision.

The Appellant's grounds

13. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred in law in stating that he could not meet the Rules for  leave
    to remain as a partner or as a parent on the grounds that both  require
    a valid application for the relevant leave which the Appellant had  not
    made.  Paragraph GEN 1.9 of Appendix FM states that the requirement  to
    make a valid application will not apply when, inter alia, an Article  8
    claim is raised in an appeal or in response to a One-Stop Notice issued
    under Section 120 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.
    The Appellant relied on the Supreme Court judgment of Patel,  Alam  and
    Anwar v SSHD [2013] UKSC 77 for the proposition that  the  Section  120
    statement and instead of relying on the Immigration  Rules  to  justify
    leave to remain an Appellant can rely on a human  rights  ground.   The
    majority in the case of AS Afghanistan was  correct  to  hold  that  an
    Appellant could invoke a different Immigration Rule to justify leave to
    remain.

14. The judge therefore failed to take  into  account  Section  85  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 in that he failed to  take
    into account the additional ground submitted under Section 120  of  the
    2002 Act and paragraph GEN 1.9.  He meets the requirements of  Appendix
    FM EX1 and the appeal ought to have been allowed under the  Immigration
    Rules.

15. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Holmes for the reasons stated
    in the grounds.

Findings on the Appellant's challenge

16. The requirements for indefinite leave to remain as a  partner  are  set
    out in Section R-ILRP of Appendix FM.

17. R-ILRP.1.1 states that the requirements to be met for indefinite  leave
    to remain as a partner are -

      a) the applicant and their partner must be in the UK;

      b) the applicant must have made a  valid  application  for  indefinite
         leave to remain as a partner;

      c) the applicant must not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in
         Section S/LTR: suitability - leave to remain;

      d) the applicant must meet all of the requirements of Section  E-LTRP:
         eligibility for leave to remain as a partner; and

      e) the applicant must meet all of the requirements of Section  E-ILRP:
         eligibility for indefinite leave to remain as a partner.

18. The judge was wrong when he stated that the Appellant  could  not  meet
    the Rules because he required to have made a valid application for  the
    relevant leave.  This is not a requirement where Article  8  is  raised
    (GEN 1.9).

19. However he was right to state that the  applicant  must  not  fall  for
    refusal under any of the grounds in Section S-LTR which includes, under
    S-LTR.2.2:

         "Whether or not to the applicant's knowledge -

         (a)  false information,  representations  or  documents  have  been
             submitted in relation  to  the  application  (including  false
             information submitted to any person to obtain a document  used
             in support of the application); or

         (b)  there has  been  a  failure  to  disclose  material  facts  in
             relation to the application."

20.  The  judge  correctly  stated  that  refusal  on  these   grounds   is
    discretionary.  S-LTR.2.1 states that the applicant  will  normally  be
    refused on grounds of suitability if any of the paragraphs S-LTR.2.2 to
    2.4 apply. This is an Appellant who, on the judge's findings, knowingly
    produced a false document in order to try to obtain leave on the  basis
    of UK ancestry, leave which he knew that he was not entitled.  In these
    circumstances the normal course of events  should  be  followed  and  a
    refusal on suitability grounds made.

21. Accordingly the Appellant is not in a position to successfully navigate
    his way through to Section EX1 and to rely upon that exception so as to
    bring himself within the Immigration Rules.

22. Whilst the judge's reasoning was overly compressed his  conclusion  was
    right.

The Respondent's challenge

23. The Secretary of State also sought permission to appeal the decision to
    allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds in the following terms.

24. The Secretary of State noted that the  Appellant  had  submitted  false
    documents to acquire and repeatedly extend his leave in  the  UK.   The
    judge  failed to  give  adequate  consideration  to  the  Secretary  of
    State's  legitimate  interests  in  maintaining  effective  immigration
    control given the Appellant's complete disregard for the Rules and laws
    in the UK.  The judge found that the Appellant's wife and  child  would
    be unable to return to Zimbabwe with him  but  her  illness  was  under
    control at the date of hearing and there was no evidence that  she  was
    unable to acquire the relevant drugs in Zimbabwe.  The Appellant failed
    to meet the requirements of the Rules and the judge failed to  identify
    any  compelling  circumstances   which   would   render   his   removal
    disproportionate.

25. The Tribunal did not apply  the  income  threshold  in  its  Article  8
    assessment.  In making a decision it was  necessary  for  the  decision
    maker to consider all the legislation relevant and to give reasons  for
    the way it applies the legislation to the  facts  of  this  case.   The
    income threshold ensures that  those  who  choose  to  establish  their
    family life in the UK should have  the  financial  ability  to  support
    themselves and to be able to support their partner's  integration  into
    British society.  It was inappropriate that the Tribunal should  decide
    to  disregard  the  financial  requirements  of  the   Rules   in   its
    proportionality assessment.

26. The Immigration Rules specify  that  the  existence  of  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life continuing outside the UK is a key  factor  in
    the proportionality assessment, albeit not a determinative factor.  The
    Rules  require  an  assessment  of  whether  removal  is  prevented  by
    insurmountable obstacles rather than whether it is reasonable to expect
    the family to leave together.  It was acknowledged that  the  facts  of
    the  individual  case  are  the   starting   point   when   considering
    proportionality but they are also the starting point which then has  to
    be balanced against the public interest as reflected in the new  Rules.
    The public interest achieved by applying clear Rules must  be  measured
    by the effect of the Rules across the board not just in relation to  an
    individual  case.   The  Tribunal  did  not  apply  this  approach  and
    misdirected itself in law.  Furthermore it was made  clear  in  Gulshan
    [2013] UKUT 00640 that the Article 8 assessment should only be  carried
    out where there are compelling  circumstances  not  recognised  by  the
    Rules.  The Tribunal did not identify such compelling circumstances and
    its findings are unsustainable.  Gulshan also made  it  clear  that  an
    appeal  ought  only  to  be  allowed  where   there   are   exceptional
    circumstances  which  are  ones  where  refusal  would   lead   to   an
    unjustifiably harsh outcome.

27. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Landes on  24th  April  2014.
    Judge Landes said that there was force in the argument that  the  judge
    had  failed  to  give  adequate  consideration  to  the  interests   of
    maintaining immigration control, given the  Appellant's  submission  of
    false documents. However she considered the other grounds to  be  thin.
    There was no challenge to the adequacy of the judge's reasoning that it
    would not be reasonable for the family to live in Zimbabwe nor  to  his
    finding that the Appellant's wife and child would be at  risk  of  harm
    there.  If family members would be at risk it is difficult to  see  how
    this is not an insurmountable obstacle.  If EX1 applies  the  financial
    threshold  is  not  applicable  under  the  Immigration  Rules.  It  is
    difficult to see how the Respondent could argue that the  judge  should
    have applied the income threshold having found that  the  family  could
    not live in Zimbabwe.  If the judge was right in his factual conclusion
    there would be compelling circumstances.

Submissions

28. Mr Diwnycz relied on his grounds.

29. Mrs Preston submitted that the judge  had  identified  the  exceptional
    circumstances  in  this  case  and  was  right  to  conclude  that  the
    consequences of removal would be unjustifiably harsh  for  the  British
    wife and child.  The question of the income threshold was not relevant,
    and   EX1 had no such threshold.

Findings and Conclusions

30. With respect to Ground 1, the judge plainly did take into  account  the
    Secretary of State's  legitimate  interests  in  maintaining  effective
    immigration control.  He started off  his  considerations  by  with  an
    assessment of the Respondent's case, and stating in bold terms that the
    Appellant was a dishonest man. The judge noted that he had  omitted  to
    mention, in emphasising the fact that he has  worked  to  maintain  his
    family, that he had no right to work  and  was  occupying  a  job  that
    potentially someone with the right to be here and to work was denied.

31. Essentially Ground 1 is a complaint  about  weight  and  amounts  to  a
    disagreement with the decision.

32. The reference to the income threshold is misconceived.  The question of
    whether the Respondent's decision was in pursuant of a legitimate  aim,
    one of which is the economic wellbeing of  the  country,  was  in  fact
    addressed by the judge, who noted that the economic  wellbeing  of  the
    country would be maintained by the Appellant working here  and,  if  he
    were to be removed, his wife  and  child  would  lose  their  financial
    independence from the State.  Moreover there is no reference to such  a
    threshold in Section EX1 which refers solely to the  reasonableness  of
    expecting a British citizen child to leave the UK or to  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life with the partner continuing outside the UK.

33. The finding by the judge that they would be at risk of harm in Zimbabwe
    was not challenged in the grounds nor by Mr Diwnycz at the hearing.  It
    is therefore difficult to see why the substantive requirements  of  EX1
    are not met and hard to argue that the judge's decision  to  allow  the
    appeal on Article 8 grounds was not open to him.

34. Finally, the facts of this case are wholly different from the facts  in
    Gulshan.  Here there is a clear  argument  that  there  are  compelling
    circumstances not recognised by the  Rules.   The  Appellant's  British
    wife suffers from a number of health  problems.   There  is  a  British
    citizen child.

35. The Secretary of State's challenge therefore fails.

Decision

The judge's decision stands.  The Appellant's appeal is dismissed under  the
Immigration Rules but allowed on human rights grounds.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


