
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43502/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 November 2016                            |On 23rd Decemeber 2016        |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     CS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms K Reid, Counsel, instructed by Obadiah Rose
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of State.  However,
    for convenience I refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal ("FtT").

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica, born on  4  April  1974.  On  23
    March 2011 she applied for leave to remain on Article 8 grounds.   That
    application was refused in a decision dated 14  October  2014,  with  a
    further decision to remove her under s.10 of the Immigration and Asylum
    Act 1999.

 3. The appellant appealed against those decisions,  and  her  appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson ("the FtJ") on 10  February
    2016. He allowed the appeal under Article 8 of the  ECHR,  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.

 4. The further background to the appeal  is  that  there  was  an  earlier
    appeal before the First-tier Tribunal, following which the  appeal  had
    also been allowed.  That decision was set aside by the  Upper  Tribunal
    after a hearing on 30 October 2015, and thus  the  appeal  came  before
    Judge Hodgkinson.

 5.  The  FtJ  referred  to  the  appellant's  family   circumstances   and
    immigration history, to the effect that she came to the UK on 28 August
    2008 as a work permit holder. In November 2008 she was  joined  by  her
    husband and two children, all having leave to  enter  until  13  August
    2012 on the basis of the appellant's work permit.  The  appellant  then
    submitted an application for leave as a Tier 2 Migrant,  and  leave  in
    that capacity was granted until 14 February 2011, her husband  and  two
    children being granted leave to remain as her dependants. On 1 February
    2011 she applied for leave to remain outside the Rules on compassionate
    grounds, and on 24 February 2011 that application was refused, but with
    a  right  of  appeal.   There  was  a  request   by   the   appellant's
    representatives for reconsideration of that decision on 23 March  2011,
    which resulted in the decision under appeal,  being  dated  14  October
    2014.  Although the decision  letter  refers  at  paragraph  7  to  the
    application having been made on 13 June 2014, that in fact  appears  to
    be in error, it being a reference to additional submissions  on  behalf
    of the appellants by their solicitors, under cover of a letter dated 13
    June 2014, seemingly in response to a request for  further  information
    from the respondent.  It appears from that letter that  the  respondent
    had agreed to reconsider the application for leave to remain  in  2011,
    and that the culmination of that process and  the  further  information
    provided, was the decision under appeal.

 6. Although the Upper Tribunal had set aside the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Haria who  heard  the  appeal  on  21  April  2015,  the
    findings of fact that were not  infected  by  the  error  of  law  were
    directed to stand.  Judge Hopkinson applied those findings of  fact  to
    his conclusions. The findings are to be found at [10] and [12]  of  his
    decision.

 7. By way of background, it is to be noted that the  family  now  comprise
    the appellant, her husband, and their  three  children,  N  born  on  6
    January 1997, C born on 11 October 2004 and AC born on 4 March 2012  in
    the UK.

    The Grounds and Submissions

 8. The respondent's grounds contend that the FtJ erred in concluding  that
    it would be unreasonable for the appellant's children to leave the  UK.
    The respondent relies on the decision in EV (Philippines)  v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA  Civ  874  and  Zoumbas  v
    Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2013]  UKSC  74.   It  is
    argued that the FtJ had focused on the appellant's children's  wish  to
    continue education in the UK, as distinct from any continuing right  to
    that education. None of the children are  British  citizens,  and  that
    should have been the starting point for consideration of whether it was
    reasonable for them to return to Jamaica with the appellant.

 9. In submissions Mr Tufan also referred to the decision in MA  (Pakistan)
    & ORS v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 705.
     It was submitted that the FtJ had erred in law at [39]  in  concluding
    that the "little  weight"  provisions  of  s.117B(4)  and  (5)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, ("the 2002 Act")  had  no
    application.  Furthermore, precarious family life  was  also  a  matter
    that needed to be considered, in the light or the decision in Rajendran
    (s.117B - family life) [2016] UKUT 138 (IAC).

10. The children's best interests were not determinative of the appeal.

11. Ms Reid submitted that the FtJ's conclusions were open to  him  on  the
    evidence and in the light  of  his  findings  of  fact.   The  previous
    findings of the FtT were preserved. The decision in  MA  (Pakistan)  at
    [46] and [49] in  particular  was  relied  on.   The  FtJ  was  correct
    therefore, to place significant weight on the length of time  that  the
    child C in particular had been here. The FtJ had been aware of the fact
    that the children were not British citizens,  that  being  one  of  the
    preserved findings from the earlier appeal.

12. I was referred to [53] of MA (Pakistan) in terms of the best  interests
    of  a  child  requiring  to  be  assessed  without  reference  to   the
    immigration history or status of the child's parents.

    Conclusions

13. It was common ground before the FtJ that the appellant is not  able  to
    meet the Article 8 requirements of the Immigration Rules.  Accordingly,
    the FtJ considered the appeal outside the Rules,  under  Article  8  at
    large.

14. Certain findings of fact were either uncontroversial or the subject  of
    preserved findings.  In that context, I set out  [10]  -  [12]  of  the
    FtJ's decision as follows (with appropriate  anonymisation),  and  with
    [10] being a quotation from the decision of the Upper Tribunal:

         "10. ...

         "4. The following facts are uncontroversial:
           (i) The claimant entered the United Kingdom on  28  August  2008
           with leave to remain as a work permit holder conferred until  13
           August 2012.  The claimant's spouse and two children  -  N,  who
           was 13 years old at that time and C, who  was  5�  years  old  -
           entered as her dependants on 5 March 2010  (sic).  According  to
           the Home Office bundle they were each given leave  to  enter  in
           line with the claimant.  A third child of the  relationship  was
           born in the United Kingdom on 4 March 2012 [AC]. N and C are  at
           school in the United Kingdom, and both are doing well  in  their
           studies;
           (ii)  The  appellant  worked  as  a  teacher  in   Jamaica   for
           approximately twelve  years  and  has  a  Bachelor's  Degree  in
           Guidance and Counselling.  She taught in the United Kingdom  for
           a year after her arrival.   In  2010  she  was  offered  further
           employment as a teacher, but that offer was  terminated  because
           she failed to obtain a work permit in time.  She currently works
           on a part-time basis as a tutor in Maths, English and Science;
           (iii) On his arrival in United Kingdom  the  claimant's  husband
           obtained employment as a sanitising cleaner  in  a  hospital  in
           Essex, and undertook such employment until  the  expiry  of  his
           permission to work.

           11. The date of  5  March  2010,  referred  to  in  the  Panel's
           decision as being the date of arrival in the United  Kingdom  of
           the appellant's husband and two  older  children  is,  in  fact,
           incorrect, it being common  ground  that  they  arrived  in  the
           United Kingdom in 2008.  the date of 5 March 2010  is  the  date
           upon which the appellant submitted her said Tier 2 application.

           12. Turning then to specific additional  factual  findings  made
           before the  Judge  in  her  decision,  such  might  properly  be
           summarised as follows:

           1) The appellant and her husband have  a  genuine  marriage  and
           they live as a household  unit,  which  also  incorporate  their
           three children, [N], [C] and [AC];

           2) [N] was born on 6 January 1997 and was 11 years old  when  he
           arrived in the United Kingdom; [C] was born on 11  October  2004
           and was almost 4 years  old  when  she  arrived  in  the  United
           Kingdom; [AC] was born on 5 March 2012 in the United Kingdom and
           has lived her life to date in the United Kingdom;

           3)The appellant and her family have established private lives in
           the United Kingdom and have formed friendships in the community,
           such that Article 8 is engaged;

           4) The  appellant  has  numerous  extended  family  members  and
           friends who are  supportive  of  the  appellant  but  she  could
           maintain  any  friendships  from  abroad  by  modern  means   of
           communication, in the same way that she has  maintained  contact
           with her mother and sister in Jamaica since coming to the United
           Kingdom;

           5)The appellant's mother and sister reside in Jamaica;

           6) [N] is now 18 years  old,  the  best  interests  of  the  two
           younger children lie in them remaining with their  parents,  and
           it reasonable to expect that [AC] would easily adapt to life  in
           Jamaica with the support of her parents. [C] was been at  school
           in the United Kingdom since January 2009 and has participated in
           various school activities, is doing very well at school and  has
           aspirations  of  becoming  a  lawyer.  She  will  be  moving  to
           secondary school  in  September.  If  removed  from  the  United
           Kingdom [C] could maintain her existing  friendships  by  modern
           means of communication.

           7) [C] has no experience of the Jamaican  education  system  and
           removing her to Jamaica would disrupt her current stability  and
           continuity, although she is due to attend a different school  in
           September 2015.  It would be devastating to her to uproot her to
           Jamaica at this stage, as she is at  a  critical  stage  in  her
           education. She would have no difficulty adapting to the Jamaican
           education system without her friends and peers, and it would  be
           detrimental  to  her  to  remove  her  to  Jamaica,  she  having
           developed social, cultural and educational ties  in  the  United
           Kingdom. It is in [C]'s  best  interests  if  the  appellant  be
           permitted to remain in the United Kingdom.

           8) [N] is currently studying  for  his  A-levels  and  hopes  to
           attend university to study engineering. He  plays  football  for
           his college team and he is well-settled and mature. If he wished
           to do so as an adult, he could apply  to  study  in  the  United
           Kingdom.  He is of an age where he  is  establishing  a  private
           life of his own outside the family unit;

           9) The appellant and her family are  not  British  and  have  no
           rights to future education or healthcare in the United Kingdom;

           10) With regard to the appellant's husband's medical  condition,
           which involved an episode of minor palpitations, in  respect  of
           which he had seen a cardiologist, his blood pressure  was  found
           to be  normal  over  a  24-hour  period,  his  palpitations  had
           improved and he was in receipt of beta-blockers, there being  no
           objective evidence to indicate that  such  medication  would  be
           unavailable in Jamaica;

           11) The appellant, her husband and children  all  speak  English
           and have demonstrated that they are able to integrate  into  the
           United Kingdom society. They live in a close family unit and the
           appellant would not have much difficulty in finding a job  as  a
           teacher in the United Kingdom. Her husband has demonstrated that
           he is able to find employment in the United Kingdom;

           12) There would be some burden  on  the  taxpayer  in  that  the
           children will be entitled to education and the family  would  be
           entitled to access to the National Health Service."

15. It must be said however, that where at [12(7)] the FtJ said that it was
    a preserved finding that "It would  be  devastating"  to  uproot  C  to
    Jamaica as she is at a critical stage in her education,  in  fact  what
    Judge Haria  said  at  [44]  of  her  decision  is  that  it  could  be
    devastating to uproot her; plainly not the same thing as would.

16. I do not detect in the respondent's grounds or submissions any argument
    to the effect that  the  FtJ  erred  in  his  assessment  of  the  best
    interests of C in particular, who was plainly the focus for the appeal,
    she having lived in the UK at the time of the hearing  before  the  FtJ
    for about seven years and two months.  At [34], adopting the  preserved
    findings, he concluded that it would not be in her  best  interests  to
    leave the UK.

17. At [37] he  said  that  it  was  not  contended  that  there  were  any
    "countervailing factors" applicable in the case of  the  appellant,  or
    any  of  the  family  with  reference  to  what  he  described  as  the
    suitability requirements.  He referred to the fact that  the  appellant
    is "clearly highly employable" as a science teacher, if she were  given
    permission to work, and her  husband  has  a  work  history.   He  then
    concluded that "there are no strong reasons for me to conclude that  it
    would be anything other than reasonable [sic] to expect  [C]  to  leave
    the United Kingdom".  I assume that he meant to say unreasonable.

18. The FTJ then went on to refer to the decision in Treebhawon and  others
    (section 117B(6)) [2015] UKUT 674 (IAC), in particular at [22] in which
    it was said as follows:

         "22.      It  would  further  appear  that  the   'little   weight'
             provisions of section 117B(4) - (5) are of no application.  If
             Parliament had  been  desirous  of  qualifying,  or  diluting,
             section 117B(6) by reference to either section 117B(4) or (5),
             it could  have  done  so  with  ease.  It  has  not  done  so.
             Fundamentally, there is no  indication  in  the  structure  or
             language of Part 5A that in cases where, on the facts, section
             117B(4) and/or (5) is engaged, the unambiguous proclamation in
             Section 117B(6) is in some way weakened or  demoted.  To  this
             may be added the analysis in [18] - [21] above. Clearly, there
             is much to favour this construction. However, conscious of the
             limits of the judicial  function,  we  decline  to  provide  a
             definitive answer to this discrete question, for two  reasons.
             First, we received no argument upon it. Second,  it  does  not
             clearly fall within the grant of permission to appeal."

19. Having referred to the decision in Treebhowan and others, the FtJ  said
    that the maintenance of immigration controls in the present instance is
    not in the public interest, and that s.117B(1),  (2)  and  (3)  do  not
    apply.  Those provisions provide that effective immigration control  is
    in the public interest, that it is  in  the  public  interest  that  an
    individual is able to speak English,  and  that  such  are  financially
    independent.

20. The FtJ went on also to conclude that the "little weight" provisions of
    s.117B(4) and (5) do not apply, in the light of Treebhowan and others.

21. The reliance on the decision in Treebhowan must now, it seems to me, be
    in some doubt in the light of [45] of MA (Pakistan).

22. However, so far as the ability  to  speak  English  and  the  need  for
    financial  self-sufficiency  are  concerned,  the  FtJ  in  any   event
    concluded that the appellant is highly employable as a science teacher,
    and  that  her  husband  has  a   work   history.    He   also   found,
    uncontroversially, that they all speak fluent English.  Insofar  as  it
    could be said that he was wrong to conclude that  those  provisions  of
    s.117B do not apply, if there is an error in that  respect  it  is  not
    material in the circumstances.

23. Furthermore, although again the FtJ  said  at  [39]  that  the  "little
    weight" provisions of s.117B(4) and (5) have no application, relying on
    the decision in Treebhowan and others, it is not at all clear, and  has
    not been suggested on behalf of the respondent, that the appellants are
    in the UK unlawfully, because it would appear that the application  for
    further leave to remain was made during the currency of their  existing
    leave.  It is undoubtedly the case however, that the immigration status
    of the appellant and each member of her family was precarious.

24. In any event, in terms of any error of law  in  failing  to  take  into
    account precariousness, or unlawful status of the  appellant  or  other
    family members, if it be such, it is nevertheless important to bear  in
    mind what was said at [46] of MA (Pakistan) to the effect that the fact
    that a child has been here for seven years must  be  given  significant
    weight when carrying out the proportionality exercise. Furthermore,  in
    that case reference was made to published guidance in August  2015,  in
    the form of the Immigration Directorate Instructions  entitled  "Family
    Life...10 Year Routes" in which it is expressly stated  that  once  the
    seven years' residence requirement  is  satisfied,  there  need  to  be
    "strong reasons" for refusing leave.

25. The Court of Appeal found that although those instructions were not  in
    force at the time of the appeals in the cases before them, they confirm
    what is implicit in adopting a policy of that nature.  Furthermore,  at
    [49] the Court said  that  seven  years'  residence  establishes  as  a
    starting point that leave should be granted unless there  are  powerful
    reasons to the contrary.

26. Although in submissions on behalf of the respondent  it  was  contended
    that part  of  the  decision  in  Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions
    affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197 (IAC) was said by
    the Court of Appeal to be wrong in terms of  compelling  reasons  being
    needed for disruption of that residence in  the  UK,  the  FtJ  in  the
    appeal with which I am concerned did not expressly adopt that aspect of
    the decision in Azimi-Moayed.  He clearly decided  the  appeal  on  the
    basis of the reasonableness test.

27. It seems to me to be clear that even if the FtJ had erred in concluding
    that the public interest requirements did not apply  because  s.117B(6)
    was satisfied in relation to C, the whole tenor of his decision  is  to
    the effect that those public interest requirements would not  have  led
    to a different outcome. The FtJ undertook a rounded assessment  of  all
    the circumstances, coming to conclusions on the law from  the  platform
    of the accepted findings  of  fact.   It  is  not  suggested  that  any
    particular factor was not taken into account, at least in terms of  the
    facts.

28. Whilst it is possible to conclude that a different judge may have  come
    to a different conclusion, the FtJ considered this  appellant's  appeal
    in the context of the family overall, which is what he was required  to
    do  under  the  Article  8  assessment.  He  appropriately  focused  in
    particular on C's best  interests,  and  the  established  findings  in
    relation to her situation in the UK.

29. In all the circumstances, I am not satisfied that there is any error of
    law in the FtJ's decision, or that if there is, it is an error  of  law
    that requires the decision to be set aside.

    Decision

30. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law.  Its decision to  allow  the  appeal  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR therefore stands.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            22/12/16
