
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/43214/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26th August 2015                  |On 2nd September 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            EMMANUAL OGBONNA EZE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr F Singarajah (counsel) instructed by Nasim & Co,
solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal  but
in order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Turnock, promulgated on 13  May  2015,
which allowed the Appellant's and held that  the  respondent's  decision  to
remove the appellant from the UK was  disproportionate  and  unlawful  under
Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

Background

3.    The appellant is  a  Nigerian  citizen,  born  on  27  May  1960.  The
appellant first visited the UK in 2000.  The  appellant  was  granted  entry
clearance as a visitor in 2000, again in 2002, and again in 2004.

4     On 4 February 2014, the appellant applied for leave to remain  in  the
UK on the basis of his relationship with his  partner  and  their  children.
That application was refused on 25 February 2014, but no decision to  remove
the appellant from the UK was made. The  appellant  raised  judicial  review
proceedings which were concluded by a consent  order.  The  respondent  then
gave  further  consideration  to  the  appellant's  claim  and  refused  the
appellant's claim (of new) and issued a decision  to  remove  the  appellant
from the UK on 13 October 2014.

The Judge's Decision

5     The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal.  First  Tier
Tribunal  Judge  Turnock  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  under  the
Immigration Rules but allowed the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds,  because
the appellant's partner and their children have leave to remain  in  the  UK
until January 2016.

6     The Secretary of State lodged grounds of appeal and on  9  July  2015,
First Tier Tribunal Judge Pooler gave permission to  appeal,  stating  inter
alia:

    "The judge found that the circumstances  of  the  appellant  should  be
    considered together which those of his partner and their four  children
    (who had leave to remain) when their leave expired in January 2016  and
    arguably failed to give reasons for his conclusion at [60] that at  the
    date of hearing, it was not possible to expect the appellant to  return
    to Nigeria and apply for entry clearance."

The Hearing

7     Mr Nath, for the respondent, argued that between [57]  and  [59],  the
judge sets out the case law but does not set out any reasoning, and then  at
[60], the judge makes a bold statement that it is  not  reasonable  for  the
appellant to return to Nigeria to apply for entry clearance from  there.  He
argued that it was incumbent on the judge to look at the  situation  at  the
date of the hearing and to reach conclusions based on the evidence,  and  to
set out those conclusions. He argued that a fair reading  of  [57]  to  [60]
discloses a material error of law because the judge failed  to  analyse  the
evidence and set out clear reasons for reaching the conclusion that he  did.


8     Mr Singarajah, Counsel for  the  appellant,  relied  on  the  case  of
Budhathoki (Reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC). He told me  that
when the decision is read as a whole, it sets out adequate reasons and  that
neither party is left in any doubt about the reasons that the judge came  to
the decision that he did. It was his position that  the  grounds  of  appeal
amount to no more than a disagreement with the findings made  by  the  judge
and an attempt to re-litigate matters, rather than  identifying  a  material
error of law.

Analysis

9     At paragraph 49 of MA (Somalia) [2010]  UKSC  49,  it  was  said  that
"Where a tribunal has referred to considering all the evidence, a  reviewing
body should be very slow to conclude  that  that  tribunal  overlooked  some
factor, simply because the factor is  not  explicitly  referred  to  in  the
determination concerned".

10    In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that (i) Although there is a legal duty to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

11    In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC), it  was
held that (i) It was axiomatic that a determination  disclosed  clearly  the
reasons for a tribunal's decision. (ii) If a tribunal  found  oral  evidence
to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document  to  be  worth  no
weight whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the determination  and  for
such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a  witness
was not believed or that a document was afforded no weight was  unlikely  to
satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

12    In this case, the judge  could  have,  perhaps,  expressed  himself  a
little more clearly and could have expanded on his reasons for finding  that
Article 8 ECHR is engaged, and that the respondent's decision to remove  the
appellant is a disproportionate interference with the right to  respect  for
family and private life. However,  when  the  determination  is  read  as  a
whole, I find that there is no  misdirection  of  law  and  that  the  judge
properly considered the statutory framework and the  case  law  relevant  to
the appeal.

13    It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration  Judge  to  give
too little weight or too much weight to a factor,  unless  irrationality  is
alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to  deal
with every factual issue under argument. Disagreement with  an  Immigrations
Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of the evidence or assessment  of
credibility, or his evaluation of risk does not give rise  to  an  error  of
law.  Unless  an  Immigration  Judge's  assessment  of  proportionality   is
arguable as being completely wrong, there is no error of law, nor is  it  an
error of law for an Immigration Judge not to  have  regard  to  evidence  of
events arising after his decision or for him to have  taken  no  account  of
evidence that was not before him. Rationality is a very high  threshold  and
a conclusion is not irrational just  because  some  alternative  explanation
has been rejected or can be said to be possible.

14.   I am satisfied that the Judge's determination when  read  as  a  whole
sets out findings that were sustainable, sufficiently detailed and based  on
cogent reasoning.

 CONCLUSION

15.   I therefore find that no errors of law have been established and  that
the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

16.   The appeal is dismissed.


Signed      Date 1st September 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

