


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
IA/43237/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at : Field House                   |   Decisions and Reasons          |
|                                         |Promulgated                       |
|On 30 March 2016                         |   On 10 May 2016                 |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant
                                     And


                    MOHANED ABDULHAMID A MOHAMED ABUHEIMA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs N Willcocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Bahja, Counsel instructed by Forward & Yussuf
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing Mr  Abuheima's
    appeal against her decision to refuse  his  application  for  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant.

2.    For the purposes of this decision, I shall hereinafter  refer  to  the
    Secretary of State as the respondent and Mr Abuheima as the  appellant,
    reflecting their positions as they were in the appeal before the First-
    tier Tribunal.

3.    The appellant is a citizen of  Libya  born  on  7  February  1979.  He
    entered the United Kingdom on 13 July 2006. He  was  granted  leave  to
    enter as a student and then latterly as a  Tier  1  Post  Study  Worker
    until 2 August 2014. On 29 July 2014 the appellant applied for  further
    leave to remain as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant.

4.    According to the respondent, the  appellant's  sponsor's  licence  was
    cancelled on 13 August 2014 and a decision was therefore  made,  on  13
    October 2014, refusing his application for leave to remain  and  giving
    directions for his removal under section 47 of the Immigration,  Asylum
    and Nationality Act 2006.

5.    The appeal came before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Zahed  on  19  May
    2015. The respondent was represented and  Mr  Bahja  appeared  for  the
    appellant. There was no dispute before the  judge  that  the  appellant
    could not succeed under the Immigration Rules as  he  did  not  have  a
    valid Certificate of Sponsorship.  The  judge  noted  that  there  was;
    amongst other things, a respondent's and appellant's appeal bundle  and
    a Skeleton Argument. The  judge  heard  evidence  from  the  appellant.
    Essentially, the judge found that the appellant should have been sent a
    letter granting him a period of time in which to find a new sponsor and
    make a fresh application. He allowed the appeal on that limited basis.

6.    Permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  sought  by  the
    respondent on the grounds that the judge  had  misdirected  himself  by
    reference to the guidance in Patel (India) [2011] UKUT 211.  Permission
    to appeal was granted on 11 February 2016 on all grounds.

Appeal Hearing

7.    At the hearing Mrs Willocks-Briscoe noted the brevity of the  decision
    and the judge's failure to refer to any of the evidence before  him  as
    well as the respondent's submissions.  She  submitted  that  the  judge
    failed to give  adequate  reasons  and  failed  to  identify  a  policy
    applicable to Tier 2 Migrants allowing a period of  grace.  She  stated
    that the  case  of  Patel  (supra)  concerned  students  and  that  the
    principles therein did not extend to Tier 2 Migrants.

8.    Mr Bahja acknowledged that the judge's decision should have been  more
    detailed, but he nevertheless submitted that the judge did not  err  in
    law. He submitted that the judge correctly applied Patel even though he
    did not refer to it. He stated that the appellant was entitled to a 60-
    day reprieve in order to find a new sponsor as  the  sponsor's  licence
    was cancelled after the application was  lodged.  He  referred  to  his
    Skeleton Argument before the judge and the Tier 2 policy  guidance.  He
    stated that it was not open to the appellant to vary his application as
    his leave had been extended by virtue of s.3C of  the  Immigration  Act
    1971.

9.    In reply, Mrs Willocks-Briscoe submitted  that  it  was  open  to  the
    appellant to vary his application up until the time a decision was made
    and she reminded the Tribunal  that  no  record  of  the  evidence  was
    referred to in the judge's decision.




Consideration and Findings

10.   Whilst Mr Bahja made a valiant attempt to defend the  decision,  I  am
    satisfied that the judge's decision involved the making of an error  of
    law such that the decision must be set aside.

11.   There is no dispute between the parties that the judge's  decision  is
    very brief and does not refer to  the  evidence  and  the  respondent's
    submissions. The decision consists of eight paragraphs. The first  five
    paragraphs refer to the  background  to  the  appeal  proceedings,  the
    documentation submitted in support of the appeal and the fact that  the
    appellant gave oral evidence. At paras. [6],  [7]  and  [8]  the  judge
    stated as follows:

    "6. The appellant argues that he should have been granted  60  days  in
    order to find a new Sponsor,  as  the  cancellation  of  his  Sponsor's
    Licence was not his fault. I find that the appellant's position is akin
    to those Tier 4 students who had a valid CAS at the time of application
    but at the time of decision the CAS became  invalid  as  the  Sponsor's
    Licence was revoked. In those circumstances the respondent had a policy
    that they would inform the appellant that their CAS was not  valid  and
    were given a period of time in which to submit a further CAS before the
    decision was to be made.

    7. I find that  the  respondent  should  have  sent  a  letter  to  the
    appellant to state that at the time of looking at his  application  his
    Sponsor's Licence had been revoked and  that  he  would  be  allowed  a
    period of time in order to submit a fresh Sponsor's  licence  at  which
    time a decision would be made on  his  application.  I  find  that  the
    appellant had submitted a valid Certificate of Sponsorship at the  time
    of application and his Sponsor had a valid licence. I  also  find  that
    the appellant did not have anything to do with  the  Sponsor's  Licence
    being revoked.

    8. I find that the respondent has acted not in accordance with the law.
    I thus allow the appeal to the extent that the matter is sent  back  to
    the respondent to make a lawful decision and that the decision  on  the
    appellant's application is still outstanding."

    In allowing the appeal to this limited extent I am satisfied  that  the
    judge's reasoning is inadequate.

12.   Whilst brevity in decision-making can be  a  virtue,  the  judge  must
    demonstrate that he has  considered  the  respective  position  of  the
    parties' and has reached a sufficiently reasoned decision in accordance
    with the evidence. This I find the judge failed to do. As Mrs Willocks-
    Briscoe pointed out, there is no reference to the evidence  or  to  the
    respondent's submissions. No findings of fact have been made in respect
    of the appellant's credibility save that he was not  complicit  in  the
    cancellation of the sponsor's licence albeit there was no suggestion to
    the contrary. Findings of fact,  in  respect  of  the  background  were
    pertinent to the question  of  fairness.  For  instance,  the  evidence
    before the judge indicated that the sponsor was aware as  early  as  13
    August 2014 that its licence had been suspended. This was shortly after
    the appellant made his application on 29 July 2014 and long  after  the
    respondent's decision to refuse the application on 13 October  2014.  A
    period of two months thus lapsed in  which  the  appellant  could  have
    sought to vary his application had he been aware of the suspension.  No
    consideration has been given to such  issues.  It  is  clear  from  the
    Skeleton Argument put before  the  judge  that  detailed  arguments  in
    relation to the  question  of  fairness  were  raised.  None  of  those
    arguments have been considered and determined and there is no reference
    to the principle of "fairness" in  the  decision.  These  failings  are
    material to the decision as the appellant's case was essentially put on
    the basis of "fairness".

13.   What the judge was not entitled to do, as is the  case  here,  was  to
    equate the respondent's policy of granting a period of 60 days leave to
    students, to that of Tier  2  Migrants  simply  by  reference  to  that
    policy. Mr Bahja stated that he placed  a  similar  policy  before  the
    judge and indeed produced a copy of it to the Upper Tribunal. There  is
    no reference to that policy in the decision and it is not apparent that
    the judge considered the same. On  closer  inspection  of  that  policy
    guidance, I note that paragraphs 242 to 244,  upon  which  reliance  is
    placed by Mr Bahja, refers to a 60 day period  in  circumstances  where
    leave has been curtailed which is not the position  of  the  appellant.
    Nevertheless, I accept that these are all arguments  the  judge  should
    have but failed to  consider  and  are  material  to  the  question  of
    fairness.

14.   It is essentially for these reasons  that  I  find  that  the  judge's
    decision cannot stand. Both parties  agreed  that  given  the  lack  of
    consideration and findings on material issues raised in the appeal that
    the appropriate course would be to remit the matter to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for rehearing. I agree  with  that  disposal.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal rehearing the appeal should make findings, in  particular,  on
    whether the  policy  identified  by  Mr  Bahja  is  applicable  to  the
    appellant and, if not, whether any unfairness arises in this case.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an  error  on
a point of law. The Secretary of State's appeal is accordingly  allowed  and
the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. By  agreement  of  the
parties the appeal is remitted to the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for  rehearing
before a judge other than Judge Zahed.










Signed




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral                       Dated

