

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
IA/43561/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               |     Decision and Reasons         |
|                                   |Promulgated                       |
|On 21 May 2015                     |     On 27 May 2015               |
|                                   |                                  |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL

                                   Between

                        Mrs CHARDITA CENTINA BARREDO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms E Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
           Tribunal  Judge  Shimmin  on   16   March   2015   against   the
           determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge P J  Clarke  who  had
           dismissed the Appellant's appeal under Appendix FM as the spouse
           of British Citizen and on human rights (Article  8  ECHR  family
           life) grounds against her removal  in  a  decision  and  reasons
           promulgated on 3 February 2015. The appeal was determined in her
           absence on the papers as the Appellant had requested.


      2.    The Appellant is a national  of  the  Philippines,  born  on  19
           September 1989.  The Appellant had entered  the  United  Kingdom
           with a visa granted outside the Immigration Rules, i.e., in  the
           Secretary of State's discretion, valid from 20 March 2012 to  20
           June 2014.  The Appellant was not entitled to "switch"  and  did
           not meet the eligibility requirements  of  Appendix  FM  of  the
           Immigration Rules.  The  judge  found  that  family  life  could
           reasonably  be  enjoyed  in  the  Philippines   and   that   the
           Appellant's removal was proportionate.


      3.    Permission to appeal was granted because it was considered  that
           it was arguable that the judge had  erred  by  failing  to  have
           regard to all of the evidence.   There  appeared  to  have  been
           documents submitted with  the  variation  of  leave  application
           which the judge had not seen.


      4.    Standard directions were made by the tribunal,  indicating  that
           the appeal would be reheard immediately if a material  error  of
           law were found.   A  rule  24  notice  had  been  filed  on  the
           Respondent's behalf, opposing the onwards appeal.


      5.    When the  appeal  was  called  on  for  hearing,  there  was  no
           appearance by or on behalf of the Appellant.  The tribunal  file
           indicated that the notice of hearing had been  correctly  served
           in good time to the address nominated for  service.   There  had
           been no further communication received from the Appellant or  on
           her behalf.  The Appellant had not supplied any other  means  of
           contacting her, e.g., telephone or email.  The tribunal  decided
           that the appeal could justly and fairly proceed in her absence.




      Submissions


      7.    Ms Savage for the Respondent relied on the rule 24  notice.   It
           had been the Appellant's choice to  nominate  a  paper  hearing.
           The Appellant was simply seeking to attack the judge's  findings
           of fact which had been open to him on the evidence as  it  stood
           on the day of the hearing.  There was no  error  of  fact.   The
           Appellant was not  entitled  to  switch  categories  from  leave
           outside the Immigration Rules to Appendix FM.   The decision and
           reasons should stand.


      8.    No new matters had been raised by the Appellant.  The  documents
           which were said to make a difference had not  been  produced  or
           identified.




      No material error of law finding


      9.    The grounds of appeal raise a number  of  assertions  which,  if
           supported  by  proper  evidence,  would  have  required  careful
           consideration.  The judge was restricted to such evidence as had
           been provided by the parties.   It  was  for  the  Appellant  to
           support  her  case.   The  judge  dealt  with  the   appeal   as
           sympathetically as he could, but his hands were tied:  see  [20]
           of the decision  and  reasons.   In  the  tribunal's  view,  the
           Appellant's challenge amounted to no more than disagreement with
           the judge's conclusions.  No errors of fact were  identified  in
           the decision and reasons.  There was  no  procedural  unfairness
           and the judge cannot be held  responsible  for  the  Appellant's
           choice of a paper hearing.


      10.   The tribunal finds that there was no material error  of  law  in
           the decision and reasons and there is no basis  for  interfering
           with the judge's decision.


      DECISION


      The making of the previous decision did not involve the making  of  an
error on a point of law and stands unchanged

      Signed                                  Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
