
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber)                           Appeal  Number:
IA/43806/2014
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
Heard  at  Field  House,  London                                 Decision  &
Reasons Promulgated
On the 21st December 2015                                        On the  9th
March 2016
Before:
                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL MCGINTY

Between:
                              MR SHAH AZMAN ALI
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                    Claimant
                                     and
                 THE SECRETARY STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
Representation:
For the Appellant (Secretary of State): Mr Kandola (Home  Office  Presenting
Officer)
For the Claimant (Mr Ali): Mr Karim (Counsel)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Ado promulgated on the 15th May 2015, in which  he
      allowed the Claimant's appeal against the decision  to  issue  removal
      directions in accordance with Section 10 of the Immigration Asylum Act
      1999,  consequent  upon  the  Secretary  of  State's  refusal  of  the
      Claimant's application for Leave to Remain in the UK as the spouse  of
      a settled person under the Immigration Rules HC 395,  as  amended.  As
      this is the appeal of the Secretary of  State,  for  the  purposes  of
      clarity throughout this decision, the Appellant will be referred to as
      "the Secretary of State" and the Claimant Mr Ali will be  referred  to
      as "the Claimant".

Background

   2. On the 12th August 2014 the Claimant had applied for Leave  to  Remain
      in the United  Kingdom  as  the  spouse  of  a  settled  person.  That
      application was refused in a decision dated the 16th October 2014. The
      Claimant sought to appeal that decision to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
      and that appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ado  at  Hatton
      Cross on  the  23rd  April  2015.  Within  that  decision,  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Ado did not  accept  that  the  Claimant  had  utilised
      deception by having a Proxy Test Taker take his English language  test
      for him and that this had not been proved by the Secretary of State to
      the requisite standard. He further went on to consider whether or  not
      there would be significant difficulties in the Claimant and  his  wife
      continuing family life outside of the United Kingdom and he found that
      the Claimant did meet the requirements of paragraph EX1.1 (b)  of  the
      Immigration Rules, and that the Claimant's appeal  should  thereby  be
      allowed under the Immigration Rules.


   3. The Secretary of State has sought to appeal that decision to the Upper
      Tribunal, and permission to appeal has been granted by Upper  Tribunal
      Judge McWilliam on the 22nd September 2015. She found that  there  was
      no merit in the first ground of appeal which sought to argue that  the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge had failed to give adequate reasons for  his
      findings that the Claimant had not utilised  deception  and  that  the
      Judge should have had due  consideration  to  the  witness  statements
      which identified this Claimant as  an  individual  who  had  exercised
      deception and had failed to give adequate reasons for holding  that  a
      person who speaks English would therefore have no reason to  secure  a
      test certificate by deception. Upper Tribunal  Judge  McWilliam  found
      that this simply amounted to a disagreement with the findings of First-
      tier Tribunal Judge and that the First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  properly
      considered the evidence at [11] and [12] and that  the  weight  to  be
      attached to that evidence was a matter  for  the  Judge,  as  was  the
      weight to be attached to the Claimant's language ability and that  the
      decision was adequately reasoned.


   4. However, Judge McWilliam did grant permission to appeal to  the  Upper
      Tribunal on the second ground of appeal  on  the  basis  that  it  was
      arguable that the Judge did not apply the correct test in relation  to
      EX.1 and that he arguably applied the test of  reasonableness  instead
      of that of insurmountable obstacles. She further  found  that  as  the
      appeal was allowed under Appendix FM, Section 117B  was  arguably  not
      material. She granted permission in  respect  of  ground  two  of  the
      Grounds of Appeal.


   5. Within ground two of the Grounds of Appeal, it is argued that allowing
      the appeal under paragraph 276 ADE of the Immigration Rules, the First-
      tier Tribunal Judge failed to have account  of  Section  117B  of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  as  the  Claimant  and
      sponsor began  their  relationship  when  the  Claimant's  immigration
      status in the UK was precarious.  It  is  argued  that  this  approach
      should not be  rewarded.  Secondly,  it  is  argued  the  decision  to
      formalise and develop this  relationship  was  a  matter  of  personal
      choice and not the responsibility of the Secretary of  State  for  the
      Home Department  and  that  the  Secretary  of  State  should  not  be
      penalised for the couple's actions. Thirdly, it was  argued  that  the
      outcome of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision is an abuse of the
      Immigration  Rules  and  that  whilst  these  points  may   constitute
      exceptions, they do not mean  that  the  Tribunal's  decision  reached
      requirements of EX.1, not least because it is argued  that  the  child
      was not yet born  and  there  was  nothing  to  prevent  a  short-term
      separation whilst the Appellant seeks entry clearance, as would be the
      case in any other circumstance. It is  argued  that  in  allowing  the
      appeal under the Immigration Rules the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  had
      materially erred in law such that the decision should be set aside.


Submissions

   6. In his oral submissions on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  Mr
      Kandola recognised that permission to appeal had only been granted  on
      ground 2 and that the findings of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in
      respect of deception stood. However, in respect of ground 2, he sought
      to  argue  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   had   focused   on
      reasonableness rather than  insurmountable  obstacles  and  sought  to
      argue that within paragraph 13 the Judge had raised  questions  as  to
      whether or not it was reasonable to expect the sponsor to relocate  to
      Bangladesh in view of the number of years she has spent in the UK  and
      in paragraph 14 had again mentioned that  it  was  not  reasonable  to
      expect the Claimant to return to Bangladesh and leave his wife who was
      expecting a child in less than 5 months' time and  that  "it  was  not
      reasonable  to  expect  the  sponsor  to  accompany  the  Claimant  to
      Bangladesh". He then argued that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  found
      that "I therefore accept the submissions made by  Mr  Hasan  and  find
      that the Claimant satisfied the requirements of paragraph EX.1 (B)  of
      the Immigration Rules." He argued that the  Judge's  concentration  on
      reasonableness rather than the question as to whether or not there are
      insurmountable obstacles, rendered the decision unsafe  and  that  the
      decision should be remade, dismissing the Claimant's appeal.


   7. In his submissions on behalf of the Claimant,  Mr  Karim  argued  that
      permission to appeal had been limited to  ground  2.  He  argued  that
      there was no need to consider Section 117B, as the  appeal  was  being
      allowed under the Immigration Rules by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge.
      He argued that whether or not the decision to  formalise  and  develop
      the relationship between the Claimant and his sponsor was a matter  of
      personal choice, did not mean that the Secretary of State for the Home
      Department was being penalised by the couple's actions  and  that  the
      outcome did not amount to an abuse of the Immigration Rules  and  that
      the argument as  to  whether  or  not  there  could  be  a  short-term
      separation, was irrelevant and that these arguments  did  not  show  a
      material error in law and simply amounted  to  disagreement  with  the
      outcome.



   8. In respect of the issue raised by Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam as to
      whether or not the wrong test had been applied, he argued that it  was
      dangerous to look at words in isolation. He argued that in [4] of  the
      decision, the Judge had set out that in the reasons  for  the  refusal
      letter the Secretary of State had considered paragraph  EX1  and  that
      the Secretary of State had noted that the Claimant did  not  meet  the
      requirements of paragraph EX.1 (B) on  the  ground  that  it  was  not
      accepted  that  there  were  any  insurmountable  obstacles   to   the
      Claimant's family life with  his  spouse  continuing  outside  of  the
      United Kingdom. He argued that the insurmountable obstacles  test  had
      been set out. He further argued that at [9] the Judge  had  considered
      whether or not it would be unduly harsh to remove the  Appellant  from
      the United Kingdom and that this, he argued, was a  higher  test  than
      insurmountable obstacles. He argued that insurmountable  obstacles  do
      not in fact mean obstacles which were impossible to surmount and  that
      the Secretary of State's appeal effectively was an appeal on semantics
      and that the Judge had properly considered all of the relevant  issues
      and applied the correct test.


   9. He further relied upon the House of Lords case of Secretary State  for
      the Home Department v AH (Sudan) and Others [2007]  UKHL  49  and  the
      Lady Hale at [30] in which she stated  "This  is  an  expert  Tribunal
      charged with administering  a  complex  area  of  law  in  challenging
      circumstances. To paraphrase a view which I have expressed about  such
      expert Tribunals  in  another  context,  the  ordinary  courts  should
      approach appeals from them with an appropriate degree of  caution;  it
      is probable that in  understanding  and  applying  the  law  in  their
      specialist field the Tribunal will have got  it  right:  See  Cooke  v
      Secretary of State for Social Security [2001] EWCA Civ 734,  [2002]  3
      ALL ER TR279, paragraph 16. They and they alone are the Judges of  the
      facts. It is not enough that their decision on those  facts  may  seem
      harsh to people who have not heard and read the evidence and arguments
      which they have heard and read. Their  decision  should  be  respected
      unless it is quite clear that they have misdirected themselves in law.
      Appellate courts should not rush to find  such  misdirection's  simply
      because they might have reached a different conclusion on the facts or
      expressed themselves differently".


  10. Mr Karim further sought to argue that they had since the date  of  the
      decision been a change in circumstances in that the  Appellant's  wife
      had now given birth, such that if there was a material error  of  law,
      he left it in my hands as to whether or not the case  remains  in  the
      Upper Tribunal or should be remitted back to the First-tier  Tribunal.
      However, he argued that any error of law  was  not  material,  as  the
      Judge  would  have  come  to  the  same  conclusion  outside  of   the
      Immigration Rules. He further sought to argue that within the  Grounds
      of Appeal it was not specifically stated that the  Judge  had  applied
      the wrong test.

My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

  11. Permission to appeal was not granted in respect of ground one  of  the
      Grounds of Appeal, and therefore I do not make any findings in respect
      thereof and the findings of First-tier Tribunal Judge Ado  in  respect
      of deception thereby stand.


  12. In respect of ground 2 of the Grounds of Appeal, namely that the First-
      tier Tribunal Judge made a material misdirection of  law  in  allowing
      the appeal under paragraph  276  ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  In
      respect of the argument that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  failed  to
      take account of the provisions of Section 117 A-D of the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, the Upper Tribunal  in  the  Case  of
      Bossade ADE (Sections 117 A-D-inter Relationship  with  Rules)  [2015]
      UKUT 415 (IAC)  set  out  specifically  that  ordinarily  a  Court  or
      Tribunal will, as a first stage, consider  an  Appellant's  Article  8
      claim by reference to the Immigration Rules that set  out  substantive
      conditions, without any direct reference to  Part  5A  considerations.
      Such considerations have no direct application to Rules of this  kind.
      Part 5A considerations only have  direct  application  at  the  second
      stage of the Article 8 analysis. It was  found  that  this  method  of
      approach does not amount to according priority to the Rules  over  the
      Primary  Legislation  but  rather  of  recognising   their   different
      functions. When the First-tier Tribunal is  considering  a  Claimant's
      family life under paragraph 276 ADE, it is not carrying out the second
      stage Article 8 analysis  outside  the  Rules,  but  is  applying  the
      substantive conditions as set out  within  the  Rules  without  direct
      reference to Part 5A considerations. Indeed, the  wording  of  Section
      117A (2) makes it clear that it is  when  the  Court  or  Tribunal  is
      considering the public interest question that the  Court  or  Tribunal
      must (in particular) have regard in all cases  to  the  considerations
      listed at Section 117B. The public interest  question  is  defined  at
      Section 117 A (3) as meaning "the question of whether an  interference
      with a person's right to  respect  for  private  and  family  life  is
      justified under Article 8 (2)". I therefore find that had  the  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge gone on to consider the Claimants  appeal  outside
      of the Immigration Rules in respect of Article  8,  then  clearly  the
      considerations under Section 117 A-D of the  Nationality,  Immigration
      and Asylum Act 2002 would have been relevant. However, he did not need
      to  take  them  into  directly  into  account  when  considering   the
      application under the Immigration Rules under Paragraph 276 ADE. There
      is no error of law in the decision on the First-tier Tribunal Judge on
      this basis.


  13. In respect of the second argument that the decision to  formulate  and
      develop their relationship between the Claimant and his sponsor was  a
      matter of personal choice and not the responsible of the Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department and that the Secretary of  State  should
      not be penalised for the couple's actions, this amounts  to  simply  a
      disagreement with the decision reached and does not reveal  any  error
      of law in  the  approach  taken  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.
      Further, the  third  argument  that  the  outcome  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge's decision rewards  abuse  of  the  Immigration  Rules,
      again does not reveal any material  error  of  law,  and  is  entirely
      misconceived, as there were no findings that the Claimant  had  sought
      to abuse the Immigration Rules, and consideration of  his  family  and
      private life under the Immigration Rules is exactly the  consideration
      that the First-tier Tribunal Judge should have been  applying,  as  he
      did, when considering the appeal. Further, in respect of the  argument
      that the points taken by the Judge may constitute exceptions but  they
      did not meet the requirements of paragraph EX1, not least because  the
      child was not yet born, also simply amounts to a disagreement with the
      decision reached  and  does  not  reveal  a  material  error  of  law.
      Furtherthe question as to whether or not there could be  a  short-term
      separation was not  relevant  when  considering  whether  or  not  the
      provisions of paragraph EX.1 were met.


  14.  I further bear in mind that although within the Grounds of Appeal  it
      is argued that the First-tier Tribunal Judge allowed the appeal  under
      paragraph 276 ADE and misdirected himself in law in this regard,  when
      one actually reads the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Ado  and
      his findings of fact between [10] and [14], although  he  allowed  the
      appeal under Appendix FM in respect of the Appellant's family life, he
      did not in fact decide the case on the basis  of  private  life  under
      paragraph 276 ADE, as asserted by the Secretary of State.


  15. However, in respect of the  basis  upon  which  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
      McWilliam granted permission to appeal, namely  that  it  is  arguable
      that the Judge did not apply the correct test in relation to paragraph
      EX.1 and arguably applied the  test  of  "reasonableness"  instead  of
      "insurmountable obstacles", although the Secretary  of  State  in  the
      Grounds of Appeal, does argue that there was a  material  misdirection
      in law, the specific argument raised by Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
      was not raised, but I do accept the submission of Mr Kandola that this
      was a Robinson obvious point which Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam  was
      correct to raise. It is therefore appropriate for me to consider  that
      argument.



  16. I find that although First-tier Tribunal Judge Ado at [4] when dealing
      with the Refusal Letter set out the Secretary  of  State's  stance  in
      respect of paragraph EX.1 and how the Secretary of  State  noted  that
      the Claimant did not meet the requirements of paragraph  EX.1  (B)  on
      the  grounds  that  it  was  not  accepted   that   there   were   any
      insurmountable obstacles to his family life with his spouse continuing
      outside of the United Kingdom, when actually making  his  findings  of
      fact, after finding  at  [12]  that  the  suitability  criteria  under
      appendix FM S-LTR.1.1 to 1.3 of the Immigration  Rules  were  met  and
      that the Secretary of State had accepted that  the  Claimant  and  his
      wife were  in  a  subsisting  relationship  and  having  accepted  the
      documents submitted showing that their  relationship  was  subsisting,
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Ado then states at [13] that  "the  issue  I
      have to consider is whether there will be significant difficulties  in
      the Claimant and his wife continuing family life outside of the United
      Kingdom." Nowhere within his findings between [10] and [14] does First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Ado specifically refer to the actual test that has
      to be applied under paragraph EX.1 as to whether  or  not  there  "are
      insurmountable obstacles to family life with that  partner  continuing
      outside of the UK." Although I do bear in mind  that  under  paragraph
      EX.2 it is stated  that  "for  the  purposes  of  paragraph  EX.1  (B)
      'insurmountable obstacles' means  the  very  significant  difficulties
      which would be faced by the Claimant or their partner continuing their
      family life together outside of the UK which could not be overcome  or
      would entail serious hardship for the Claimant or their partner.'


  17. I do bear in mind the judgement of  Lady  Hale  in  the  case  of  the
      Secretary of State for the Home Department v AH (Sudan) [2007] UKHL 49
      at paragraph 30 and her comments that the First-tier  Tribunal  is  an
      expert Tribunal charged with administering a complex area  of  law  in
      challenging circumstances and that the Courts should approach  appeals
      from them with an appropriate degree of caution  and  it  is  probable
      that in understanding and applying the law in their  specialist  field
      the Tribunal will have got it right. I bear in mind that as Lady  Hale
      stated specific at paragraph 30 that "appellate courts should not rush
      to find such misdirection simply because they  might  have  reached  a
      different conclusion on the facts or expressed themselves differently"
      and that "their decision should be respected unless it is quite  clear
      that they have misdirected themselves in law".



  18. I find that First-tier Tribunal Judge Ado was aware of and did have in
      mind the test under paragraph EX.1, although  this  was  not  set  out
      later within his decision, he referred to the test   that  had  to  be
      applied when dealing with  the  reasons  for  the  refusal  letter  at
      paragraph 4.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ado,  although  not  having
      specifically stated that there needed to be insurmountable  obstacles,
      has gone on to consider whether or not  there  were  very  significant
      difficulties which would be faced  by  the  Claimant  or  his  partner
      continuing their family life outside the United Kingdom which is  what
      is required to prove that there are insurmountable obstacles  for  the
      purpose  of  paragraph  EX.1  as  a  result  of  the  definition   for
      insurmountable  obstacles  in  paragraph  EX.2.  Although   First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Ado has referred  in  his  findings  that  it  was  not
      reasonable to expect the sponsor to relocate to Bangladesh in view  of
      the number of years she has spent in the UK, he also when  considering
      whether or not there are significant difficulties to the Claimant  and
      his wife continuing family life outside  the  UK,  specifically  found
      that the wife had been residing in the UK since the age  of  6  or  7,
      that she was British citizen and had a stable  job  in  the  UK  being
      employed by the University Hospital of Leicester NHS Trust on  a  wage
      of �16,210 per annum and that she was also expecting her  first  child
      and found specifically that this would bring significant  difficulties
      in continuing family life outside the UK. He also found that she would
      lose her job if she had to relocate and would then be worse off by not
      having employment to provide for herself and her family as her husband
      is not able to work at present. He then states "the other  significant
      difficulty for the families is that they  are  expecting  their  first
      child which is due in less than 5  months'  time.  This  is  an  added
      factor which would make it difficult for them to live  together  as  a
      family and continue their family life bearing in mind  that  they  had
      been together since  the  start  of  their  relationship".  The  Judge
      therefore clearly has directed his findings to the question of whether
      or  not  they  are  very  significant  difficulties  in  family   life
      continuing  outside  the  UK  such  as  to  amount  to  insurmountable
      obstacles, although it is not specifically set out within his findings
      the words "insurmountable obstacles". However, the First-tier Tribunal
      Judge can be taken to know the law in this regard, and indeed had  set
      it out previously at paragraph 4.


  19. Although reference has been made by him to the reasonableness  of  the
      sponsor accompanying the Claimant to Bangladesh and that it would  not
      be reasonable for the Appellant to return to  Bangladesh  leaving  his
      wife expecting their child in less than 5 months' time as at the  date
      of his decision, these were simply factors that he took account of  in
      considering what the very significant difficulties would be  that  the
      couple faced. I do not accept  that  he  has  misapplied  the  law  or
      applied the wrong test in this case. Although the Judge clearly  could
      have expressed himself differently and better in  this  regard,  I  do
      find reading the decision as a whole, that he  has  clearly  addressed
      his mind to the issues that needed to be considered  and  has  applied
      the correct test.  The  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ado
      therefore does not contain a material error of law, and  his  decision
      shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Ado does not  contain  a  material
error of law and shall stand;
I make no order in respect of anonymity, no  order  having  been  sought  in
respect thereof from the First-tier Tribunal, and no such order having  been
sought before me.

Signed                                                                 Dated
23rd December 2015
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty
