
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/43588/2013
                                                               IA/46254/2013
                                                               IA/43591/2013
                                                               IA/46253/2013
                                                               IA/46255/2013
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 21st May 2014                                |On 29th May 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                       charles goto (First appellant)
                     Mavis Munatsire (second appellant)
                   tafadzina claris goto (Third appellant)
                   tawanda charles goto (Fourth appellant)
                      tinutenda goto (fifth appellant)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Khalaf
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. These are the Appellants' appeals against the decision of  Judge  Ghani
    made on the papers at Birmingham on  3rd  February  2013,  the  parties
    having indicated that they did not wish to have an oral hearing.

Background

 2. The first Appellant entered the UK on 13th June 2001 as a student.   He
    then applied for leave to remain on the basis of UK  ancestry  and  was
    given two periods of leave on that basis from 2003  to  2007  and  then
    from 2007 to 2012.  The second Appellant entered the UK in June 2002 as
    a visitor and was subsequently granted leave in  line  as  a  dependent
    spouse.  The older children entered the UK in January 2008, again  with
    leave in line, and a fourth child has been born here.

 3. The Appellant submitted a  Zimbabwean  birth  certificate  FM579822  to
    prove his ancestral links to the UK.  He says that his mother was  born
    to a British national on 16th  December  1945  at  the  Andrew  Fleming
    Hospital.

 4. The Respondent contends that the hospital was not built until 1974.  It
    was also said that further checks on the birth certificate  established
    that it had not been legitimately issued by the Zimbabwean authorities.

 5. Accordingly when the Appellant applied for indefinite leave  to  remain
    he was refused both on the grounds that he could not establish that  he
    had been born to a British grandparent and also on the grounds that  he
    had submitted  false  documents  in  relation  to  the  application  by
    reference to paragraph 322(1A).

 6. The judge said that the main Appellant maintained that the  information
    which the Respondent used regarding the Andrew Fleming Hospital was  an
    article published on the  internet,  but  the  document  had  not  been
    submitted.  His case is that the name of the  hospital  had  changed  a
    number of times.  The judge recorded that the Appellant had been placed
    on notice as regards the Respondent's reasons for refusal and there was
    no evidence to confirm the change of name  of  the  hospital  over  the
    years.

 7. He said that the Appellant had not been able to  discharge  the  burden
    placed upon him in order to meet the requirements of the Rules.

 8. With respect to Article 8, the family would be removed as  a  unit  and
    there would therefore be no breach of Article 8 so far as  family  life
    is concerned.  Although Mr Goto had been in the UK for twelve years and
    been  employed,  that   in   itself   did   not   make   the   decision
    disproportionate.  The children have been in the  UK  since  2008  with
    limited leave since they were 18, 13 and 9  years  of  age.   They  had
    spent their formative years in  Zimbabwe  and  there  was  no  evidence
    presented to show what impact the removal would have on them so far  as
    their education was concerned.  Clearly the welfare of the children was
    an important consideration, but they would remain  with  their  natural
    parents and there was no reason why they could not readjust to life  in
    Zimbabwe.  So far as the Appellant's private  life  was  concerned  the
    decision was proportionate.

The Grounds of Application

 9. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    did not give appropriate weight to the Appellant's supporting evidence.
     There was no document  verification  report  and  the  judge  had  not
    confirmed what investigation  had  taken  place  with  respect  to  the
    hospital. It was also argued that the judge had failed to  have  regard
    to the best interests of the children having  regard  to  the  relevant
    case law.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Hemingway on 4th March  2014.
    Judge Hemingway said that it was arguable that the judge had failed  to
    direct himself that the burden of showing that the document  was  false
    falls upon the Respondent.  He observed that the second  ground  lacked
    merit but said that he would not shut out the argument.

11. On 20th  March  2014  the  Respondent  served  a  reply  defending  the
    determination.

Submissions

12. Ms Khalaf relied upon her skeleton argument which she  adduced  at  the
    hearing which, in the main, is simply a copy of the grounds.

13. Ms Pettersen defended the determination with respect to Article  8  but
    acknowledged  that  there  was  an  arguable  error  in   the   judge's
    application of the burden of proof.

Consideration of whether there is an error of law

14. The judge was in error in respect of his  consideration  of  where  the
    burden of proof lies in this appeal.  Whilst it is for the Appellant to
    show that he can meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules  it  is
    for the Respondent to show that he has produced a false document.   The
    distinction is not clear in this  determination  and,  so  far  as  the
    Immigration Rules is concerned, the decision is set aside.

Further submissions

15. Ms  Pettersen  then  produced  a  document  verification  report  which
    consists  of  a  letter  from  the  central  registry  for   passports,
    citizenship, national and  voter's  registration,  births,  deaths  and
    marriages.  It states that, according to records kept  at  the  central
    registry, the  following  birth  certificates  are  not  authentic;  it
    contains a number of names which have been redacted but also  the  name
    of the Appellant's mother. The document  is  signed  E  Dube,  for  the
    Registrar general births and deaths and dated 15th May 2013.

16. Because the document had been produced very late I gave Ms  Khalaf  the
    opportunity of taking instructions on it.  There was an adjournment  of
    45 minutes.

17. Ms Khalaf submitted that the document verification report could not  be
    relied upon because the copy was not clear, other  third  parties  were
    named on it and pasted over, there was  no  indication  of  the  Harare
    address on the  document  and  nothing  to  show  that  there  was  any
    authorisation for it to be  released.   She  requested  an  adjournment
    because she said that crucial evidence had only  been  submitted  today
    and the Appellant had not had any opportunity to make  his  own  checks
    and cross-reference the document with officials in Zimbabwe.

18. Her instructions were that the Appellant had attempted to  contact  the
    Zimbabwean authorities in December/January after the Grounds of  Appeal
    had been filed but got no answer, in that when he had called  them  the
    officials had asked for money to check the certificate.  The  Appellant
    claimed that the hospital had changed its name over the years, but  the
    representatives  had  not  written  to  the  hospital  to  confirm  the
    Appellant's evidence because it was their view that since the Secretary
    of State had accepted the document as genuine on two previous occasions
    it was not logical to reject it at this stage.  She repeated the points
    made in the grounds that the judge had not properly had regard  to  the
    fact that the children had been in the UK for six  years,  and  another
    child had been born here, and it was disproportionate for  them  to  be
    removed.

19. Ms Pettersen submitted that simply because checks had not been done  at
    an earlier stage did not preclude the Secretary of State from doing  so
    now as a result of the application for indefinite leave to remain.  The
    mere fact that they had been accepted before  did  not  establish  that
    they were genuine.  It was open to the Appellant to  discover  material
    about the change of name of the hospital and he had not done so.

Findings and Conclusions

20. It is  regrettable  that  the  document  verification  report  was  not
    produced at an earlier stage. However he was given the  opportunity  to
    give instructions to his representative.  There is no prejudice to  him
    by refusing the adjournment.

21.  The  Appellant  has  been  aware  from  the  very  beginning  of   the
    Respondent's case.   He  has  chosen  not  to  contact  the  Zimbabwean
    authorities directly save by making a single phone call.   He  did  not
    write to them.  It is not surprising that there would be a fee involved
    to check the register but he elected not to follow the matter up.

22. I am satisfied that the document enables the  Respondent  to  discharge
    the burden of proof upon her.  There is no reason at all to  doubt  its
    contents.

23. The fact that other names have been redacted from the  document  simply
    indicates a need to preserve  their  confidentiality  and  is  not  any
    indication that the document cannot be relied upon.  The copy is  clear
    enough to read and does  in  fact  give  an  address.  The  Appellant's
    contention that the hospital where his  mother  was  born  existed  but
    under another name is not supported by any evidence at all even  though
    he has had more than ample opportunity to obtain that evidence.

24. The mere fact that the document had not been challenged before  by  the
    Secretary of State is not evidence that it is a genuine document.

25. So far as Article 8 is concerned there  is  no  error  of  law  in  the
    judge's determination.  The consideration is brief but  covers  all  of
    the main points.  Having found that the principal  Appellant  not  only
    has no basis for stay in the UK but also has produced a false document,
    the Secretary of State's interest in maintaining immigration control is
    clear.  The judge considered the best interests of the children  as  he
    was required to do and was entitled to observe that there was a paucity
    of evidence of any detriment to them in returning to their  country  of
    nationality where they have spent their formative years.

Decision

26. The decision with respect to the Immigration Rules is set aside.  It is
    remade as follows.  The appeal is dismissed.  With respect to the human
    rights appeal the decision of the judge stands and again the appeal  is
    dismissed.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


