
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43798/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th October 2015                 |On 23rd November 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MUHAMMAD LUQMAN
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Claimant: Mr G Davison, Counsel; instructed by Adam Bernard
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Meah allowing the Claimant's  appeal  to  the
    limited extent that it was remitted  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for
    consideration of the Article 8 claim.

 2. In a Refusal Letter, dated 24 October  2014,  the  Secretary  of  State
    refused the Claimant's application  for  confirmation  of  a  right  to
    reside as the  dependent  of  his  brother,  a  British  citizen  under
    Regulation 9 of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 ("2006 Regulations"). An appeal was brought under Regulation 26 of
    the 2006 Regulations. The First-tier Tribunal promulgated its  decision
    allowing the Claimant's appeal to the limited extent  indicated  on  19
    May 2015.

 3. The Secretary of State appealed against that decision and  was  granted
    permission to appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett. The  ground
    upon which permission was granted may be summarised as follows:

      i) It is arguable that the judge erred in remitting the appeal back to
         the Secretary of State to consider Article 8 where no error on  the
         part of the Respondent was alleged.

 4. I was not provided with a Rule 24 response from the  Claimant  but  was
    addressed in oral submissions by his counsel.

    Error of Law & Re-making

 5. Both parties were in agreement that the judge's  decision  revealed  an
    error of law such that it should be set aside.  For  the  Claimant,  Mr
    Davison accepted that the aspect of the appeal relating to Regulation 9
    should have been dismissed  as  he  maintained  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. Contrary to the course of action pursued  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, Mr Davison also now agreed with  Mr  Whitwell  that  the
    Article 8 consideration  should  have  been  the  subject  of  a  fresh
    application and the appeal should be dismissed in light of  the  recent
    decision of the Upper Tribunal in Amirteymour & Ors (EEA appeals; human
    rights) [2015] UKUT 466 (IAC).

 6. At the close of submissions, I indicated that in light of  that  agreed
    position, and given the decision in Amirteymour, I could see no  reason
    to disagree with the parties mutual submissions and proposed to  follow
    that course of action.

 7. Consequently, I find that there was an error of  law  in  the  decision
    such that it should be set aside. My reasons  for  so  finding  are  as
    follows.

 8. The Claimant does not seek to pursue his appeal under Regulation  9  of
    the 2006 Regulations and consequently that element of the appeal before
    the First-tier Tribunal remains untouched.

 9. Similarly, the Claimant now discontinues his position that  the  appeal
    should have been remitted to the Secretary of State  for  consideration
    of his Article 8 matters. The Claimant now accepts  that  such  matters
    will be considered by the Secretary of State should he submit a further
    application and pay a fee in order to have his human rights considered.
    Given that broad concession, I do not propose to interfere with it  for
    my own part and do not propose to give comment on that matter.

10. Of final note, it is noteworthy that consideration  of  the  Claimant's
    Article 8 rights do not require consideration by the  Tribunal  in  the
    instant scenario. This is reinforced by  the  recent  decision  of  the
    Upper Tribunal in Amirteymour, which confirms as follows:

         Where no notice under section 120 of the 2002 Act has  been  served
         and where no EEA decision to remove has  been  made,  an  appellant
         cannot bring a Human Rights challenge to removal in an appeal under
         the EEA Regulations. Neither the factual matrix nor  the  reasoning
         in JM (Liberia) [2006] EWCA Civ 1402 has any application to appeals
         of this nature

11. In the present context, as the parties agree, the Claimant's Article  8
    matters do not require consideration by the Tribunal. This would anyhow
    be so given that there has been  no  section  120  notice  and  no  EEA
    decision to remove.

12. There being nothing remaining to determine, the appeal is  remade  with
    the resultant effect that it is dismissed on all grounds.

    Decision

13. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

15. The appeal is dismissed on all grounds.

    Anonymity

16. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an  anonymity  order.  I  was  not
    invited to make any such order and in any event I see no reason to make
    such an order.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini

