
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/43944/2013
     IA/09174/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 5th December 2014                            |On 12th December 2014      |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               mr faisal ansar
                               mrs safia syed
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr S Muquit, Counsel instructed by Farani Javid
Taylor Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Mr Ansar and his wife, Mrs Syed, are citizens of Pakistan  whose  dates
    of birth are recorded  respectively  as  14th  February  1981  and  5th
    February 1984.  In February 2013, Mr  Ansar  made  application  for  an
    extension of his leave as a Tier 1 Migrant.  On 9th  October  2013  the
    Secretary of State refused the application.  There were,  according  to
    the Determination of Judge Shamash, who was to  hear  the  appeal,  two
    refusal letters in this case in relation to the Appellants.  The  first
    was dated 9th October 2013; that related to Mr Ansar and in relation to
    Mrs Syed, and her application, one dated 5th February  2014.   In  each
    case the refusals were accompanied by decisions to remove  pursuant  to
    Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality  Act  2006.   Mr
    Ansar and Mrs Syed appealed and  as  I  have  already  indicated  their
    appeals were heard in the First-tier Tribunal by Judge Shamash.

 2. However before the appeals were heard, the applications were varied  in
    order that Ansar could argue that he was entitled to  indefinite  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of ten  years'  continuous
    lawful residence, having  regard  to  paragraph  276B  of  HC  395  (as
    amended). Mrs Syed purported to  seek  leave  on  the  basis  of  being
    dependent upon  her  husband's  276B  application.  I  say  "purported"
    because for reasons which are set out below, that  was  not  an  avenue
    that was open to her.

 3. Judge Shamash found in  favour of Mr Ansar and Mrs Syed in  respect  of
    the ten years' continuous residence point and so did not go on to  make
    full findings in respect of the points-based case that was before  her.



 4. Not content with the determination of Judge Shamash,  by  Notice  dated
    26th September  2014  the  Secretary  of  State  made  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 5. There were a number of grounds.  It was submitted that  the  Judge  had
    failed to find whether Mr Ansar had demonstrated at  least  ten  years'
    continuous lawful residence in the United Kingdom and in any event  had
    not made a finding whether he had sufficient knowledge of  the  English
    language and sufficient knowledge about  life  in  the  United  Kingdom
    having regard to paragraph 276B(a)(iv) on the  immigration  rules.   It
    was also said that there was no sufficient  evidence  that  an  English
    language test had been completed as required and further there were  no
    sufficient findings in relation to continuity of residence.

 6. In respect of Mrs Syed, the grounds submit that there are no dependency
    provisions under paragraph 276B so that it was not open to the judge to
    make the finding that she did to the effect that she could succeed as a
    dependent of her husband. The grounds further submit that the judge did
    not make formal findings with regard to the points based aspect of  the
    appeals, having regard to paragraph 245C, which clearly the  Judge  did
    not do. She says as much at paragraph 36 of the Determination.

 7. On 3rd November 2014 Judge P J G White granted permission.   Mr  Muquit
    who represents  Mr  Ansar  and  Mrs  Syed  accepts  that  there  is  no
    dependency provision with respect to the ten year continuous  residence
    rule and therefore to that extent  concedes  the  Respondent's  appeal.
    However, he did draw to my attention that within the Appellants' bundle
    which was before the First-tier Tribunal there was a Pass  Notification
    Letter in respect of the life in the United Kingdom test.

 8. The issues which remained live and maintained by the Secretary of State
    were  whether  or  not  Mr  Ansar  had  established,  on   balance   of
    probabilities, that he had  ten  years'  continuous  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom and whether the judge had given adequate  reasoning  for
    the decision which she had made based upon sufficient evidence.

 9. Mr Avery for the Secretary of State took me through  the  Determination
    and in particular paragraph 33 in which Judge Shamash says:

         "I accept that [Mr Ansar] came to the United Kingdom as  a  student
         at the age of 22 with no expectation  that  he  would  be  able  to
         remain in the United Kingdom.  However he has now lived in  the  UK
         for over ten years and is not a burden on the state."

    The determination then goes on to other matters. Mr Avery submits  that
    there is simply insufficient reasoning.

Is there an error of law?

10. The Determination has to  be  read  as  a  whole.   It  is  clear  from
    paragraphs 12 and 13 of the Determination that the Judge was aware that
    there was a requirement that  Mr  Ansar  needed  to  prove  ten  years'
    continuous lawful residence in the United  Kingdom;  the  determination
    sets out the requirements.  The  Judge  was  also  aware  that  certain
    periods of absence would not break the  period  of  continuity,  as  to
    which see paragraphs 15 and 16 of the determination.

11. It was Mr Ansar's contention that he had been resident  in  the  United
    Kingdom between December 2003 and July 2014 (there is an obvious typing
    error at paragraph 18 of the Determination  where  it  reads  2004),  a
    period of over ten years and met all of the requirements under the long
    residence requirements. That was  the  evidence  before  the  Judge  as
    recorded by her.

12. In my judgment reading the determination as a whole it  is  clear  that
    the Judge found that  Mr  Ansar  was  credible  and  met  the  required
    standard of proof.  It  may  be  that  there  might  have  been  better
    evidence.  It may be that Mr Ansar should have produced  his  passport,
    though both parties agree that in fact that was, and  remains,  in  the
    possession of the Secretary of State.

13. Mr Avery is not able to point to any cross-examination which challenged
    Mr Ansar's evidence relating to ten years' continuous residence. He  is
    right when he says that the burden of proof remained on  the  Appellant
    in the First-tier Tribunal and that it was not  for  the  Secretary  of
    State  to  prove  the  negative  but  in  my  judgment,   reading   the
    determination as a whole, there was sufficient evidence for  the  Judge
    to find, absent any challenge, as she did.

14. It cannot be said that the determination was perverse or irrational nor
    can it be said that there was no sufficient evidence for  her  to  make
    the finding that she did.  It may be that she would have been helped if
    the Secretary of State had chosen to cross-examine  on  the  point  but
    that does not  appear  to  have  happened.   As  it  is  therefore  the
    Secretary of State's appeal on that point is dismissed.

15. The question now arises is what should happen with this appeal.  It was
    conceded as I have already said that the Mrs Syed was not  entitled  to
    succeed on the basis upon which the judge found that she did.  In  that
    respect there is a material error of law such that the determination in
    respect of Mrs Syed is to be set aside to be re-made.  It is  also  the
    case that no sufficient findings  have  been  made  in  respect  of  Mr
    Ansar's appeal, which are required if  the  dependency  aspect  of  Mrs
    Syed's appeal is to be determined.

16. Given that Judge Shamash had, with respect to the  points-based  appeal
    that was before her, almost completed the task but simply said that she
    did not make formal findings, both parties agree that the  best  course
    is for the appeal to be remitted to Judge Shamash to complete the  task
    which lay before her.  I am told that Judge Shamash is not  a  salaried
    judge and it may not  be  possible  therefore,  having  regard  to  the
    overriding objective, to have the matter listed  before  her  within  a
    reasonable time.  If that is so then it  would  be  a  matter  for  the
    Resident Upper Tribunal Judge at the centre to  which  this  appeal  is
    remitted to decide which Judge should  hear  the  appeal.  However,  it
    would be my preference for the appeal to be heard by Judge Shamash  and
    so I direct that the matter should be heard by Judge Shamash unless  it
    is not possible for that to be done within a reasonable period of time.
    It follows that this matter is to be put before the Resident  Judge  at
    Taylor House for further directions.

17. In remitting this appeal I have had regard to  the  Senior  President's
    guidelines.

Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed. The matter is remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal.



Signed        Date 5th December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker

