
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43232/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 November 2015                  |On 29 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                Shahzad Khan
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No Appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms E Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I see no need for, and do not make, an order restricting the publication
    of details about this case.

 2. The appellant in this case is a citizen of Pakistan who was born in 1984
    and who has lived in the United Kingdom entirely with  permission  since
    February 2010.  He appealed unsuccessfully to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    against a decision of the respondent on 15 October 2014 refusing to vary
    his leave to enable him to remain as an entrepreneur.

 3. It is not necessary to go through each of the points considered  by  the
    Secretary of State when she refused the  application  or  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Grant when she dismissed the appeal.  Suffice it  to  say
    that it is clear that the appellant did not provide appropriate business
    cards because they did not identify the nature of the business.

 4. Whilst this might seem exceedingly trivial it is also a  requirement  of
    the Rules which were not met.  There can be no criticism of the decision
    to dismiss the appeal under the Rules and the judge granting  permission
    to appeal does not criticise the decision under  the  Rules.   The  sole
    basis for giving permission to appeal is that it was arguable  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge did not consider properly  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.

 5. The appellant did not appear before me.   I  am  satisfied  that  proper
    notice was sent out on 10 November referring to today's  hearing  on  17
    November.  It was sent to the address  for  service  which  matches  the
    address known to the Home Office and when it was convenient to call  the
    case on at a little after 11 o'clock this morning my  clerk  checked  to
    make sure that there was no appearance and no-one had arrived.

 6. I am satisfied that there has been good service in accordance  with  the
    Rules and it is right to continue with the case in the  absence  of  the
    appellant.

 7. I believe that the First-tier Tribunal Judge gave permission  to  appeal
    because of the skimpy nature of the  consideration  of  the  case  under
    Article 8. However I do not think that it is the law  that  every  point
    that has to be considered under Section 117A to D  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 has to be addressed at  length  or  even
    set out when there is no reason to think them relevant.

 8. This is a case where Article 8 was raised in a most superficial way.  It
    consists solely, as far as I can see, in a throwaway line in  a  witness
    statement.

 9. There was nothing in the witness statement that laid the foundation  for
    allowing the appeal on Article 8 grounds.  There was nothing before  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge which could  have  led  to  the  appeal  being
    allowed properly.

10. Whilst there may have been a technical error in dealing with  the  point
    quite so superficially, although I am not sure that there was, there was
    absolutely definitely not a material error because  the  evidence  would
    not have supported a decision  to  allow  the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds either within the Rules or as an exception to them.

    Notice of Decision

    It follows therefore that I dismiss the appeal against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's decision and the decision shall stand.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 29 January 2016                |

