
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/43590/2010
     IA/43596/2010
     IA/43592/2010
     IA/43595/2010
     IA/43586/2100
     IA/43601/2010


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 27 September 2013                          |On 14 October 2013           |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

                                elena saidova
                      mohaMED ABDEL DAIM ABOU EADA SAID
                               SANYIA SAIDOVA
                                  SAID SAID
                                SARAH SAIDOVA
                                 SAFEER SAID

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     The second appellant appeared in person
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants appealed to a Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  against
    decisions made by the Secretary of State on 15 November  2010  refusing
    to grant them certificates entitling them to permanent residence in the
    United Kingdom.

2.   The first, third, fourth, fifth and sixth appellants are  all  citizens
    of the Czech Republic. The second appellant is a citizen of Egypt.  The
    first appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in 2004.   She  commenced
    work but  was  made  redundant  in  November  2005.   Subsequently  she
    received Job Seekers Allowance until she obtained further employment on
    1 March 2010  in  which  employment  she  remained.   She  applied  for
    permanent residence on 20 May 2010 and her  husband  and  the  children
    (the second, third, fourth, fifth  and  sixth  appellants)  applied  in
    line.  Mr Said has health problems and since  June  2005  has  been  in
    receipt of income support.

3.   The judge concluded that the first appellant had not been  a  qualified
    person  as  defined  by  the  Immigration  (European   Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006 for five continuous years since  her  arrival  in  the
    United Kingdom.  She concluded as a consequence that  all  the  appeals
    must be dismissed.

4.   The appellants sought permission to appeal, arguing that the judge  had
    failed to consider points raised reflecting the argument that the right
    to permanent residence should not be dependent  on  being  a  qualified
    person, noting what had been  said in SSWP  v Lassal  C-169/09  and  in
    London Borough of Harrow v Ibrahim C-310/08.   The  point  is  made  in
    respect of the latter decision that a parent who is the  primary  carer
    of children of a national of a Member State who worked or had worked in
    the  host Member State could claim a right of residence on the basis of
    Article 12 of Regulation 1612/68.  Permission to appeal was granted.

5.   Thereafter the matter proceeded no further for a  little  while,  since
    it was anticipated that the decision of the Court of Justice in Alarape
    would be of assistance to the Tribunal, and the decision of the  Court,
    whose reference is C-529/11, was published on 8 May 2013.

6.   By this time the appellants were not longer  legally  represented.   It
    seems there had been  some  difficulties  with  funding,  and  Mr  Said
    appeared.

7.   We are very grateful to Mr Deller who was  of  considerable  assistance
    to us and also in explaining to Mr Said the  legal  position.   It  was
    agreed that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had erred in law  in  failing
    to consider the issue of derived residence  rights.  It  was  necessary
    therefore for us to remake the decision.

8.    The  essential  difficulty  faced  by  the  appellants  in  terms   of
    establishing a right of permanent residence is  that  Mrs  Saidova  has
    only worked in the United Kingdom between September 2004  and  November
    2005 and then since March 2010 to today.  A continuous period  of  five
    years' work has therefore not been achieved and the right to  permanent
    residence that would accrue from that is not made out.

9.   As we made clear to Mr Said, however, there are other  protections  for
    the family.  The first is the fact that Mrs Saidova is working  at  the
    moment and therefore  the  family  are  protected  by  that  continuous
    employment.  More particularly, as a consequence of  the  decisions  in
    Ibrahim and Alarape, the appellants have derived residence rights under
    Article 12 of Regulation No. 1612/68 through the fact that the children
    are in education.  It was made clear in Ibrahim at  paragraph  59  that
    the children of a national of a Member State who works or has worked in
    the host Member State and the parent who is  their  primary  carer  can
    claim a right of residence in the latter state on  the  sole  basis  of
    Article 12 of Regulation 1612/68 without such a right being conditional
    on their having sufficient resources and comprehensive  sickness  cover
    in that State.

10.  In Alarape it was said at paragraph 31 that:

         "The parent of a child who has reached the age of majority and  who
         has obtained access to education on the  basis  of  Article  12  of
         Regulation no. 1612/68 may continue to  have  a  derived  right  of
         residence under that Article if that child remains in need  of  the
         presence and care of that parent in order to be  able  to  continue
         and to complete his or her education, but it is for  the  referring
         court to assess, taking into account all the circumstances  of  the
         case before it."

11.  The effect of these decisions is to clarify the derived right  for  the
    parties in this case to reside in the United Kingdom  during  the  time
    when the children (who  are  all  currently  in  education)  remain  in
    education.   The  youngest  child  is  10  and  therefore  it  can   be
    anticipated that the derived right will continue for another six years,
    and of course it is the case that in March  2015  the  first  appellant
    will be entitled to apply for permanent residence on  having  completed
    by that time, assuming she continues to work, a period of five years in
    employment.  The rest  of  the  family  would  then  be  able  to  make
    applications for permanent residence also as her family members.

12.  The formal outcome  of  the  appeal,  therefore,  is  that  the  appeal
    against the decision to refuse permanent residence  is  dismissed,  but
    the appellants are referred to the above matters indicating the  lesser
    but not insubstantial rights which they continue to have.  The  appeals
    are dismissed.


Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
