
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/43047/2014
                                                               IA/43046/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 September 2016                         |On 11 October 2016            |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               CHRISTIANA [A]
                                    [O A]
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J. Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Not represented


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By way of a decision promulgated on 7 June 2016, the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 15 October 2015 was set aside to  be
    remade.


 2. For the purposes of this decision, I refer to the Secretary of State as
    the Respondent, to Christiana [A] as the first Appellant, and  to  [OA]
    as the second Appellant, reflecting their positions as they were before
    the First-tier Tribunal.


 3.  The  Appellants  attended  the  hearing.   They   were   not   legally
    represented.  I heard oral evidence  from  the  first  Appellant.   She
    asked that the second Appellant leave the room while she gave evidence.
     I asked a couple of simple questions of the second Appellant.   I  was
    mindful of the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No. 2 of  2010:  Child,
    vulnerable adult and sensitive Appellant guidance, given his  age.   Ms
    Isherwood made oral submissions to which the first Appellant responded.




 4. The first Appellant had not provided any fresh evidence.  I have  taken
    into account the documents in the Respondent's  bundle,  together  with
    two letters referring to the second Appellant's education.   I  have  a
    copy of the application, but I do  not  have  a  copy  of  any  of  the
    attachments sent with this application.


Decision and reasons


 5. The Appellants had legal representation at  the  start  of  the  appeal
    process, but they have not had any representation for  some  time,  and
    were not represented in the First-tier Tribunal.  The  first  Appellant
    was  clearly  nervous.   Nevertheless,  she  was  able  to  answer  the
    questions put to her in cross-examination and was not evasive.  She was
    clearly concerned that the second Appellant did not hear  the  contents
    of her evidence, in particular relating to the treatment  she  received
    from her husband in Nigeria, and she asked that he leave the room while
    she gave evidence.  Similarly I asked him to leave  during  submissions
    in the event that any sensitive issues be raised.


 6. Whereas I find that the first Appellant has two other daughters  living
    in the United Kingdom, they are not the subject of  this  appeal.   The
    first Appellant was asked by Ms Isherwood why she had not mentioned her
    other children in her application.  She said that she had been  advised
    by her lawyer not to mention them as they were "of  age".   The  second
    Appellant is the only child under the age of 18.  She  said  that  they
    had not put in an application as she did not have enough money  to  pay
    for them.  Ms Isherwood pressed this point, but the  first  Appellant's
    answer was consistent that she did not have enough  money  to  make  an
    application for them.  I accept this explanation and, while  of  course
    her daughters should not be remaining in  the  United  Kingdom  without
    leave or without making any attempts to regularise their stay, they are
    adults, and they are not the subject of this appeal.  They do not  live
    with  the  Appellants.   They  are  the  half-sisters  of  the   second
    Appellant.  When considering reasonableness of return, I am considering
    the  position  of  the  Appellants  returning  together.   I   am   not
    considering a scenario where  the  Appellants  return  with  the  first
    Appellants' two daughters as a unit of four, as  was  suggested  by  Ms
    Isherwood.


 7. Taking all of the first Appellant's circumstances into account, I found
    her to be an honest witness.  She answered all the questions which were
    put to her, and I find that her evidence can be relied on.


 8. I  accept  that  I  have  very  little  in  the  way  of  corroborative
    documentary evidence.   The  core  issue  before  me  is  that  of  the
    reasonableness of returning the second Appellant to Nigeria,  which  is
    relevant to my consideration under the immigration  rules  relating  to
    family or private life, and to any consideration of Article  8  outside
    the  immigration  rules.   The  absence  of  corroborative  documentary
    evidence, while taken into account, does  not  damage  the  Appellants'
    case.


Immigration rules


 9. I find that the Appellants arrived in the  United  Kingdom  on  4  June
    2005.  I find that as at the date of the  application,  27  June  2012,
    they had been in the United Kingdom for seven years.  I find  that  the
    second Appellant was born on 25 May 2002, and is now 14 years old.


10. The Respondent considered the first Appellant's application  for  leave
    to remain as a parent under paragraph R-LTRPT.1.1.

    "The requirements to be met for limited leave to remain as a parent are-


         (a) the applicant and the child must be in the UK;
         (b) the applicant must have made a valid application for limited or
         indefinite leave to remain as a parent or partner; and either
         (c)
           (i) the applicant must not fall for refusal under Section S-LTR:
           Suitability leave to remain; and
           (ii) the applicant meets all of the requirements of Section
           ELTRPT: Eligibility for leave to remain as a parent, or
         (d)
           (i) the applicant must not fall for refusal under S-LTR:
           Suitability leave to remain; and
           (ii) the applicant meets the requirements of paragraphs E-
           LTRPT.2.2-2.4. and E-LTRPT.3.1-3.2.; and
           (iii) paragraph EX.1. applies.


11. The Respondent considered that the first Appellant  did  not  meet  the
    relationship requirements so as to meet the requirements of (c)(ii)  by
    reference to paragraph E-LTRPT.3.2, as she had remained in  the  UK  in
    breach of immigration laws for a period of over 28 days.


12. The Respondent therefore considered whether subparagraph  (d)  applied.
    She did not refuse it by  reference  to  the  suitability  requirements
    under (d)(i).  She refused it with reference to  paragraph  E-LTRPT.2.2
    and paragraph EX.1.(a) as she did not accept  that  the  conditions  in
    paragraph EX.1.(a) were met.  I have considered  whether  or  not  this
    paragraph is met, and therefore whether the first Appellant  meets  the
    requirements of R-LTRPT.1.1.


13. Paragraph EX.1.(a)  applies  where  an  applicant  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with a child who is under the  age  of
    18 years, who is in the UK, who is a British Citizen or  has  lived  in
    the UK continuously for at least the seven years immediately  preceding
    the date of application, and where it would not be reasonable to expect
    the child to leave the UK.


14. In considering whether or not it would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    second Appellant to leave the United Kingdom, I have taken into account
    his best interests in accordance with section 55 of the 2009 Act.   His
    best interests must be a primary  concern.   I  have  also  taken  into
    account the cases of ZH Tanzania [2011] UKSC 4,  and  EV  (Philippines)
    [2014] EWCA Civ 874, particularly paragraph 35. This provides:


      "A decision as to what is in  the  best  interests  of  children  will
      depend on a number of factors such as (a) their age; (b) the length of
      time that they have  been  here;  (c)  how  long  they  have  been  in
      education; (c) what stage their education has  reached;  (d)  to  what
      extent they have become distanced from the  country  to  which  it  is
      proposed that they return; (e) how renewable their connection with  it
      may be; (f) to what extent they will have linguistic, medical or other
      difficulties in adapting to life in that country; and (g)  the  extent
      to which the course proposed will interfere with their family life  or
      their rights (if they have any) as British citizens."


15. I was also referred by Ms Isherwood  to  the  cases  of  MA  (Pakistan)
    [2016] EWCA Civ 705, AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015]  UKUT  0260  (IAC),  and
    Rajendran (s117B - family life) [2016] UKUT 00138 (IAC).


16. I find that the second Appellant is 14 years old.  As at  the  date  of
    the application, he had been in the United Kingdom for seven years.  At
    the date of the hearing, he had been  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  11
    years.  He has been in education since 28 November 2006 when he  joined
    Gascoigne Primary School.  He would have been 4 years old at the  time.
    He has attended Eastbury Comprehensive School since 4  September  2013.
    He is now 14 years old and in his fourth year at secondary school.


17. I find that the second Appellant has  not  returned  to  Nigeria  since
    coming to the United Kingdom some 11 years ago.   In  relation  to  the
    Appellants' contacts and ties with Nigeria, the first Appellant said at
    the hearing that her parents had died and that she  had  no  family  in
    Nigeria.  She had one brother, but he had died.  She had  no  aunts  or
    uncles in Nigeria.  She had no home in Nigeria.  She was asked  whether
    she had any friends in Nigeria, and said that unfortunately she did not
    make friends.  She said that she did not have contact  with  anyone  in
    Nigeria.


18. The first Appellant said that she  had  had  contact  with  the  second
    Appellant's father once while she was in the United Kingdom but it  was
    a long time ago.  She said that he had found somebody who had said that
    they had met the first  Appellant  which  is  how  he  had  established
    contact.  She said that he had remarried and had two wives.  Further he
    was a Muslim and she was  a  Christian.   I  find  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities that the second Appellant does not have any contact  with
    his father.


19. The first Appellant said in cross-examination that  her  two  daughters
    have contact with their  father.   However,  this  is  not  the  second
    Appellant's father.  Ms Isherwood submitted that this contact could  be
    utilised on the Appellants' return to Nigeria.  I find that this man is
    not the second Appellant's father.   I  accept  the  first  Appellant's
    evidence that she has no contact with this man.  I  do  not  find  that
    this man represents a credible form of contact and tie for  the  second
    Appellant.  I find on the balance of  probabilities  that  neither  the
    first nor second Appellant has any contact with anyone in Nigeria.


20. I find that the Appellants attend  church.   It  was  submitted  by  Ms
    Isherwood that, this being  a  Nigerian  church,  the  Appellants  were
    culturally integrated into Nigerian culture.  The first Appellant  said
    that it was not only  Nigerians  who  attended  the  church,  but  also
    Ugandans, Ghanaians, and people from many countries.   The  church  was
    not meant only for Nigerians.  Even if  the  Appellants  did  attend  a
    church in the United Kingdom solely intended for Nigerians, I would not
    find  that  this  meant  that  the  second  Appellant  was  "culturally
    integrated" into Nigeria.  It might mean that he had had  some  contact
    with Nigerian culture, but that is not the same  as  being  "culturally
    integrated".


21. The second Appellant said at the hearing that he did not understand the
    language in Nigeria.  The only language that he speaks is  English.   I
    find that English is the  official  language  of  Nigeria,  although  I
    accept that it is not the only language.


22. The first Appellant said that the second Appellant had  to  go  to  the
    doctor a lot and in winter it was worse.  She did not know exactly what
    the problem was, and had no corroborative medical evidence.  The second
    Appellant said that he had had to  visit  the  doctor  in  the  UK  for
    allergies in winter.  He said that it was a hayfever type problem.   He
    was given eye drops, cough medicine and one further tablet, although he
    did not know what that was.  I find that while the second Appellant may
    suffer from allergy-type problems in the winter,  I  have  no  evidence
    that they are serious, and no evidence that he is  suffering  from  any
    other illness.


23. Regarding other difficulties which the second Appellant  will  have  in
    adapting to life in Nigeria, I have accepted the evidence of the  first
    Appellant that she has no contact with Nigeria.  I find that  she  does
    not have any family members living in Nigeria.  I find  that  she  does
    not have a home in Nigeria.  I find that she  survives  in  the  United
    Kingdom on charity from the church that she attends.  I find  that  she
    cleans the church.  She said that she has "no money" and  I  find  that
    she is in a precarious financial position.  I find that  she  does  not
    have any assets in the United Kingdom which could be sold in  order  to
    fund the Appellants when they returned to Nigeria.   I  find  that  the
    second Appellant would have no home to return to  in  Nigeria,  and  no
    relatives or friends who could support the Appellants while  the  first
    Appellant established herself and got herself into a position where she
    could provide for the second Appellant.  I find that she does not  have
    any formal financial  assistance  from  the  church  here  which  would
    continue on her return to Nigeria.


24. The second Appellant is not a British citizen.

25. I find that it would be in the second  Appellant's  best  interests  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.  I find  that  remaining  in  the  United
    Kingdom would provide him with stability and continuity of  educational
    provision.   I find that it would not  be  in  his  best  interests  to
    return to Nigeria where he would be without  a  home,  without  support
    from friends or relatives, and where the first Appellant would  not  be
    in a financial position to  be  able  to  support  him  until  she  had
    obtained employment. Without a home and a network of  support,  finding
    employment would not be straightforward.


26. However, finding that it is in his best  interests  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom is not  the  same  as  finding  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect him to leave the United  Kingdom.   I  have  taken
    into account the case of MA, in particular paragraph [47].


27. In considering whether or not it  is  reasonable,  I  have  taken  into
    account the immigration history of the Appellants.   While  the  second
    Appellant is a minor, and no blame can be attached to him for his  lack
    of immigration status, I must take into account  the  circumstances  of
    the first Appellant.  I find she came to the United Kingdom in 2005  on
    a visit visa and did not return to Nigeria when  it  expired.   I  find
    that she made an application for leave to remain in 2012.   I  have  no
    evidence that she made any attempt to regularise  her  position  before
    this time.


28. I have taken  into  account  the  circumstances  to  which  the  second
    Appellant will return in Nigeria if he leaves the  United  Kingdom.   I
    find that he does not have a home to return to in Nigeria.  I find that
    there is no support network to help him to adapt to life in Nigeria.  I
    find that there would be an immense disruption to his life,  and  I  do
    not find that this would be short-lived owing to the  circumstances  of
    the first Appellant and their lack of contact and support  in  Nigeria.
    I  find  that  there  would  be  a  great  amount  of  uncertainty  and
    instability.


29. I have found above that the  second  Appellant  has  stability  in  the
    United Kingdom in the form of his schooling, and the social  circle  he
    will have developed at school.  I find that he will find it  harder  to
    develop a private life in Nigeria owing to the fact that he only speaks
    English.  He has not been to Nigeria for some 11 years.  He has had  no
    contact with Nigeria since he left at the age of three.


30. I take into account the immigration history of the first Appellant, but
    that does not outweigh the difficulty of the  situation  to  which  the
    second Appellant will return, and the instability  and  uncertainty  he
    will face.  I have taken into account the case of Rajendran, and  while
    I find that family life has been established when the  Appellants  have
    not had leave to remain, this factor, and the consequent weight  to  be
    applied to such family life, does not outweigh the problems  which  the
    second Appellant will face in Nigeria.  He will be in a  country  which
    he does not know, with  only  his  mother,  the  first  Appellant,  for
    support.  I find that she will  be  without  a  home,  without  a  job,
    without friends or family, and therefore without the means  to  support
    the second Appellant.  In these circumstances, I find that  it  is  not
    reasonable to expect the second Appellant to leave the United Kingdom.


31. I therefore find that the first Appellant  meets  the  requirements  of
    paragraph R-LTRPT.1.1.(a) (b) and (d).


32. Paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) provides that leave should be granted where  an
    applicant is under the age of 18 years and has  lived  continuously  in
    the United Kingdom for at least  seven  years,  and  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect him to leave the  United  Kingdom.   Having  found
    that it would not be reasonable for the second Appellant to  leave  the
    United Kingdom for the reasons set out above, I find that he meets  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).


33. Having allowed the appeals under the immigration rules, I do  not  need
    to go on to consider Article 8 outside the immigration rules.


Notice of Decision


34. The appeals are allowed under the immigration rules.


Signed                                  Date 10 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

