
[pic]
IAC-CH- CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43509/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24th October 2014                          |On 11th November 2014        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MRS ALICE MEAD
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Irwin Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms B Asanovic


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. In this determination I will refer to the parties  in  the  manner  in
      which they appeared before the First-Tier Tribunal.

   2. The appellant is a female citizen of Ghana, born 3 May 1965.   She  is
      married to a UK citizen, born 17 July 1943.  They married in Ghana  in
      September 1994.  The appellant entered the United  Kingdom  in  August
      2008 with leave to enter as a spouse until June 2010.  In May 2010 she
      submitted an application for indefinite leave to remain as the  spouse
      of a person present and settled in the United Kingdom,  but  this  was
      refused on 24 August 2010.   She  was  however  granted  discretionary
      leave until 23 August 2013.  On 20 August 2013 the  appellant  applied
      for further leave to remain and this was refused on 25 September  2013
      as the respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  met  the
      requirements of the Immigration Rules, and there were no  grounds  for
      leave to be  granted  outside  the  rules.   It  was  noted  that  the
      appellant had not met the requirements of paragraph 276ADE or Appendix
      FM of the Immigration Rules.

   3. The appellant appealed against  that  decision  and  her  appeal  came
      before Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal  Archer  sitting  at  Columbus
      House, Newport on 15 May 2014.  There was an  oral  hearing  and  both
      parties were represented.

   4. Whilst evidence was adduced to the effect that  the  appellant  was  a
      victim of domestic abuse, the judge at paragraph  14  found  that  the
      appellant and her husband continued to reside together  and  that  the
      marriage was still in existence.  In short the judge found that  there
      was no evidence of abuse.

   5. At paragraph  19  of  the  determination  the  judge  found  that  the
      appellant could not succeed under the rules, including Appendix FM and
      paragraph 276ADE.

   6. The judge then went onto consider the  European  Convention  on  Human
      Rights.  He quoted MF (Nigeria)  v  SSHD  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192  and
      considered  whether  or  not  there  were  "sufficiently   compelling"
      circumstances to outweigh public interest.   He  said  he  found  that
      there were arguable grounds  and  that  Article  8  could  be  engaged
      because of the existence of private life.  The appellant's appeal  was
      dismissed under the rules, but allowed under "the 1950 Convention".

   7. The respondent sought leave to appeal.  The  grounds  allege  material
      misdirection of law.  The respondent suggested  that  the  Immigration
      Rules were a complete  code  (MF  Nigeria)  and  that  any  Article  8
      assessment could only be made after consideration under  these  rules,
      which had not been done in this  case.   Reference  is  also  made  to
      Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) and that the judge had not  identified
      any compelling circumstances.  The  Tribunal  had  failed  to  provide
      adequate  reasons  why  the  appellant's  circumstances  were   either
      compelling or exceptional.  There was no evidence that the appellant's
      removal would lead to an extremely  harsh  outcome,  as  suggested  in
      paragraph 25 of the determination.

   8. In granting leave to appeal another judge of the  First-Tier  Tribunal
      said as follows:

         "1. This is  an  in-time  application  by  the  respondent  seeking
      permission to appeal against the determination of Judge of the  First-
      Tier Tribunal  Archer  who  allowed,  on  human  rights  grounds,  the
      appellant's appeal against the respondent's  decision  to  refuse  her
      further leave to remain".


     2.  It is arguable as set out in the grounds, in  particular  paragraph
      5 and the last few sentences of paragraph 6 that  the  judge  did  not
      give adequate reasons for his findings.  The appellant's stay of under
      six years in the  UK  would  not  itself  appear  to  be  particularly
      exceptional without further explanation, neither would her  commitment
      to meet the spouse requirements.  Whilst the fact that  the  appellant
      suffers from depression and PTSD caused  by  the  psychological  abuse
      from her husband could potentially amount to a compelling circumstance
      the judge does not explain why the appellant could not be  treated  in
      Ghana neither does he make findings on the impact which leaving the UK
      would have on her condition  and  therefore  on  her  ability  to  re-
      establish a meaningful private life in Ghana".

 9. Hence the matter came before me in the Upper Tribunal.

  10. At the commencement of the case Ms  Asanovic  produced  a  handwritten
      Rule 24 response, which embodied an application for  an  extension  of
      time.  The document merely stated that the judge's decision on Article
      8 ECHR did not disclose a material error of law the document then went
      onto allege and error of law in the  way  the  judge  dealt  with  the
      appeal under the rules.  Reference is made to internal contradictions.

  11. A discussion then took place as to whether this could be dealt with as
      a cross  appeal.   I  indicated  my  preliminary  view  was  that  the
      determination of Judge Archer did contain a material error of law  and
      that it should be set aside and remitted to  the  First-Tier  Tribunal
      for re-hearing.

  12. Neither representative objected to that.  Initially Mr Richards sought
      preservation of the findings in respect of the appeal under the rules,
      but he then conceded that the argument offered in respect of that part
      of the decision was "not devoid of merit".

  13. I therefore indicated that I found a material error of  law  contained
      in the determination.  It would be remitted  for  re-hearing  with  no
      findings preserved.

  14. I now give brief reasons.

  15. Whilst correctly directing himself with regard to the guidance set out
      in Nagre, I find that  the  judge  has  failed  to  identify  what  is
      exceptional in the appellant's circumstances.  The appellant has  only
      been in the United Kingdom 6 years.  While she  suffers  from  certain
      health problems there was  no  consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
      treatment was available in her home country.  As  highlighted  by  the
      judge granting leave, Judge Archer has not made findings  with  regard
      to the impact upon the appellant of leaving the United Kingdom so  far
      as her medical condition is concerned.  The judge does not explain the
      "strong evidence as to private life" referred to in  paragraph  22  of
      the determination, neither does  he  explain  (at  paragraph  23)  her
      removal would interfere with her private life.

  16. The judge attempts (paragraph 25) to explain compelling circumstances,
      but such explanation is not  sufficient  to  explain  why  the  appeal
      should be allowed under Article 8 ECHR.

  17. I regard the short comings as being material errors  of  law,  to  the
      extent  that  the  determination  and  decision  must  be  set  aside.
      Extensive fact finding must be carried out before a  decision  can  be
      remade and it is appropriate for this matter to be  remitted  back  to
      the First-Tier Tribunal for a hearing de novo.

  18. No application was made  in  respect  of  an  anonymity  order  and  I
      therefore do not make such a direction or order.

Decision

  19. Material error of law.

  20. Decision set aside to be remitted to the First-Tier Tribunal.



Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Poole                   11th November 2014
