
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43079/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 30th October 2014                 |On 12th December 2014                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                             Zviad Sheshaberidze
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Harris of Counsel instructed by
Farani.Javid. Taylor Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals with permission  a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, Judge Britton, promulgated on 3rd June  2014,  in  which  the
    Tribunal dismissed the Appellant's appeal brought against a refusal  of
    an application for further leave  to  remain  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The judge took into account that the application  was  Georgian
    national who had entered the UK on 22nd September  2003  on  a  student
    visa which was extended until 7th October.  His application for further
    leave to remain outside of the Rules was made on 5th October 2012, i.e.
    in time, and it was made on the basis of  his  relationships  with  his
    partner, a Russian national whose visa had expired in 2008,  and  their
    Russian citizen child David born in the United Kingdom on 25th February
    2005, and also a Russian national.  However the Respondent refused  the
    application reasoning that the  Appellant  did  not  meet  any  of  the
    requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  that  the  decision  was
    proportionate taking into account the  family  circumstances  including
    the best interests of the child, David.

 2. The Appellant appealed on the basis that the Respondent's  decision  of
    26th September 2013 was contrary to  the  Immigration  Rules  and  law,
    failing to take into account  that  the  Appellant  had  completed  ten
    years' continuous lawful residence in the United Kingdom  (paragraph  2
    refers).  In the context of human rights  the  Appellant's  son  was  8
    years old so that the decision was contrary to the family's  Article  8
    rights and argued that discretion under the  Immigration  Rules  should
    have been exercised differently.

 3. Permission was granted on renewal by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Pitt  who
    found merit in the proposition made in the grounds that as at the  date
    of decision the Appellant had been in the United Kingdom lawfully as  a
    student for over ten years.  Further that the assumptions made  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal judge concerning the child's ability  to  adapt  to
    living in Russia or Georgia  and  inclusion  at  paragraph  21  of  the
    assessment of the child's  best  interests  comments  on  the  parents'
    failure to prepare him for return to those countries, were arguably  in
    error.  The grant of permission pointed out that the challenge  to  the
    judge's failure to pay regard to the case of Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74  is
    misconceived as the judge referred to it in turn at [24].

 4. In a Rule 24 response the Respondent pointed out  that  no  application
    had been made in respect of paragraph 276B and that there had  been  no
    reliance on the same in the Grounds of Appeal or before the judge.

 5. At the  hearing  before  me  the  matter  proceeded  on  the  basis  of
    submissions.  Mr  Harris  pursued  the  Appellant's  challenge  on  two
    grounds:

      a) Firstly although the Appellant had not made  an  application  under
         276B, it being apparent that he did not have ten  years'  residence
         as at the date of application in October 2012, he  had  raised  the
         issue in the Grounds of Appeal.  The ground had merit and  required
         determination.  In the event that the issue could not succeed under
         the Immigration Rules it  was  a  matter  which  should  have  been
         weighed positively for the Appellant in  the  Article  8  balancing
         exercise.  In that regard it was pertinent that the judge, although
         having identified correctly the date of the  Appellant's  entry  as
         22nd September 2003, then mistakenly went on at [25] to state  that
         he had taken into consideration that the Appellant "had not been in
         this country for ten  years".   In  this  context  there  being  no
         requirement to have obtained the requisite  period  of  ten  years'
         lawful residence as at the date of  application  laid  out  in  the
         Rule, and  the relevant date for the assessment of the satisfaction
         of the Rule in an  in-country  appeal  was  the  date  of  hearing.
         Further in the context of the calculation of the period  of  lawful
         residence the matter was not  adversely  impacted  by  the  earlier
         expiry of leave, section 3C leave under the 1971 Immigration Act is
         lawful leave, and counts towards the  ten  year  period.   Had  the
         judge recognised that the ten year marker had been reached  it  may
         have occurred to him to consider whether or not, as at the date  of
         hearing the Appellant met the requirements of  the  long  residence
         Immigration Rules, in the context of further leave to remain  under
         276A, if not indefinite leave under 276B. A failure to recognise an
         entitlement to remain vitiated the Article 8 consideration.

      b) The judge's assessment of the best  interests  of  the  Appellant's
         child affected by the immigration decision was flawed.  The  matter
         was set out at paragraphs [20] to [21].  The  judge  accepted  that
         the Appellant's son David had been in the United Kingdom  for  over
         seven years, the child was 9 as at the date of hearing in May  2014
         and had been born here in 2005.  The judge  correctly  states  that
         his starting point is that it is in the best interests of  children
         to be with their parents.  However the judge does not  specifically
         consider the issue of where he should be with  his  parents.   That
         requires an assessment of the child's own private life and ties  to
         the United Kingdom in the context of the length of residence.   The
         relevant  case  of  Azimi-Moayed  &  Others  (decisions   affecting
         children: onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC) states in its  head
         note at (ii) and (iii) matters the judge should take  into  account
         to the point that the child's position can be such that it would be
         inappropriate to disrupt, in the absence of compelling  reasons  to
         the contrary, the social cultural and  educational  ties  developed
         over the period of time in the United Kingdom.   Whilst  the  judge
         was entitled to look at the questions of adaptability on return  to
         Georgia or Russia the issue is not necessarily  determinative  when
         taking into account the ties developed in the United Kingdom.   The
         judge does not appear to have reached a conclusion as to  the  best
         interests of the child in the context of his own cultural  identity
         or ties here with reference to the issue as to  whether  he  should
         remain in the United Kingdom or relocate.  At paragraph 21 there is
         also a criticism of the parents.  One has to ask why it  is  there.
         It must be relevant because it is included and the judge appears to
         hold it against the child.  The case of Zoumbas,  which  the  judge
         sets out over the page in his determination points out that  it  is
         an error of approach to blame a child for matters for which  he  is
         not responsible such as the conduct of the parent.

 6. Mr Kandola for the Respondent relied on the Rule  24  response  to  the
    point that the Appellant had not made an application for long residence
    either prior to the decision nor in a Section 120 notice following. Sop
    that the issue was simply not before the judge.  The  only  application
    in respect of long residence is that for indefinite  leave  to  remain,
    i.e. 276B, and it is conceded that the Appellant could not in any event
    meet those requirements because he did not have  the  English  language
    competency.  The suggestion that he could nonetheless be granted  leave
    in line with 276A(2) referred to an entirely  different  provision  and
    was a gloss on the case made for the first time in the oral submissions
    before me.

 7. Turning to the issue of Article 8 the judge had correctly self-directed
    referring to EA (Article 8 - best interests of child (Nigeria))  [2011]
    UKUT 00315 (IAC).

 8. The judge had had regard to the length of residence and the evidence of
    the appeal and he was not required to do anymore.   He  invited  me  to
    find that there was no error of law and dismissed the appeal.

My Consideration

 9. In terms of the long residence aspect of the appeal I find  that  there
    is merit in the grounds as identified in the grant of permission.   The
    issue was live before the First-tier Tribunal Judge as a result of  the
    reference to it in the Grounds of Appeal. The grounds asserted that the
    Appellant had gained ten years' lawful  residence  as  a  student;  the
    chronology reveals that although that was not the case  at  application
    it was the position by the date of decision. The judge's assessment  of
    the length of residence is problematic for the reasons set  out  in  Mr
    Harris' submission. It is not clear what the judge meant when  he  said
    that he took account of the fact that the Appellant  did  not  have  10
    years residence. It may be a reference to the date of  application.  It
    may be that it was a mistake about the calculation of time to the  date
    of decision and hearing or an error as to  the  import  of  the  latter
    position.

10. The Appellant arrived on 22nd September 2003 with  leave  and  he  then
    embarked  on  a  period  of  "lawful  residence"  in  the  context   of
    Immigration Rules, HC 395, as amended at paragraph 276A(b) which states
    that to count as lawful residence for the purposes of 276B it must -

         "(b)  'lawful  residence'  means  residence  which  is   continuous
             residence pursuant to:

             (i)  existing leave to enter or remain, or

             (ii) temporary admission within section 11  of  the  1971  Act
                  where leave to enter or remain is subsequently granted; or

             (iii)    an  exemption  from  immigration  control,  including
                  where an exemption ceases to apply if  it  is  immediately
                  followed by a grant of leave to enter or remain."

11. The Appellant's leave expired on 7th October 2012.  Before that date he
    made an application for leave pursuant to Article 8 ECHR. At  the  time
    of his application he did not have 10 years continuous lawful residence
    to found an application under  Rule  276.  However  once  his  in  time
    application was made his existing leave  continued  as  the  result  of
    Section 3C statutory leave,  pursuant  to  the  Immigration  Act  1971.
    Section 3C leave is lawful. The Respondent's Long residence and private
    Life guidance reminds her officers that section 3C leave is lawful  and
    that it is to be counted in a length of residence calculation.

12. The date of the Respondent's decision is 26 September 2013 i.e.  a  few
    days  after the Appellant had been here for  10  years.   Although  the
    Respondent did not have a rules  based  application  in  front  of  her
    because the Appellant had not applied to vary  his  application  before
    her decision,   and the grounds of appeal did not raise a  rules  based
    challenge, the question of what the Appellant's position is  under  the
    rules  remained  pertinent  to  the  judge's  Article  8  consideration
    because, in terms of the public interest, if an Appellant has  a  basis
    to remain under the rules, what is the public interest in removal?

13. It is a Robinson obvious point because it is a  point  that  materially
    affects a Treaty obligation of the UK and it is  a  point,  once  made,
    with obvious merit. That it was not raised before the First-tier  judge
    in terms may explain why he did not take it into account,  but  is  not
    sufficient, as submitted by Mr. Kandola, to save  the  decision.    Nor
    does the fact that the Rules at 276A sets  out  a  basis  for  granting
    limited leave on the satisfaction of a lesser basis than that  set  out
    for the application made because the only application available is  for
    the larger grant of indefinite leave, deprive the point of merit.

14. I find that the rest of Mr Harris's  submissions  add  nothing  to  the
    point above because they do not establish any separate error of law. If
    the parents had no rules based entitlement to be here then the  judge's
    best interests consideration and overall conclusions are in  accordance
    with the recent jurisprudence set out at EV (Philippines)  &  Others  v
    SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874.

15. It follows that for the  reasons  above  I  find  that  the  First-tier
    tribunal decision is vitiated by a material error of law and I  set  it
    aside. I find that on the evidence as it was before  the  First  -tier,
    taking  account  of  the  length  of  lawful  residence  of  the  first
    Appellant, the best interests of the child, the strength and  character
    of family and private life here, and the  limited  public  interest  in
    removing someone with an entitlement to be here under  the  Immigration
    rules in the event of having made a rules based application,  I  remake
    the decision, and allow the Appellants' appeals on Article 8 grounds.

Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and I  remake  the
    decision allowing the Appellants' appeals on Article 8 grounds.



Signed        Date 11th December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge
