
IAC-AH-SAR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43815/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 23 April 2015                              |On 1 May 2015                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                                MATTHEW COYLE
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Jones of Counsel by Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala of the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Australia born on 23 December  1991.   On
    25 July 2012 he entered the United Kingdom as a Tier 5 (Youth Mobility)
    Migrant.  On 10 September 2013 before expiry of his  Tier  5  leave  he
    applied for further leave outside the Immigration Rules on the basis of
    his private life in the United Kingdom.  His application also  included
    a claim for a Certificate of a Right of Entitlement of Abode  based  on
    his British ancestry.

The Respondent's Decision

 2. On 8 October 2013 the Respondent refused  the  Appellant's  application
    and decided to remove him by way of directions under Section 47 of  the
    Immigration,  Asylum  and  Nationality  Act   2006.    The   Respondent
    considered  the  Appellant's  circumstances  by  way  of  reference  to
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules and found  that  he  did  not
    meet any of  the  requirements.   Further,  treatment  for  his  mental
    condition was available in Australia  and  there  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances warranting consideration of his application under Article
    8 of the European Convention outside the  Immigration  Rules.   Neither
    the Respondent's  decision  nor  the  letter  giving  reasons  for  the
    decision made any reference to the Appellant's ancestry claim.

The Grounds for Appeal

 3. On 23 October 2013 the Appellant in  his  own  name  lodged  notice  of
    appeal under Section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002 as amended (the 2002 Act).  The grounds  refer  not  only  to  his
    personal circumstances but also to his ancestry claim.

The First-tier Tribunal Hearing

 4. Mr Jones represented the Appellant at the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing
    before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal McIntosh.  By  a  determination
    promulgated on 24 July 2014 the Judge dismissed the appeal based on his
    claim to a private life by way of reference  to  paragraph  276ADE  and
    Article 8 of the European Convention outside the Immigration Rules.

 5. The Appellant sought permission to appeal which,  on  9  October  2014,
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Chohan refused on the basis  that  the
    grounds did not disclose any obvious errors of law  and  the  Judge  at
    paragraphs 19-31 of her decision had set out in full her findings  upon
    which the conclusions she reached were open to her.

 6. The Appellant again in person renewed his application for permission to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal and on  21  January  2015  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Keki? granted permission to appeal on the basis it  was  arguable
    the Judge's consideration did not take account of the issues listed  in
    the grounds and did not properly  assess  his  mental  health  and  the
    impact of removal on it.

 7. By a letter of 28 January 2015 the Respondent filed  a  response  under
    Rule 24 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  as
    amended.  The response asserts the Judge took into account the relevant
    facts  and  made  a   sustainable   assessment   of   the   Appellant's
    circumstances and was  entitled  to  reach  the  conclusions  she  did.
    Additionally, she had found the Appellant was not reliant on medication
    or treatment and that in any event treatment  or  medication  would  be
    accessible to him on return to Australia where he could relocate  to  a
    new area.



The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 8. The Appellant attended with his girlfriend and  two  other  friends  to
    support him.  Mr Jones conceded there was no arguable error of  law  in
    the First-tier Tribunal's consideration of his  claim  under  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  However,  he  would  argue  that  the
    Judge's  consideration  of  the  claim  under  Article  8  outside  the
    Immigration Rules contained material errors  of  law.   The  Judge  had
    failed to consider the claim  fully  and  in  particular  that  if  the
    Appellant were removed from his support network which he had created in
    the United Kingdom, then his mental health would be severely  affected.
    His support  network  was  sufficiently  effective  to  enable  him  to
    dispense with other treatment or medication.  If this support were lost
    he would inevitably have to find support from elsewhere and  would  not
    be able in sufficient  time  to  recreate  a  new  support  network  in
    Australia  where  previously  psychiatric  treatment   had   not   been
    effective.

 9. Ms Fijiwala submitted this amounted simply to an  attempt  to  re-argue
    the Appellant's case.  The Judge's decision at paragraphs 11, 12 and 26
    noted the Appellant's mental condition and at paragraph 31 that he  was
    no longer  receiving  any  treatment.   Mr  Jones  responded  that  the
    Appellant was not receiving medical treatment  in  the  United  Kingdom
    because its need had been superceded by his having acquired  a  support
    network.

10. At the close of  submissions  I  enquired  what  had  happened  to  the
    Appellant's ancestry claim.  The papers in the Tribunal file showed not
    only that it had not been addressed in the Respondent's reasons  letter
    but  it  had  not  been  argued  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    consequently it was perhaps not surprising that the First-tier Tribunal
    decision was silent on the claim.  Ms Fijiwala suggested the claim  had
    not been raised until the Appellant had lodged notice of appeal  but  I
    referred her to page 28 of the  Appellant's  original  application  for
    further leave.

11. There was a discussion in chambers about the options available to  deal
    with both the ancestry  claim  and  the  challenge  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's  decision  on  the  claim  under  Article  8   outside   the
    Immigration Rules. On resuming the hearing, I announced my decision  to
    remit to the Respondent the whole decision for  further  consideration.
    I explained the effect to the Appellant and that my  reasons  for  this
    decision which had been agreed to by both representatives  in  chambers
    would follow in this written decision.

12. The Judge had before her evidence of the Appellant's  personal  history
    including two attempts on his life to which she referred  at  paragraph
    25 of her decision.  She noted that in the United Kingdom  he  was  not
    receiving medication or treatment.  She referred at paragraph 23 to the
    submission that the Appellant did not need treatment or  medication  in
    the UK because of his support network but made  no  connection  between
    the two at paragraph 31 when she concluded as a single  adult  male  he
    would be able to re-establish a  life  in  Australia.   She  failed  to
    engage with the letter of 9 June 2014  from  the  Appellant's  clinical
    psychologist in Australia and in particular the paragraph at  the  foot
    of the first page of the letter at pages 75 and 76 of  the  Appellant's
    bundle.  Her treatment of the  claimed  risk  of  suicide  was  not  in
    accordance with the learning in J (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2005]  EWCA  Civ.
    629 and her assessment  of  the  claim  under  Article  8  outside  the
    Immigration Rules failed to follow the recommended steps described in R
    (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27.  These amount to material errors of law
    such that the decision must be set aside in its entirety.

13. Turning to the Appellant's ancestry claim it is evident that  this  has
    never been considered by the Respondent although it was raised  in  the
    original application. If the Respondent was not  prepared  to  consider
    the ancestry claim at the same time, as part  of  the  application  for
    further leave outside the Immigration Rules, then it  would  have  been
    procedurally fair for the Respondent to have notified the Appellant  of
    this  and  to  have  required  him  to  make  a  separate  or  parallel
    application before reaching the decision now under  appeal.  For  these
    reasons the decision of the First-tier Tribunal must be set aside  and,
    as the parties agreed, the most practicable course is for both  aspects
    of  the  appeal  to  be  remitted  to  the  Secretary  of   State   for
    reconsideration.

Anonymity

14. There was no request for an anonymity direction and  having  considered
    the appeal I find none is warranted.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of law  such
    that it is set aside and the following decision is substituted:-

    The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for   further
    consideration.



Signed/Official Crest  Date 28. iv. 2015

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE RESPONDENT: FEE AWARD

The appeal has effectively been allowed because it  has  been  remitted.   I
have considered whether to make a fee award and  in  all  the  circumstances
find that it is not appropriate to make any fee award.



Signed/Official Crest  Date 28. iv. 2015

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

