
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/43044/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 December 2015                  |On 26 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                 JOSEPHINE O
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Darryl Balroop - counsel instructed by Shan & Co
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                             DECISION & REASONS

1.    This is a resumed hearing, following a hearing which took place on  11
November 2015 at which I found that First Tier Tribunal Judge  Plumptre  had
erred  materially  in  law  in  allowing  the  Appellant's  appeal   without
considering the requirements of regulation  15A(4A)(c)  of  the  Immigration
(EEA) Regulations 2006 and had made no reference  to  the  requirement  that
the British citizen spouse would be required to leave the United Kingdom.  A
copy of the error of law decision and reasons is appended to this decision.

2.    The appeal came before me for consideration of whether [AN]  would  be
unable to reside in the United Kingdom if his wife is required to leave  and
Article 8 of ECHR. The second limb of  this  consideration  has  now  fallen
away in light of the judgment of the Court of Appeal in  TY  (Sri  Lanka)  v
The Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ  1233  handed
down on 1 December 2015, which in turn endorsed the decision  of  the  Upper
Tribunal in Amirteymour  (EEA  appeals;  human  rights)  [2015]  UKUT  00466
(IAC). It is uncontentious that no section 120 notice  was  served  in  this
case.

3.    Mr Balroop began by drawing my attention to a letter from St  George's
hospital dated 9 December 2015, which had previously been  served  upon  the
Upper Tribunal and which makes clear  that  the  Appellant's  husband  lacks
capacity in  terms  of  his  ability  to  give  evidence  before  the  Upper
Tribunal. He called the Appellant to  give  evidence  and  she  adopted  her
statement. The Appellant was asked about  the  frequency  of  her  husband's
hallucinations and she replied that they occurred  every  day  and  that  he
sees people in the house who come to attack him; that he calls  the  police,
they come in and there is no-one there. She said she  has  been  advised  to
calm him down. Last time she went to the Home Office to sign on he left  the
house thinking people were coming to attack him as he does  not  like  being
in the house on his own. He went outside and sat down  waiting  for  her  to
come back. She was referred to the  letter  from  her  husband's  doctor  in
respect of his medication and she was  also  asked  about  what  happens  at
night.  The  Appellant  stated  that  her  husband  gets  up  suddenly  with
hallucinations and she has to help him to get up and to go to  the  bathroom
and sometimes this happens 4-6 times in the night. She was asked what  would
happen to her husband if she had to return to Ghana and she  said  that  she
went to see Wandsworth council to see what help they  could  give  and  this
amounted to meals on wheels and they would not be able to  provide  24  hour
care for him. She was asked whether she had discussed with her husband  what
would happen if she went back to Ghana and she said  that  they  had  talked
about it but had not really reached a decision but that if she is  not  with
him he has to go with her to Ghana and he has said this.

4.    The Appellant was then cross examined by  Ms  Holmes.  She  was  asked
whether her husband expressed concern about the care  available  to  him  in
Ghana and she replied that Ghana does not have a care system  like  the  one
in the United Kingdom and that there the family takes care of you. She  said
that her husband had expressed concern  about  not  getting  medication  and
care in Ghana and that he would die quickly. Ms Holmes asked  the  Appellant
if it was likely that if she had  to  leave  he  would  stay  here  and  the
Appellant responded "No."  When  asked  why  she  said  that  the  Appellant
replied that he would not receive the kind of care she provided for him  and
he would be better off if the two of them  went.  The  Appellant  was  asked
whether she had a letter from Wandsworth council that  the  only  care  they
could provide was meals on wheels and she  said  "No".  She  said  that  the
Council had come to provide them with equipment in the household to make  it
easier for him in terms of  his  mobility  and  other  than  that  there  is
nothing they can do for them. She  said  that  he  had  been  provided  with
mobility aids to help him move around the  house.  When  asked  whether  she
thought it was highly likely that he would  be  cared  for  because  of  his
state of health, by the council and  the  NHS  who  are  aware  of  him  the
Appellant accepted that this maybe the case if she was not around.

5.    I then asked the Appellant whether there were any  alternative  carers
who could look after her husband and she denied this. She said that  he  was
supported in the UK by way  benefits  and  council  accommodation.  I  asked
about her circumstances in Ghana and the Appellant said her husband  has  an
older sister there; they are in  contact  and  she  lives  in  Kodufai.  Her
husband had children but they had all left Ghana.  The  Appellant  said  she
has her mother and sisters in Accra and she would have to go there and  stay
with them. She said in terms of supporting herself she would have  to  start
again. She has worked as a beautician and  hairdresser.  She  said  she  had
checked whether her husband's medication would be  available  in  Ghana  but
she was not sure whether  his  medication  for  Parkinsons  disease  or  his
current medication would be available.

6.    The Appellant was then re-examined by Mr Balroop. She  confirmed  that
she was the only person who provides care for her  husband.  She  was  asked
how she had checked the availability of medication for him in Ghana and  she
said that she had carried out an internet check  in  respect  of  the  first
drugs he had been given but that his hallucinations were so  much  they  had
to change. She said she did not know how he would  cope  with  it.  She  was
asked whether it was, in her view, highly likely he would be  cared  for  in
the UK and she said that he would be cared for by being provided with  meals
on wheels.  I gave Ms Holmes permission to ask  further  questions  and  she
asked about the Appellant about her  husband's  contact  with  his  son,  to
which she responded that he does not call him and they had  not  heard  from
him for a long time and they did not know where he is. She  said  it  was  a
number of years and that she had never met him nor  spoken  to  him  on  the
phone. There has been no contact with him since  she  met  and  married  her
husband. She stated that he was in the UK at the time of last  contact.  The
Appellant was asked about her social life and she said that this was  Church
only because her husband does not feel comfortable going to see  people  and
he does not like people to see  him  since  he  became  unwell.  He  attends
Church with her. She was asked if  she  had  friends  who  visited  and  she
replied that it was only [IG] who sometimes comes  to  see  them.  She  said
[IG] was sitting at the back of the court and he would drive them if he  had
time, because of her husband's condition. There were no further witnesses.

7.    I then heard submissions from both parties. Ms Holmes took me  through
the decision in Ayinde & Thinjom [2015]  UKUT  00560  (IAC).  She  submitted
that Mr Ayinde looked after his mother who had schizophrenia and high  blood
pressure. She submitted that the circumstances of Mr  Ayinde's  mother  were
more comparable than those of Mrs Thinjom's husband but comparisons  can  be
made with both. At [13] she submitted that this was  quite  comparable  with
what the Appellant does for the Sponsor in this case. [17] sets out what  Mr
Stevens's situation is and that he would need to go to a care home. At  [41]
and [42] reliance was placed on the broad principles of  human  dignity  but
this  does  not  assist  the  Appellant  because  while  the  principle   is
inviolable, it is necessary to secure the presence of relatives or a  carer.
In respect of [54] and [55] in her  submission  in  this  case  it  was  not
possible to contemplate an  outcome  where  the  Sponsor  would  leave.  The
Appellant has given evidence that she has spoken to  the  council  and  they
have said all they  could  provide  is  meals  on  wheels  but  in  practice
everything would be done that needs to be done:  the  medical  services  are
more than aware of his situation and it is not just the local authority  who
are aware. The Sponsor has a degenerative disease and if left on his own  it
is likely all the services would come together and he would  be  cared  for.
He would not be forced to leave as everything is  here  that  he  needs.  In
respect of [57] and [58] and the assessment  of  likelihood  that  he  would
leave she  submitted  that  it  was  necessary  to  compare  what  would  be
available in Ghana to what he  would  have  in  the  UK.  She  submitted  in
respect of [59] that it was  not  enough  that  the  British  citizen  would
prefer his carer to be given leave to remain. In her  submission  all  those
points made by Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan applied in this particular  case.
She submitted in respect of [62] in respect of the  Appellant  Ayinde,  that
there was a similarity between the two cases  and  the  Sponsor's  need  for
treatment would be better met in the UK and if his needs cannot  be  met  by
carers he would go into a care home. It was not possible to claim Ms  Ayinde
would be unable to remain in the UK once her son leaves. In respect  of  the
Appellant Thinjom, he stated categorically he would  stay  in  the  UK.  She
submitted that this case is very  similar  to  that  of  Ayinde  because  of
difficulties and the level of care. In her submission  there  was  only  the
verbal evidence of the Appellant to say  that  the  only  care  her  husband
would receive would be meals on wheels but it is likely to be much  more  if
she were to leave. In terms of the emotional side of things it  seems  clear
the Appellant and Sponsor have friends i.e. [IG] and it was  likely  if  she
were required to leave that the Sponsor would not be left  entirely  on  his
own and [IG] would continue to be helpful and provide support  in  terms  of
friendship. Ms Holmes made clear that she was not submitting that  would  be
comparable to the care provided by  the  Appellant  however.  She  submitted
that the fact that I had not heard from  the  Sponsor  must  place  a  small
caveat on the Appellant's evidence. She requested that I dismiss the  appeal
because the Appellant  could  not  succeed  on  the  basis  of  the  current
caselaw.

8.    Mr Balroop submitted that the Appellant's circumstances  were  similar
to those of Thinjom, which also involved a husband  and  wife  and  drew  my
attention to [55]. He questioned how it was  possible  to  define  the  term
"unable to remain" and it was clear that the Upper Tribunal says the  answer
is obvious, that the children would go  with  their  parents.  He  submitted
that in respect of Thinjom, [52] is evidence from Mr Stevens that  he  would
not go. In his submission if you have a husband and wife it is obvious  that
the husband would  go  with  his  wife.  He  submitted  that  this  case  is
distinguishable in this context. Mr  Balroop  invited  me  to  consider  the
facts of Thinjom at [63] and that he was 82  when  he  married  and  so  was
already elderly and had issues surrounding his care and paying for  a  carer
to visit him twice a week. In this particular  scenario  he  submitted  that
the Sponsor and Appellant were married before  the  Sponsor  was  diagnosed;
that he was born in 1955 so he is 56 and the Appellant  has  been  his  only
carer, not just with regard to his daily task of dressing but she cares  for
him at night 4-6 times. Mr Balroop submitted that if they returned to  Ghana
they would stay with the Appellant's mother and sisters in  Accra  so  there
is a place to stay and care will continue. This is a different  result  from
Thinjom. In terms of the medication he submitted that the only  evidence  is
internet research and this is not reliable. He  drew  my  attention  to  the
letter from St Georges Hospital of 9 December 2015 at  page  2  which  makes
clear that the Sponsor's illness will reach a stage  where  medication  will
not make a difference. Mr Balroop submitted that this is about care  by  his
wife. He said that  any  help  that  Isaac  can  give  does  not  reach  the
threshold for care by the wife if she is  unable  to  remain.  He  submitted
that the Sponsor can leave cf [53] of Ayinde and it must be  right  that  he
satisfies [iv] and the appeal should be allowed.

The Relevant Law

9.    Regulation 15A of the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  provides  inter
alia as follows:

    "15A.  Derivative right of residence

    (1)    A person ('P') who is not an exempt person and who satisfies the
    criteria in paragraph ...(4A)... of this regulation is  entitled  to  a
    derivative right to reside in the United  Kingdom  for  as  long  as  P
    satisfies the relevant criteria.

    (4A)   P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if -

           i.    he is  the  primary  carer  of  a  British  citizen  ('the
           relevant British citizen')

           ii.   the relevant British citizen is  residing  in  the  United
           Kingdom; and

           iii.  the relevant British citizen would be unable to reside  in
           the UK or in another EEA state if P were required to leave."

10.   In Ayinde & Thinjom (Carers - Reg.15A - Zambrano)  [2015]  UKUT  00560
(IAC) the Upper Tribunal held at 61:

    "61.   From the foregoing, it  is  possible  to  derive  the  following
    general principles:

         (i)      The deprivation of the genuine enjoyment of the  substance
         of the rights attaching to the status of  European  Union  citizens
         identified in the decision in Zambrano is limited to safeguarding a
         British citizen's EU rights as defined in Article 20.

         (ii)     The provisions of reg. 15A of  the  Immigration  (European
         Economic Area) Regulations 2006 as amended apply when the effect of
         removal of the carer of  a  British  citizen  renders  the  British
         citizen no longer able to  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom  or  in
         another EEA state. This requires the carer to establish as  a  fact
         that the British citizen will be forced to leave the  territory  of
         the Union.

         (iii)    The requirement is not  met  by  an  assumption  that  the
         citizen  will leave and does not involve a consideration of whether
         it would be reasonable for the carer to leave the United Kingdom. A
         comparison of the British citizen's standard of living or  care  if
         the      appellant remains or  departs  is  material  only  in  the
         context of whether  the  British  citizen  will  leave  the  United
         Kingdom.

         (iv)     The Tribunal is required to  examine  critically  a  claim
         that a British citizen will leave the  Union  if  the  benefits  he
         currently receives by remaining in the United Kingdom are  unlikely
         to be matched in the country in which he claims he will  be  forced
         to settle."

11.   The Home Office  guidance  "Derivative  Rights  of  Residence  -  Ruiz
Zambrano cases" 12.12.12 provides:

    "Would the British citizen be forced to leave the EEA  if  the  primary
    carer was forced to leave?

    24.     Even  where  there  is   evidence   of   primary   and   shared
    responsibility, evidence to show  why  the  British  citizen  would  be
    forced to leave  the  EEA  (for  example  because  they  cannot  access
    alternative care in the UK) is still required.

    25.    If there is another person in  the  UK  who  can  care  for  the
    British citizen, then a derivative residence card must  be  refused  on
    the basis that such a refusal would not result in the  British  citizen
    being forced to leave the EEA.

    26.    Therefore caseworkers  must  assess  whether  there  is  another
    direct relative or legal guardian in  the  UK  who  can  care  for  the
    British citizen and, in the case  of  a  child,  who  has  already  had
    established contact. In making this assessment,  the  burden  of  proof
    remains on the applicant and the standard of proof is  the  balance  of
    probabilities. This means the onus is on the applicant  to  demonstrate
    that their removal would force the British citizen to leave the EEA. If
    there is no information to demonstrate this, then caseworkers may  wish
    to make further enquiries with  the  applicant  as  to  the  status  or
    whereabouts of the other parent in the case of a child, or  alternative
    care provisions in the case of a British citizen adult.

    27.    Examples of when it may be appropriate  to  issue  a  derivative
    residence card to a primary carer would be where:

         there are no other direct relatives or legal guardians to care  for
         the British citizen; or

         there is another direct relative or legal guardian  in  the  UK  to
         care for the British citizen but there are reasons why  this  carer
         is not suitable; or

         in the case of an adult British citizen, there are  no  alternative
         care provisions available in the UK."

Decision

12.   I have had very careful regard to the decision  in  Ayinde  &  Thinjom
(Carers - Reg.15A - Zambrano) [2015] UKUT 00560 (IAC) and  I  find  that  if
the Appellant were to be  removed  that  her  husband  would  be  unable  to
continue to reside in the United Kingdom. My reasons are as follows:

12.1. I accept the Appellant's oral evidence as credible, indeed it was  not
challenged by Ms Holmes who simply stated that  the  fact  that  I  had  not
heard from the Sponsor should  place  a  small  caveat  on  the  Appellant's
evidence. However, it was not possible to hear from the Sponsor  because  as
the letter from St George's  University  Hospital  dated  16  December  2015
makes clear, it was not considered that he has capacity to give evidence  in
a court of law due to his  cognition  problems  and  visual  hallucinations.
However, the medical evidence is consistent with  the  Appellant's  evidence
before me.

12.2. I find that [AN] would be unable to reside in the  United  Kingdom  if
the Appellant left because he is dependent upon her  specifically.  I  found
her evidence telling that when she has to leave the house e.g. to go to  the
Home Office to sign on, her husband goes outside to wait for her  to  return
and her absence makes him anxious. It is clear  from  the  medical  evidence
that, aside from medication, what [AN] requires is "ongoing assistance  with
daily personal activities and domestic activities  of  living.  He  requires
some assistance to get dressed  and  his  personal  care  and  all  domestic
activities such as preparing food are done for  him"  and  he  requires  on-
going management with taking  his  medication.  These  are  tasks  that  are
carried out by his wife, the Appellant. She also gave evidence that she  has
to assist him 4-6 times a night when he suffers from hallucinations and  she
assists him in going to the bathroom. It  is  clear  and  I  find  that  the
Appellant provides her husband with essential personal care - not simply  in
terms of general tasks that could be  carried  out  by  a  carer,  but  more
crucially in calming him when he is anxious - which  occurs  frequently  due
to his hallucinations and assisting him during the night. They have been  in
a relationship since March  2009,  at  which  time  [AN]  owned  and  ran  a
shipping company and they married in  March  2011.  He  was  diagnosed  with
Parkinsons Disease later that year and  the  Appellant  has  cared  for  him
since that time.

12.3. I accept the evidence that there is no alternative carer in  terms  of
a family member in the United Kingdom. Their friend  [IG]  assists  e.g.  in
driving the Appellant and her husband to court but he  cannot  take  on  the
role of carer. Whilst I accept that if the Appellant were to leave  that  it
is likely the NHS and the local authority would step in to ensure that  [AN]
receives support and assistance with  his  daily  personal  activities  this
does not resolve matters because he would be without the assistance  of  his
wife, upon whom he is clearly dependent.

12.4. [AN] is originally from Ghana and is familiar  with  the  culture  and
has a sister who lives there. The Appellant also has her mother and  sisters
in Accra and she and her husband would be able to live with them,  at  least
in the short term whilst the  Appellant  re-establishes  herself  and  seeks
employment  as  a  beautician/hairdresser.  Whilst  the  Appellant  and  her
husband would not be  in  receipt  of  benefits  in  Ghana  [[AN]  currently
receives  housing  benefit,  council  tax  benefit  and  Disability   Living
Allowance] they would have accommodation and the Appellant would be able  to
work to support  them  both.  The  Appellant  has  also  conducted  internet
research  and  whilst  it  is  not  clear  whether  her  husband's   current
medication is available, medication  for  the  treatment  of  Parkinsons  is
available there.

12.5. Of primary  importance  is  the  fact  that  it  was  the  Appellant's
evidence that she and her husband have discussed what they would do  if  the
appeal is unsuccessful and her evidence  is  that,  although  they  had  not
reached a firm conclusion, he would have to go with  her  because,  although
he has concerns that his health would deteriorate  and  he  would  die  more
quickly, they  considered  that  he  would  be  better  off  with  her  than
remaining in the UK without her because he would not  receive  the  sort  of
care she provides for him. The letter Alison Leake, specialist nurse at  the
neurology department of St George's Healthcare Trust dated 7  February  2014
expressly states that: "Parkinson's disease  patients  ...  require  ongoing
support from very close family members"  both  to  support  compliance  with
medication and to support any personal or  domestic  care  requirements.  Ms
Leake continued: "I know from [AN] that he struggles when he is not  in  the
company of his wife both physically  and  mentally  and  has  a  history  of
hallucinations which are disturbing ... Depression is a very common  problem
in Parkinson's disease and I suspect there is an element of this  with  [AN]
which we continue to monitor and again his wife's support  is  important  to
maintain good mental health."

13.   Consequently, I find that:

    (i)    the Appellant is  the  primary  carer  of  her  British  citizen
    husband;

    (ii)   there are no alternative  carers  in  the  form  of  a  relative
    residing in the United Kingdom who would be willing and able to provide
    the care that [AN] requires as  a  person  suffering  from  Parkinson's
    disease;

    (iii)  the Appellant's husband would be unable to reside in the  United
    Kingdom if the Appellant were required to leave because - in line  with
    the medical evidence - he is dependent upon her not only  for  physical
    support but also for emotional and mental support as a  consequence  of
    his illness.

14.   I further find that, unlike the factual  circumstances  pertaining  in
the cases of Ayinde and Thinjom, that [AN] would leave  the  United  Kingdom
with his wife if she were to be required to leave as he would be  unable  to
manage without her personal care and emotional support.

15.   For these reasons I allow the appeal. The Appellant is entitled  to  a
derivative residence card pursuant to  regulation  18A  of  the  Immigration
(EEA) Regulations 2006 (as amended).


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

23 February 2016

