
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: ia/43931/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At                                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 07.01.2016                        |On 05.02.2016                        |


                                   Before:

                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN


                                  Between:
                              Glory Nyong AKPAN
                                                                   appellant
                                     and


                                                                  respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:  Shaheen Haji (counsel instructed by Dias)
For the respondent: Mr Keith Norton


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Anthony Higgins), sitting at Taylor House on  22  April
    2015, to  a long residence appeal by a  citizen  of  Nigeria,  born  28
    December 1973. The basis of the appeal will be clearer when the history
    is explained.

 2. History  On 4 October 2002 the appellant arrived as a student, and  she
    stayed with student leave till 2009, and graduate  or  post-study  work
    migrant leave till 8 May 2010. On that day she  applied  for  leave  to
    remain as a tier 2 (general) migrant; but that was refused, first on 19
    July 2010. Following the first judicial review claim in  this  case,  a
    consent order was signed on 2 December 2011, under which the respondent
    undertook to review the decision, resulting in a  fresh  refusal  on  2
    October 2012. By 4 October that year the appellant  had  completed  ten
    years' lawful residence here; however, what she did on 6 November,  was
    to appeal the tier 2 refusal. That appeal was dismissed on 15  February
    2013, which became final when she was refused permission to  appeal  by
    the Upper Tribunal on 24 April 2013.

 3. The next thing the appellant did, on 24 July 2013, was to file a second
    claim for judicial review, this time of the Upper Tribunal's refusal of
    permission to appeal. The respondent had failed to  reply  to  a  'pre-
    action protocol' letter on 16 May, or a follow-up on 18 July; but  this
    was the very last day for a judicial  review  claim.  It  met  with  an
    acknowledgement letter on 19 August, but no formal  acknowledgement  of
    service. However, judicial review, entirely predictably, since this was
    a Cart [2011] UKSC 28  case, was refused on 4 March 2014. The appellant
    received notice of that decision on 7  April,  but  did  not  make  her
    application for indefinite leave to remain till 19 June.

 4. That application was refused on 9 October: it  was  accepted  that  the
    appellant had been lawfully  here  till  24  April  2013,  so  for  the
    necessary  ten  years  since  her  arrival.  So  her  application   was
    considered under paragraph 276B (i)  (a)  of  the  Rules;  but  it  was
    refused on the basis that she had waited for more than 28  days  before
    making her application for indefinite leave to remain. Her  application
    was also refused under the 'new Rules', as amended on 9 July 2012;  but
    it has not been suggested that she could have qualified  for  leave  to
    remain under those. There was a third ground for refusal, to the effect
    that she could not show the 'exceptional and compelling  circumstances'
    required for a claim under article 8  to  succeed  outside  the  Rules,
    under MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 and authorities since then, and
    I shall come to that in due course.

 5. Issues   The refusal letter reckoned the appellant's  delay  in  making
    her claim as 532 days, which was clearly wrong; but  that  mistake  was
    not adopted by the judge, so it is neither here nor there. The relevant
    rule dealing with delay was at paragraph 276B (v):

         '... the applicant must not be in the UK in breach  of  immigration
         laws except that any period of overstaying for a period of 28  days
         or less will be disregarded'

    The effect of that rule was modified by the  Immigration  Directorates'
    Instructions [IDIs], which at the relevant time were as follows:

         'When refusing an application on the grounds that it was made by an
         applicant who has  overstayed  by  more  than  28  days,  you  must
         consider any evidence of exceptional circumstances which  prevented
         the  applicant  from  applying  within  the  first   28   days   of
         overstaying.

         The threshold for what constitutes 'exceptional  circumstances'  is
         high,  but  could  include  delays  resulting  from  unexpected  or
         unforeseeable causes.'

    A number of examples are then given, including serious illness,  travel
    or postal delays, loss of or delay in returning travel documents by the
    Home Office, or loss of them by theft, fire or flood.

 6. The judge set out the appellant's solicitor's submissions on this point
    at paragraphs 16 - 17, but at paragraph 18  he  rejected  the  argument
    that the facts set  out  amounted  to  exceptional  circumstances,  for
    reasons he gave in some detail, also explaining at paragraphs 20 and 21
    why they did not show any unlawful failure to depart from the Rules  or
    guidance. However, permission to appeal was given, on this point  only,
    by another first-tier judge, on the basis that  he  had  arguably  "...
    failed to give sufficient weight to the Respondent's alleged  tardiness
    in dealing with  the  judicial  review  proceedings".  The  judge  also
    dismissed the article 8 arguments, to which I shall come later.

 7. Conclusions: paragraph 276B  The second judicial review application  in
    this case, challenging the Upper  Tribunal  refusal  of  permission  to
    appeal on 24 April 2013, was doomed to failure from the  start  by  the
    decision of the Supreme Court in Cart, as any  competent  solicitor  in
    this field could and would have advised the  appellant.  Under  present
    practice, it would certainly  have  been  refused  as  totally  without
    merit. It was the leisurely progress of this  application,  whether  or
    not caused or contributed to by the Home  Office,  which  is  said,  in
    terms of the IDIs, to have prevented the appellant from applying within
    the first 28 days of overstaying.

 8. There are a number of answers to this point, each of them conclusive on
    its own, First, there was nothing whatever  to  prevent  the  appellant
    from applying for indefinite leave to remain as  soon  as  her  tier  2
    appeal was finally dismissed on 24 April, or at any time before 22 May,
    when the 28 days ran out. Second, if she chose, no doubt on advice,  to
    start off a judicial review by sending a 'pre-action  protocol'  letter
    on 16 May, that was her choice, and not something  that  prevented  her
    from making an application for indefinite leave to remain at any  stage
    as well as, or instead of that. No doubt  in  that  case  the  judicial
    review application might have been met by the answer that she both  had
    and was pursuing an alternative remedy; but, since the judicial  review
    application was hopeless anyway, that hardly matters.

 9. Third, no delay after the first 28 days is relevant to the issue raised
    by the IDIs: no doubt an appellant who was  prevented  from  making  an
    application during that time would need to show that by making  one  as
    soon as possible afterwards, but neither of those things applied  here.
    Fourth, the 28 days had very nearly run out by the time  the  appellant
    set  the  judicial  review  process  in  motion  with  the  'pre-action
    protocol' letter, so that no later delay by the Home  Office  made  any
    real difference. Fifth, even if it had, the appellant would  have  been
    free to file a judicial review claim 21 days after sending the  letter,
    whether there was any reply or not. Sixth, when the  claim  was  filed,
    the respondent sent the letter  of  19  August  on  the  last  day  for
    acknowledging service, and, in view of Cart, which it cited, it  was  a
    perfectly adequate response to the claim, and any further delay was  no
    doubt the result of pressure of business in the Administrative Court.

10. It will already be clear that I consider permission  to  appeal  should
    never have been given on the ground on which it was  based.  The  judge
    had very clearly pointed out at paragraph 18 why he  did  not  consider
    there were exceptional circumstances within the terms of the IDIs,  and
    that should have been  that.  However,  the  appellant's  grounds  also
    challenged the judge's article 8 decision. Since permission  to  appeal
    had not been given on that ground, both the respondent and the Tribunal
    had a right to expect that some notice should have been  given  of  the
    appellant's intention still to rely on it. However, since Mr Norton did
    not object to Miss Haji arguing it, I allowed her to do so.

11. Conclusions: article 8 The judge rejected the  article  8  claim  after
    considering s. 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
    (inserted by the Immigration Act 2014 ).  This  applies  to  all  cases
    where the , so far as relevant:

         '(1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
         public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

             (a)    are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         financially independent, because such persons-

             (a)    are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  ...

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
         precarious

         (6)  ...'

12. At paragraph 18, the judge  gave  the  appellant  credit  for  speaking
    English (2), and for not being a burden  on  the  tax-payer  (3),  even
    though she was not financially independent, since  she  relied  on  the
    support of her brother. On the other hand, he pointed out (5), that she
    had established her private life in this country at  a  time  when  her
    immigration status was precarious. That is challenged at  paragraph  39
    of the grounds, on the basis that she had been legally here throughout.
    That challenge not only neglects the division between (4), dealing with
    persons  unlawfully  here,  and  (5),  with  those  whose   status   is
    precarious; but the  decision  in  AM  (s.  117B)  [2015]  UKUT  260  ,
    published as recently as 17 April 2015.

13. These were the relevant conclusions in AM:

      3) Parliament has now drawn a sharp distinction between any period  of
         time during which a person has been in the UK "unlawfully", and any
         period of time during which that person's immigration status in the
         UK was merely "precarious".

      4) Those who at any given date held a  precarious  immigration  status
         must have held at that date an otherwise lawful grant of  leave  to
         enter or to remain. A person's immigration status  is  "precarious"
         if their continued presence in the UK will be dependent upon  their
         obtaining a further grant of leave.

14. S. 117B applies to all cases where the public interest is in  question,
    and needs, at least in this Tribunal, to be read in the  light  of  AM.
    That is what in effect the judge did, even though he was sitting on  22
    April, and the appellant's solicitor  had,  perhaps  understandably  at
    that stage, not referred him to that decision, which had come out  only
    a few days earlier. The judge did what the Rules,  the  IDIs,  and  the
    statute required, in a clear well-balanced decision, the reasoning  for
    which took up less space to give than I have  needed  to  show  it  was
    right. I am glad in one  way  that  permission  to  appeal  was  given,
    because it has enabled me to say that.

Appeal


                               [pic]
                                             (a judge of the Upper Tribunal)
