
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43885/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On  24th June 2015                   |On 30th June 2015                    |


                                   Before

                          Deputy upper JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR UMAIR ATEEQ
                           (anonymity not directed)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Din
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Myers to allow the appeal of Mr Umair Ateeq against
    refusal of his application for a European Economic Community  Residence
    Card in recognition of his status as the extended family  member  of  a
    citizen of the European Union who is exercising  her  Community  Treaty
    rights in the United Kingdom.

 2. For ease of reference, I  shall  hereafter  refer  to  the  parties  in
    accordance with their status in the First-tier  Tribunal:  that  is  to
    say, I shall refer to Mr Ateeq as "the appellant" and to the  Secretary
    of State as "the respondent".

 3. It was not disputed in the First-tier  Tribunal  that  the  appellant's
    claimed partner, Udiko Tunde Torok, was an EU citizen who is  (and  was
    at all material times) exercising her Community  Treaty  rights  within
    the United Kingdom. The sole factual issue, therefore, was whether  the
    appellant and Ms Torok were in a "durable relationship" thus qualifying
    the appellant as an  'extended  family  member'  within  the  scope  of
    Regulation 8 of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006. In view of the respondent's first ground of appeal, it should  be
    stated from the outset that the burden of proving the existence of this
    claimed relationship was from first to last upon the appellant.

 4. The respondent's second ground of appeal is that even if the judge  had
    correctly applied the burden of proof to the evidence (the issue at the
    heart of the first ground) she was wrong to  have  allowed  the  appeal
    outright. Mr Din did not contest the merits  of  this  ground.  He  was
    right not to do so.  This  is  because,  although  'family  membership'
    entitles an applicant to an EU Residence Card, the granting of  such  a
    card to an 'extended' family member is one that falls  entirely  within
    the discretion of the respondent [compare and contrast the  wording  of
    Regulation 17(1) with Regulation 17(4)]. It follows from this that  (at
    most) the First-tier Tribunal ought only to have allowed the appeal  on
    the  limited  ground  that  the  respondent's  decision  was  "not   in
    accordance with the law", thus affording the respondent the opportunity
    to exercise her discretion as to whether this was an  appropriate  case
    in which to issue a Residence Card.

 5. By contrast, the first ground of appeal strikes at the  very  heart  of
    the basis upon which the Tribunal allowed the appeal. If  the  Tribunal
    misapplied the burden of proof to the evidence, then this will  vitiate
    the entirety of the decision. I therefore  now  turn  to  consider  the
    first ground.

 6. As the respondent correctly notes at paragraph 1 of  her  grounds,  the
    judge failed to make any discrete reference to the burden and  standard
    of proof in her decision. However, whilst it is doubtless good practice
    to make such a reference, its absence is not of itself be fatal to  the
    decision.  Conversely,  its  inclusion  would  not   necessarily   have
    demonstrated that the correct burden of proof had been applied  to  the
    evidence. The ultimate question, therefore, is whether the Tribunal has
    demonstrated that it applied the correct burden of  proof  when  making
    its findings of fact. Regrettably, I have come to the  conclusion  that
    the reverse is true.

 7. At paragraph 15 of her determination, the judge  noted  that  "although
    this appeal concerns a durable  relationship  and  not  a  marriage  of
    convenience ... it is useful  to  examine  the  rules  concerning  sham
    marriages". The judge thereafter quoted  from  what  she  described  as
    "UKBA advice to caseworkers concerning marriages of convenience".  This
    included advice that "where there is a child of the relationship", such
    a case should be "discarded from consideration as  [a]  marriage[s]  of
    convenience". Although the judge did not  specifically  highlight  this
    passage, it may be that she considered it to be of  some  relevance  to
    the instant appeal. Unfortunately, the passage  that  she  quoted  also
    included (indeed began with) the phrase, "the burden of proof is on the
    Secretary of State". Immediately after quoting this advice,  the  judge
    proceeded to quote extensively from the reported decision of  Papjorgji
    (EEA spouse - marriage of convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT  00038  (IAC)
    in which it was held that "there is no  burden  at  the  outset  of  an
    application on a claimant to demonstrate that  a  marriage  to  an  EEA
    national is not one of convenience", and that "there is  an  evidential
    burden on  the  claimant  to  address  evidence  justifying  reasonable
    suspicion that marriage is entered into for the predominant purpose  of
    securing residence rights".

 8. However, these legal materials did not have any bearing upon the  issue
    that arose for  determination  in  this  appeal.  They  related  to  an
    entirely different category of applicant; namely,  that  of  a  'family
    member' rather than of an 'extended family member' of  an  EU  citizen.
    Specifically, they relate to cases in which  the  parties  are  legally
    married, whereas the parties to the relationship in this appeal (as the
    judge herself noted) are not. This distinction is crucial to the burden
    of proof. Where parties have entered into the lifetime commitment of  a
    legally recognised marriage, then the law assumes that the relationship
    is of a durable nature unless  the  Secretary  of  State  adduces  some
    evidence that is capable of giving rise to the suspicion that it  is  a
    'sham'. The position is otherwise where the relationship is not legally
    recognised. In such a case, the burden of  proving  durability  remains
    upon the applicant/appellant throughout. The decision in Papjorgji thus
    cast no light at all upon the legal issues that had to  be  decided  in
    this appeal. On the contrary, it merely served to add to  the  existing
    confusion as to whether the judge was applying the  correct  burden  of
    proof.  Moreover, and in any event, the proposition that a relationship
    in which a child has been conceived is more likely to be of a "durable"
    nature than otherwise is one of plain common sense for which  no  legal
    authority is required.

 9. Furthermore, although the judge was right to focus upon  the  existence
    of a child of the relationship  as  evidence  of  its  durability,  her
    reference to a birth certificate providing "prima  facie"  evidence  of
    the appellant's paternity [paragraph 19] raises  doubts  about  whether
    she was applying the correct standard of proof. Evidence  that  on  the
    face of it (prima facie) establishes  the  existence  of  a  particular
    state of affairs  will  usually  suffice  to  discharge  an  evidential
    burden. It will however rarely suffice (of  itself)  to  discharge  the
    legal burden of proofing a case on a balance of probabilities.  By  way
    of example, had this been a marriage case, it may have been appropriate
    to note that the Secretary of State was  required  to  adduce  evidence
    that on the face of it (prima facie) gave rise to  the  suspicion  that
    the marriage  was  one  of  convenience,  as  a  pre-condition  to  the
    appellant being required to prove that it was not.

10. This is  not  to  say  that  the  judge  was  in  any  event  right  to
    characterise the birth certificate as mere 'prima  facie'  evidence  of
    paternity. Given the penal consequences under criminal  law  for  those
    who knowingly make  false  declarations  in  support  of  registration,
    together with the long-term legal and fiscal consequences for a  person
    who is falsely registered as the father of a  child,  it  is  at  least
    arguable that a birth  certificate  constitutes  very  much  more  than
    'prima facie' evidence of  the  facts  that  are  stated  therein.  The
    central point, however, is that  the  judge's  use  of  the  expression
    "prima facie" evidence was not only inappropriate in its use of  Latin,
    but it also added further confusion to the question of whether she  was
    applying the correct burden and standard of proof.

11. The above are not matters  of  mere  semantics.  They  are  fundamental
    errors of law concerning the burden and standard of proof.  They  could
    have been avoided by simple reference to  the  burden  of  proving  the
    existence of a durable relationship being upon the  appellant,  to  the
    standard of a balance of probabilities, followed by  findings  of  fact
    that were couched in  language  that  clearly  demonstrated  that  this
    principle was being applied to the evidence. As it is,  the  errors  of
    law mean that none of the factual findings in this appeal can safely be
    preserved. The Tribunal's decision must therefore be set aside  in  its
    entirety. The representatives agreed that in these circumstances it was
    appropriate for the appeal to be remitted to a different judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal in order for the appeal to be determined afresh.

Notice of Decision

12. The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed, the decision of the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside,  and  the  appeal   is   remitted   for
    redetermination by a First-tier Tribunal judge other than Judge Myers.

Anonymity is not directed



Signed   Date

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

