
[pic]
IAC-TH-CP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43307/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8th May 2015                      |On 30th October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MR GODFREY MUIRURI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms H Masih (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   It is convenient to refer to the parties as they were before the First-
    tier tribunal. The appellant is a citizen of Kenya.   On  15th  October
    2014 the Secretary of State decided  to  remove  him  from  the  United
    Kingdom.  His appeal against that decision was  allowed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Lodge,  on  human  rights  grounds,  in   a   decision
    promulgated on 3rd February 2015.

2.   In deciding to remove the appellant, the Secretary of State  took  into
    account  his   immigration   history,   which   included   unsuccessful
    applications for leave, his offending  behaviour  and  the  family  and
    private  life  ties  he  claimed   to   have   established,   including
    relationships with a British citizen partner and with his son, born  in
    August 2011.  The appellant's case was advanced before the judge on the
    basis that he met the requirements of Appendix FM  of  the  Immigration
    Rules ("the rules") in EX.1 and on the alternative basis that  even  if
    he could not meet these requirements, his removal would nonetheless  be
    a disproportionate response.

3.   The judge found that the  appellant  could  not  meet  the  suitability
    requirements of the rules  in  the  light  of  his  convictions,  which
    included an offence of fraud.  The  appellant  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom in 2002 and, found the judge, had no  family  members  left  in
    Kenya although there was unclear evidence regarding  contact  with  his
    stepmother's relatives there.  He accepted that the appellant  plays  a
    full role in his son's life and that the relationship with his  partner
    continues, although they have never lived together.  He found that  the
    appellant's partner would not accompany  him  to  Kenya.   Overall,  he
    concluded that removal would be disproportionate.

4.   In grounds in support of an application for permission to  appeal,  the
    Secretary of State contended that the judge misdirected himself in  law
    in relation to Article 8.  In the light of the finding of fact that the
    appellant was a persistent offender, so that  paragraph  S-LTR.1.5  and
    1.6 applied, he could not bring himself within the  rules.   The  judge
    erred in simply proceeding to make an Article 8 assessment outside  the
    rules, on the basis of guidance given in Razgar [2004]  UKHL  27.   The
    Secretary  of  State  contended  that  the  appellant's   circumstances
    disclosed no exceptional or very compelling circumstances and that  his
    family here would be able to visit him in Kenya  or  maintain  contact.
    Whilst it might be in the best interests of the appellant's son for him
    to remain here, so that he could continue to act as a father, the  best
    interests of the child were not a "trump  card"  and,  in  the  instant
    appeal, had not been  balanced  against  the  public  interest  in  the
    appellant's  removal  in  the  light  of  his  failure  to   meet   the
    requirements of the rules.  Overall, the proportionality assessment was
    fundamentally flawed.

5.   Permission to appeal  was  granted  on  24th  March  2015.   The  judge
    granting permission observed that it was arguable that the  appellant's
    failure to meet the  requirements  of  the  rules  was  not  adequately
    weighed in the proportionality balancing exercise.

6.   Before the hearing, the appellant's solicitors provided a bundle and  a
    notice under section 15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.  The further evidence  which  they  sought  to  adduce  was
    obtained in the light of the grant of permission.  The bundle  included
    a recent assessment of the appellant's risk of reoffending, prepared in
    April 2015 by a probation officer.  The bundle also included a rule  24
    response in which it was  contended  that  it  was  apparent  that  the
    judge's findings of fact were not challenged and should  be  preserved.
    The grant of permission was  made  on  the  basis  that  there  was  an
    inadequate weighing of the competing interests.   In  the  alternative,
    the grounds revealed a disagreement with the outcome but nothing  else.
    It was open to the judge to make an Article 8  assessment  outside  the
    rules in the light of his favourable findings regarding the appellant's
    relationships with his partner and child.  These were not fully catered
    for under the rules, in the light of the  particular  circumstances  of
    the case.

7.   In particular, the Secretary of State suggested in the decision  letter
    of 18th October 2014 that she  would  not  consider  it  reasonable  to
    expect the appellant to leave the United Kingdom, if  his  relationship
    with his son were accepted as genuine and subsisting.  The  judge  made
    favourable findings of fact in this context.  He did what was  required
    of him as part of an assessment under section 55 of the 2009 Act.

8.   So far as section 117A to D of the 2002 Act was  concerned,  the  rules
    did not amount to a complete code and took no account of the particular
    factor identified in section 117B(6).  The appellant  could  show  that
    this provision applied in his case.

9.   Ms Fijiwala handed up a copy of the judgment of the Court of Appeal  in
    SS (Congo) and Others [2015] EWCA Civ 387.

Submissions on Error of Law

10.  Ms Fijiwala said that  the  public  interest  considerations  were  not
    properly considered by the judge.  There was a clear finding  that  the
    appellant could not bring himself within the rules as  he  fell  within
    paragraph S-LTR.1.5.  The relevant findings were in paragraphs  27  and
    28 of the decision.  The judge then simply went on to make an Article 8
    assessment outside the rules, without considering whether the rules  in
    fact properly catered  for  the  appellant's  circumstances.   In  this
    regard,  the  decision  was  not  consistent  with  guidance  given  in
    paragraph 44 of the judgment in SS (Congo), where the Court  of  Appeal
    held that if an assessment took place outside the rules, the individual
    interests of a claimant and others whose Article 8 rights are in  issue
    had to be balanced against the public interest, including as  expressed
    in the rules.  In the present appeal, the judge made no mention of  the
    appellant's convictions in paragraph 28, a plainly material  factor  in
    the balance.  Again, this was clear from the judgment in SS (Congo), at
    paragraph 33, where the Court  of  Appeal  held  that  the  rules  will
    provide  significant  evidence  about  the  relevant  public   interest
    considerations which should be brought into account. The judge did  not
    give sufficient weight to the rules.

11.   There  was  also  no  proper  factoring  in  of  the  public  interest
    considerations in section 117B, and a failure  to  properly  apply  the
    guidance given in Dube [2015] UKUT 90 (IAC).

12.  The best interests of the child of the family  were  plainly  material,
    as identified in the rule  24  response,  the  child  being  a  British
    citizen.  However, as  was  made  clear  in  paragraph  39(iv)  of  the
    judgment in SS (Congo), this is plainly not a trump  card.   The  judge
    failed to consider whether or not the appellant's  family  and  private
    life ties were established while he had precarious  immigration  status
    and there was no assessment of whether or not he could  show  financial
    independence, matters relevant to section 117B.  It appeared  from  the
    evidence that the appellant's partner was on benefits but there was  no
    separate consideration of the appellant's own financial circumstances.

13.  Ms Masih relied upon the rule 24 response.   At  paragraph  25  of  the
    decision, there was a reference by the  judge  to  the  most  important
    conviction and, at paragraph 26, the judge summarised  the  convictions
    overall.  It was plain that he  had  dealt  with  them.   Although  not
    expressly mentioned in the Article 8  assessment  which  followed,  the
    judge considered matters in  the  round.   The  overall  conclusion  at
    paragraph 32 was one which was open to him.  Similarly, the judge  made
    clear findings that the suitability requirements of the rules were  not
    met.  There was no error of law.

14.  In any event, if there were an error  it  was  not  material.   It  was
    clear from Dube that there was no particular need to expressly  mention
    section 117A to D of the 2002 Act.  The substance  was  what  mattered.
    The appellant's status was not  the  subject  of  argument  as  it  was
    perfectly clear that it was precarious  and,  similarly,  it  was  also
    clear from the evidence that the appellant was  not  financially  self-
    sufficient.  He had no permission to  work.   The  judge  plainly  gave
    weight to the relationships with the appellant's partner and child and,
    in substance, took into account section 117B(6) of the 2002  Act.   The
    appellant was entitled to succeed in his appeal.

15.  Moreover, the Secretary of State's decision letter, written in  October
    2014, itself appeared to suggest that if the relationship  between  the
    appellant and his child were accepted, it would not  be  reasonable  to
    require the appellant to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.   This  too  was
    perfectly consistent with section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

16.  In a brief response, Ms Fijiwala said  that  even  if  the  appellant's
    precarious immigration  status  and  the  absence  of  financial  self-
    sufficiency were plain, they did not appear in the  judge's  reasoning,
    as was required.  They were not identified as factors weighing  in  the
    balance against the appellant, as they should have been. There  was  no
    particular weight given to the rules, and the  appellant's  failure  to
    meet the suitability requirements, as required.  None of this  appeared
    in the proportionality assessment.

Conclusion on Error of Law

17.  The judge cannot be  criticised  for  failing  to  directly  apply  the
    guidance given by the Court of Appeal in SS  (Congo)  as  the  judgment
    only appeared three months after his decision was promulgated.  On  the
    other hand, the approach identified in SS (Congo) was  anticipated  and
    to an extent prefigured in the earlier decision in  Nagre  [2013]  EWHC
    720 (Admin), which was affirmed by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  several
    subsequent decisions (as noted at paragraph 5 of  the  judgment  in  SS
    (Congo), including Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 74.

18.  The core challenge made by the Secretary of State  is  that  the  judge
    erred in the way he moved from a clear finding that the requirements of
    the rules were not met, to an Article 8 assessment outside  the  rules,
    in which he weighed the competing interests in accordance with guidance
    given by the House of Lords in Razgar.  It has been plain  since  Nagre
    that some care is required here.  First, there is a  need  to  identify
    compelling circumstances and to consider  whether  the  rules  properly
    cater for the circumstances of the particular case.  If  they  do  not,
    and if there is a justification for doing so, an Article  8  assessment
    outside  the  rules  may  be  required.   Secondly,  even  if  such  an
    assessment is required, the rules do not  simply  lose  all  relevance,
    leaving a court or Tribunal to weigh the  competing  interests  without
    regard to them.  They continue to have a role as identifying the  pubic
    interest, and an appellant's failure to meet the  requirements  of  the
    rules continues to be material as some indication of the proper  weight
    to be given to the public interest.

19.  With great respect to the  judge,  the  decision  does  not  reveal  an
    analysis of this sort.

20.  I also accept Ms Fijiwala's submission that  the  public  interest  was
    not properly weighed as the decision contains  no  mention  of  section
    117B of the 2002 Act.  Ms  Masih  is  right  to  submit  that  what  is
    required in the light of Dube is substance rather than form.   However,
    as Ms Fijiwala submitted, if  the  appellant's  precarious  immigration
    status and the lack of financial self-sufficiency were not in issue and
    were plainly before the Tribunal, the judge was required to  take  them
    into account as adverse factors, when weighing the competing interests.
     And, of course, section 117B(6), which might bear  favourably  on  the
    appellant's case, forms part of the overall picture  but  there  is  no
    mention of it in the decision.

21.  For these reasons, I  conclude  that  the  decision  contains  material
    errors of law which undermine the overall  proportionality  assessment.
    The decision must be set aside and remade.

22.  In a discussion with  the  representatives  regarding  the  appropriate
    venue, Ms Masih suggested that the appropriate forum would be the First-
    tier Tribunal.  The appellant's solicitors had prepared a bundle  which
    included a fairly recent letter from a probation officer, regarding the
    low risk the appellant posed.  Further evidence might  be  required  in
    this context,  in  the  light  of  the  appellant's  convictions.   The
    findings on the relationships the appellant had with  his  partner  and
    son were not challenged by the Secretary of State.

23.  Ms Fijiwala said that the case might stay in the  Upper  Tribunal,  the
    relationships not being challenged.   The  Upper  Tribunal  could  then
    simply weigh the competing interests.

24.  After careful reflection, I conclude that the appropriate forum is  the
    First-tier Tribunal, having taken into account  paragraph  7.2  of  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement of 2012.  I give  permission  for
    the bundle prepared by the appellant's  solicitors  to  be  adduced  in
    evidence and I give permission to both parties to adduce  such  further
    evidence as they wished to rely  upon  when  the  decision  is  remade.
    The judge's findings of fact in paragraphs 29 and 30 of  the  decision,
    that the appellant plays a considerable part in the upbringing  of  his
    child and that  the  relationship  with  his  partner  is  genuine  and
    subsisting (although they do not live together), are preserved.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and it will  be  remade
in the First-tier Tribunal, at Birmingham, before a judge other than  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Lodge.  If further case management is required,  it  may
be made at the Birmingham hearing centre.

ANONYMITY

There has been no application for anonymity and I make no direction on  this
occasion.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell
