
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43336/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |              Decision & Reasons     |
|                                         |Promulgated                          |
|On 7 December 2015                       |              On 4 January 2016      |
|                                         |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD


                                   Between

                               CUDKOUR YAKUBO
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss G Kiai, Counsel, instructed by Turpin Miller
For the Respondent:    Miss Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is my extempore decision following this afternoon's error  of  law
    hearing.  The matter had come before me following a decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Brennan  whereby  permission  to  appeal  had  been
    granted by way of a decision dated 5 August 2015. This  appeal  relates
    to Article 8 only because Judge Brennan had only granted permission  to
    appeal in respect of Article 8. He had said (page A3 of the  bundle  at
    paragraph 3):

         "The grounds submit that the judge erred in law  in  that  he  made
         contradictory  findings  as  to  whether  it   was   or   was   not
         proportionate   to   remove   the   Appellant   -   paragraph   42,
         disproportionate,  paragraph   47,   not   disproportionate.   This
         submission is arguable."

2.   The original appeal hearing had taken place before First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Lodge at Sheldon Court, Birmingham.  Judge Lodge  had  considered
    both the protection issue and  Article  8  issue  in  relation  to  the
    appeal.

3.   In clear findings Judge Lodge has said at paragraph 28.

         "I do not find the Appellant to be  a  credible  witness  for  the
         following reasons."

The judge then set out various reasons why he did not find the Appellant  to
be a credible witness.  In fact he thought that the appellant  was  a  liar.
Judge Lodge then went on to consider Article 8 and  said  the  following  at
paragraph 39,

         "I move on to consider his Article 8 claim.  It was  not  suggested
         that he falls within Appendix FM or  276ADE.   I  begin  by  having
         regard to the report of the independent social worker Judi Lyons at
         pages 20-30 in the Appellant's bundle.  The most pertinent question
         asked is at paragraph 15.  What impact would  the  removal  of  the
         Appellant have upon the two children of  the  Appellant's  partner?
         ..."

4.   At paragraph 41 the judge  set  out  in  quite  a  long  paragraph  the
    following:

         "Whilst I have expressed [my] reservations about  the  evidence  of
         the Appellant I am satisfied having heard him and more particularly
         his partner that they are in a genuine and subsisting  relationship
         and have been for some six years.  I also have letters from the two
         children at pages 31 and 32 describing their relationship with  the
         Appellant whom they describe as dad or stepdad.  I start  therefore
         from the premise that the Appellant is and has established that  he
         is in a committed relationship akin to marriage with Miss F and  is
         a father of her two children.   I  have  regard  to  Nagre.   I  am
         satisfied that there are insurmountable obstacles  to  family  life
         continuing for the appellant,  his  partner  and  two  children  in
         Ghana.  His partner does not speak Ghanaian and neither do the  two
         children who are both, of course British citizens, and enjoying the
         benefits of education in this country.  Against that I must balance
         the fact that a family life which the appellant enjoys was  created
         at a time when he and his partner were aware that  his  immigration
         status was such that the persistence of family life within the host
         state (this country) would from the outset be  precarious.   Indeed
         where this is the case  it  is  likely  only  to  be  in  the  most
         exceptional circumstances that  the  removal  of  the  non-national
         family member will constitute a violation of Article 8. ..."


5.    There  was  discussion  during  the  hearing  today  as   to   whether
    contradictory findings were made when considering paragraphs 42 and  47
    of the decision.  At the end of paragraph 42 it was said, "It would  be
    disproportionate to remove the appellant" and at  47  it  is  said,  "I
    cannot find that it would be disproportionate to require the  appellant
    to return to Ghana".  Was a  removal  proportionate  or  not?  I  shall
    return to this in a few moments.

6.   I have  considerable  sympathy  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    concerns about the task at hand in having to deal  with  the  Appellant
    with a very poor immigration history.  The starting position though  is
    that there is no reference in the decision to  Section  117A-D  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  which  was  an  amendment
    brought by Section 19 of  the  Immigration  Act  2014.   The  provision
    applies as of 28 July 2014 and because Judge Lodge's decision is  dated
    3 April 2015 (see page A18) then this mandatory section had to be taken
    into account.

7.   I accept of course that the specific section need not  be  referred  to
    if regard has been had to that provision in substance.  However  in  my
    judgement it is not possible to easily decipher that the judge did have
    regard to Section 117.  Indeed, instead the House of Lords' decision in
    Chikwamba is referred to at paragraph 44 and it is  very  difficult  to
    conclude that the judge took Section 117 into account.  As I  discussed
    during the hearing with Miss Kiai, the judge noted at paragraph 41 that
    he was dealing with British children.   In my judgement it is therefore
    obvious that Section 117 had to be taken into account.

8.   Despite it being an obvious point this was not a  clear  ground  raised
    in the grounds  of  appeal  originally  drafted  by  different  Counsel
    meaning no disrespect to that person, and similarly Miss Kiai  did  not
    raise Section 117 before me today either. However, canvassing the point
    with the Presenting Officer she very fairly noted that this appeared to
    be a glaring omission. Although initially  she  sought  to  contend  on
    behalf of the respondent that perhaps regard might  have  been  had  to
    section 117. But as I say, looking at the determination as a whole,  in
    particular paragraphs 43 onwards, it is not possible to  see  that  the
    judge had regard to section 117.

9.   In those circumstances I conclude that there is an error of law in  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lodge.

10.  I canvassed with the parties as to whether  the  matter  could  proceed
    further today.  There is no disagreement that the matter has to  return
    for further consideration. Therefore that will be before the First-tier
    Tribunal at Sheldon Court, Birmingham.  It will  not  be  before  Judge
    Lodge.

11.  I stress and I make  it  clear  that  I  am  not  indicating  what  the
    ultimate result might be, particularly because the Judge at the further
    hearing will have to consider section 117 as  a  whole  and  take  into
    account the Appellant's immigration history.  I also note  the  adverse
    findings which have been made in  relation  to  the  asylum  aspect.  I
    canvassed with the parties as to whether  or  not  the  argument  about
    contradictory findings in respect of Article 8 means that the  decision
    in respect of Article 8 as a whole has to be set aside.

12.  In my judgement it does.  The findings in  respect  of  the  protection
    claim shall remain though. That is because the findings in  respect  of
    the protection claim are clear and they were never appealed.   However,
    the Appellant did appeal the Article 8 findings  and  indeed  his  very
    ground was that the findings in respect of Article 8 were contradictory
    and it was on that very ground that permission was granted.   Therefore
    despite Miss Kiai's submissions I am against her that the  "favourable"
    findings in respect of Article 8 should somehow remain.

13.   In  my  judgement  it  is  clear  there  needs  to  be   a   wholesale
    reconsideration of the Article 8 aspect of this case and indeed of  the
    factual matrix that pertains to it.   To  be  absolutely  clear,  Judge
    Lodge's findings and  decision  in  respect  of  the  protection  claim
    remain. However, Judge Lodge's decision in respect of Article 8 and his
    findings in respect of Article 8 are set aside.

14.  As to the future conduct of the appeal, the parties shall  prepare  for
    the hearing which will take place before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  in
    the following way:

    1.   The Appellant shall file  with  the  Tribunal  and  serve  on  the
         Respondent a bundle of documents relied upon including any  witness
         statements 21 days before the hearing at  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         hearing;


    2.   There shall be a skeleton argument (with authorities  relied  upon
         attached) filed and served 21 days before the hearing.


    3.   The Respondent shall file and serve a  skeleton  argument  7  days
         before the hearing.

Notice of Decision

15.  The original appeal involved the making of a material error of  law  in
    respect of Article 8 only.  The decision  and  finding  in  respect  of
    Article 8 are to be reheard and remade at the  First-tier  Tribunal  at
    Sheldon Court, Birmingham or such other hearing centre as the  Resident
    Upper Tribunal Judge at Birmingham might direct.

16.  There is no anonymity order made.


  Signed                                Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood
