
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ia/43958/2014
                                                               IA/43959/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th September 2016               |On 20th October 2016                 |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                            AAA (first appellant)
                      VEM (a minor) (second appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr P Turner, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The first Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 27th May 1977.  The
    second Appellant is the first  Appellant's  minor  child  born  on  8th
    September 2003. The Appellant had originally applied  for  a  residence
    card on 4th March 2009 which was issued on 30th  September  2009.   She
    applied for permanent residence on 7th August 2014.   That  application
    which sought permanent residence as a  confirmation  of  her  right  to
    reside in the UK was considered and refused by the Secretary  of  State
    on 11th October 2014 on the grounds that the Appellant failed  to  meet
    the  requirements  of  Regulation  10(5)  of  the   Immigration   (EEA)
    Regulations 2006.

 2. The first Appellant lodged Grounds of Appeal against  the  decision  of
    the Secretary of State and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Courtney sitting at Richmond on 10th February 2016.  In a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 29th February 2016  the  appeal  of
    the first  Appellant  was  dismissed  but  the  appeal  of  the  second
    Appellant based on Article 12 Regulation 1612/68 was  allowed  and  the
    second Appellant was entitled to be issued with a derivative  residence
    card.  The judge found that the first Appellant had arrived in  the  UK
    in 2003 on a six  month  visa  and  subsequently  overstayed.   On  6th
    September 2008 she had married Quincy Matthew, a Dutch national and had
    given birth to their son VEM on  8th  September  2009.   She  had  been
    granted an EEA residence card as the spouse of an  EEA  national  valid
    until 30th September 2014.  On 7th August 2014 she had applied  for  an
    EEA residence card on the  basis  of  a  retained  right  of  residence
    following divorce from an EEA national i.e. from Quincy  Matthew.   Her
    son applied for an EEA residence card as the family member  of  an  EEA
    national.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge noted that a birth certificate
    had been supplied to him showing  that  VM's  parents  were  the  first
    Appellant and Quincy  Matthew,  whose  place  of  birth  was  given  as
    Holland.  Therefore he considered that the second Appellant had a right
    of appeal.

 3. Following the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge on  10th  March
    2015 the  first  Appellant  lodged  Grounds  of  Appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Those Grounds of Appeal were  considered  by  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Keane on 10th August 2016.  Judge Keane noted  that
    the judge had found the Appellant was the primary carer  of  [VEM]  but
    found that the Appellant had not  established  a  derivative  right  of
    residence based on Article 12.  The judge noted that  the  decision  of
    Ahmed (Amos: Zambrano: reg.15A(3)(c)  Immigration  (  EEA)  Regulations
    2006 Pakistan (Rev 1) [2013] UKUT 89  concluded  it  was  contended  in
    identical circumstances that the  Appellant  in  that  decision  had  a
    derived  right  of  residence  based  on  Article  12.    Judge   Keane
    consequently found that the judge had made an arguable error of law  in
    finding that the Appellant did not have a derived  right  of  residence
    based on Article 12.

 4. On 18th August 2016 the Secretary of State responded to the Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  The Secretary of State opposes the appeal noting
    that the judge found that the Appellant  and  her  son  could  live  in
    Holland as her son had Dutch nationality.  Further the judge also noted
    that there was no evidence of enquiries that  may  have  been  made  to
    establish that the Appellant would not be granted a residency  card  in
    Holland.

 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  her  instructed
    Counsel Mr Turner.  The Secretary of State appears by her  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer Ms Ahmad.



Submissions/Discussion

 6. Mr Turner starts by referring me to the Grounds of Appeal and  advising
    that he relies upon them.  He submits that the authority of Ahmed along
    with the European Court decisions in  Teixeira  (European  Citizenship)
    [2010] EUECJ C-480/08 and Ibrahim (European Citizenship) [2010] EUECJ C-
    310/08 established the principle that both the child of an EEA national
    former worker, in full-time education, and the non EEA national primary
    carer derive a right of residence from Article 12 of Regulation 1612/68
    (now Article 10 of the 2006 Regulations).  He submits  that  the  judge
    found the first Appellant could not go and live  in  Holland  was  pure
    speculation and that she further speculated in finding at paragraph  32
    that there was no evidence that enquiries had been made that the  first
    Appellant would not be accepted into Holland at the date of decision.

 7. In  response  Ms  Ahmad  points  out  that  the  basis  of  the  second
    Appellant's appeal being allowed  was  on  the  basis  of  the  child's
    nationality and that the mother's (i.e. the  first  Appellant's)  claim
    was  rejected  because  she  could  not  meet  the  requirements  of  a
    derivative right as there was no evidence before the judge.

 8. In response Mr Turner submits that the first  Appellant  would  not  be
    being returned to Holland and that she would have to return to Nigeria.



 9. Ms Ahmad takes me to the Regulations pointing out that  this  has  been
    considered by the judge at  paragraph  11  of  his  decision  and  that
    Regulation 15A(4A) of the Regulations show that the burden of proof  is
    on the Appellant and therefore the  judge  was  entitled  to  make  the
    findings that she did at paragraph 32.  She submits  there  is  nothing
    before the Tribunal today to say otherwise  and  that  it  is  for  the
    Appellant to show that she meets the requirements which she  is  unable
    to do so.

10. Mr Turner submits that the Rules should be read purposefully  and  that
    the position is that the Appellant  is  a  Nigerian  national  with  no
    European Community visa from Holland but the only right she can have is
    a derivative right and submits that there is no evidence that she could
    go to Holland and again comments that the judge  has  made  speculative
    findings.

The Law

11.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

12. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

13. This appeal turns on whether or not the judge was right in her approach
    in considering whether the first Appellant has or has not established a
    derivative right of residence based directly on Article  12  Regulation
    1612/68.  The judge had given very serious consideration  to  case  law
    including the decision in Ahmed and the concept of a  derivative  right
    of residence under Regulation 15 Immigration (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006.  She has  set  these  Regulations  out  carefully  at
    paragraphs 8 to 12 of her decision.  Thereafter she has gone on to look
    at the status of the then second Appellant and his derivative right  at
    paragraphs 19 to 23.  She has made findings that he was born in the  UK
    at a time when his father was exercising treaty rights and consequently
    found that he did have a derived right of residence.

14. Thereafter the judge has carried out a very careful analysis.   Firstly
    she  considered  the  general  principles  in  Ahmed  relating  to  the
    derivative right of residence of the first Appellant.   She  looked  at
    whether or not she was or was not the primary carer of the then  second
    Appellant and made findings at paragraph  28  that  she  was  perfectly
    entitled to on the balance of probabilities that Mrs  Adesiji  was  V's
    primary carer.  Secondly she looked at the position  as  to  whether  V
    would be unable to reside in the EU if the Appellant were  required  to
    leave, carefully considered the law and then came to paragraph 32 where
    she made considered findings.   She  noted,  quite  properly,  that  in
    practice the EU citizen would be compelled to leave the UK if his  non-
    EU mother were refused the right to reside.  It was thereafter that the
    judge made important findings of fact.  She noted there was nothing  in
    the evidence before her to indicate that the family would be unable  to
    live in the Netherlands such that the principles in Zambrano could have
    any purchase and that there was no evidence  that  enquiries  had  been
    made which have established that  the  first  Appellant  would  not  be
    granted a right of residence in Holland.   Her  approach  was  correct.
    The burden of proof is on the Appellant.  The judge has fully  examined
    the evidence and followed the correct procedure.  She noted that  there
    was no reason to believe that V's welfare would be compromised  in  any
    significant way if he were to relocate with his mother to  his  country
    of nationality.

15. I accept Mr Turner is submitting that the first Appellant would have to
    return to Nigeria  and  that  she  is  a  Nigerian  citizen  without  a
    derivative  right.   However  this  fails  to  address  the  point  and
    principle as set out in considerable detail in the  Zambrano  guidance.
    The burden of proof remains on the Appellant and the standard of  proof
    is the balance of probabilities.  This means that the onus will  be  on
    the Appellant to demonstrate that in this case her removal would  force
    V to leave the EEA.  It is as stated by the judge  at  paragraph  11(c)
    necessary for the Appellant to show that the relevant  British  citizen
    would be unable to reside in the UK or in another EEA  state,  i.e.  in
    this instance Holland, if the Appellant were required  to  leave.   The
    Appellant  failed  to  discharge  that  burden  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  There is no further evidence before  me  to  show  that  she
    could discharge it now.  This is of particular relevance as  the  judge
    carried out a proper and detailed analysis and made findings  that  she
    was perfectly entitled to.  In such circumstances the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal discloses no material error of law and  the  appeal
    of the first Appellant (which is the only extant appeal before  me)  is
    dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no material error  of  law
and the appeal of the first Appellant is dismissed and the decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

No application made to  vary  the  existing  anonymity  direction  and  that
direction is maintained.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris  20th October 2016



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris  20th October 2016

