
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43336/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31 October 2016                           |On 4 November 2016            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                                 Cudkour [Y]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Norman, Counsel, instructed by Turpin & Miller
LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal from a decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Parkes
    promulgated on 25 February 2016, which was set aside  on  14  September
    2016. My Error of Law Decision is annexed to this Decision, and I  need
    therefore rehearse the background relatively briefly.
    Background
2.   The Appellant the appellant is a citizen of Ghana,  born  on  30  March
    1984.  He came to the United Kingdom in 2003 and has remained here ever
    since. He has a fairly complex immigration history but the Judge  found
    that he was in a subsisting parental relationship with two children  of
    his partner, the Sponsor [15]. This  finding  is  preserved.  Both  the
    Sponsor and her children are British citizens.

3.   The Appellant appeals the refusal of the Respondent to grant him  leave
    to remain, such decision being communicated by letter dated 3 September
    2014. Reliance is placed upon paragraph EX.1  of  Appendix  FM  to  the
    Immigration Rules which reads as follows:

         "This paragraph applies if
         (a)  (i)      the applicant has a genuine and  subsisting  parental
                  relationship with a child who
                  (aa)     is under the age of 18 [or was under the  age  of
                      18 when the applicant was first granted leave on  the
                      basis that this paragraph applied;
                  (bb)     is in the United Kingdom;
                  (cc)     is a British citizen or has lived in  the  United
                      Kingdom continuously for at  least  the  seven  years
                      immediately preceding the date of application; and
             (ii)     it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                  leave the United Kingdom."

4.   No live evidence was called before me, both parties  being  content  to
    rely on the preserved factual findings made in the First-tier Tribunal,
    and the documentary material previously lodged. I heard representations
    from the representatives of each of the parties. It was agreed that the
    single issue for my determination was whether it would be reasonable to
    expect the two children to leave the United Kingdom. It is conceded  on
    behalf of the Respondent that on the facts as found in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal all other relevant components of EX.1 are satisfied.

     Appellant's representations
5.   Ms Norman, for the Appellant, relied upon her Skeleton  Argument  which
    she  augmented  with  oral  submissions.  She  summarised  the  factual
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal  in  a  series  of  uncontroversial
    propositions namely,
    i.   that the children have no meaningful contact with their biological
         father who provides no financial support [14];
    ii.  that the Appellant and his partner (the Sponsor) are in a  genuine
         relationship [15];
    iii. that the Appellant is the father figure to the two children and in
         a "parental relationship" with them [15]
    iv.  that the Appellant, the Sponsor and the two  children  have  lived
         together as a family for many years [15], in fact  since  September
         2006.
    v.   that the children, Lesah (aged 16) and Tyler (14) are both British
         citizens [16].

6.   Ms Norman  relied  upon  Appendix  FM  R-LTRP.1.1  (which  I  need  not
    rehearse) and paragraph EX.1 which I have set out above.  She  referred
    me to R(RK) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  (s  117B(6);
    'parental responsibility') [2016] UKUT 00031 (IAC), which stresses  the
    equal significance of  a  non-biological  parent  who  has  effectively
    'stepped into the shoes' of the actual parent.

7.   Ms Norman made reference to section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009, where emphasis is placed on the best interests of
    children, and to the Respondent's own guidance, Immigration Directorate
    Instruction: Family Migration -  Appendix FM Section 1.0b, Family  Life
    (as a Partner or Parent)  and  Private  Life:  10-Year  Routes  (August
    2015), particularly paragraph 11.2.3:

         11.2.3. Would it be unreasonable to expect a British Citizen  child
    to leave the UK?
         Save in cases involving criminality, the decision  maker  must  not
         take a decision in relation to the parent or  primary  carer  of  a
         British Citizen child where the effect of that decision would be to
         force that British child to leave the EU, regardless of the age  of
         that child. This reflects the European Court of Justice judgment in
         Zambrano.
         [...]
         Where a decision to refuse the application would require  a  parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside the  EU,  the  case
         must always be assessed on the basis that it would be  unreasonable
         to expect a British Citizen child to leave the EU with that  parent
         or primary carer.

8.    Reference  was  also  made  to  section  117B  of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Ms  Norman  placed  reliance  on  the
    observations of the Upper Tribunal (McCloskey J  and  UTJ  Frances)  in
    Secretary of State for the Home  Department  v  Treebhawon  and  others
    [2015] UKUT 674 (IAC) at paragraph 20.

         "In section 117B(6), Parliament has  prescribed  three  conditions,
         namely:
         (a)  the person concerned is not liable to deportation;
         (b)  such person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
             with a qualifying child, namely a person who is under the  age
             of 18 and is a British citizen or  has  lived  in  the  United
             Kingdom for a continuous period of seven years or more; and
         (c)  it would not be reasonable to expect the qualifying  child  to
             leave the United Kingdom.
         Within this discrete regime, the  statute  proclaims  unequivocally
         that where these three conditions are satisfied the public interest
         does not require the removal of the parent from the United Kingdom.
         Ambiguity there is none."

     Respondent's submissions
9.   Ms Brocklesby-Weller's submissions sought to  read  down  sub-paragraph
    (ii) of EX.1. She argued that in the  particular  facts  of  this  case
    there is no expectation of the children leaving with the Appellant.  In
    the event that the appeal fails, the  children  will  remain  with  the
    mother  who  shares  in  their  primary   care.   She   suggests   that
    consideration should not be  given  to  a  'reasonableness  assessment'
    which is entirely theoretical in that there is no expectation that  the
    children, both British citizens, will leave  the  United  Kingdom.  She
    further relies on the public interest consideration that little  weight
    should be attached to a private life formed whilst a person has been in
    the country unlawfully or while his immigration status  is  precarious.
    She submits that the Respondent's policy guidance (reproduced above) is
    not law.

     Assessment and conclusions
10.  I reject the construction for which Ms Brocklesby-Weller contends,  and
    prefer the submissions of Ms Norman. Paragraph EX.1 is couched in plain
    English which should be given its ordinary and natural  meaning.  There
    are, in this instance, three qualifying features, each of which must be
    satisfied, namely:
    (i)  "a genuine and subsisting parental relationship";
    (ii) "a child" (two here) under 18, in the United Kingdom, and  British
         citizen;
    (iii)    "not reasonable to  expect  the  child  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom".
    Item (i) is an evidential matter which has been determined conclusively
    in the earlier decision of the First-tier Tribunal; item (ii) comprises
    objective facts which are admitted by the Respondent; and item (iii) in
    this instance admits of only one answer. It would be unreasonable - and
    unthinkable - to uproot children aged 16 and 14 from the  only  country
    which they have even  known  and  from  their  community,  educational,
    economic and social environment.

11.  The Respondent's own policy (above)  arguably  goes  further  than  the
    statute in declaring:


         Where a decision to refuse the application would require  a  parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside the  EU,  the  case
         must always be assessed on the basis that it would be  unreasonable
         to expect a British Citizen child to leave the EU with that  parent
         or primary carer. (underlining added)

    Legitimate alternative views may be held as to the wisdom or  merit  of
    such a policy, but unless and until revoked by the Respondent, then  in
    the absence of good and  compelling  reason,  it  is  to  be  routinely
    followed and implemented as a  matter  of  justice  in  all  cases.  It
    follows that the qualitative  assessment  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    which found on the facts (contrary to  the  Respondent's  case  at  the
    time) that there was a genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship
    between the Appellant and two British minors is effectively dispositive
    of the matter. In such circumstances it is declared and presumed to  be
    unreasonable to expect the children to leave the EU with the Appellant.
    It matters not that they might choose (and  in  this  case  undoubtedly
    will choose) to remain in the United Kingdom with the  Sponsor,  a  co-
    parent and equal carer.

12.  It is not open to the Respondent, or this Tribunal, to imbue  the  word
    "expect" with a heightened or specialised meaning as  suggested  by  Ms
    Brocklesby-Weller,  and  it  is  significant  that  she  struggled   to
    articulate precisely what that alternative  reading  might  be  without
    doing violence to the words used.

13.  In the  circumstances,  this  appeal  succeeds  under  the  Immigration
    Rules,  and  it  is  unnecessary  to  address  the  broader  Article  8
    considerations. I merely observe that, notwithstanding the  Appellant's
    poor immigration history and the fact  that  the  family  life  he  has
    developed with the  Sponsor  and  her  children  has  been  whilst  his
    presence  in  the  United  Kingdom  was  unlawful  and/or  his   status
    precarious, his de facto relationship with the children has been  found
    to be longstanding, genuine, involved and supportive [15], in which the
    Sponsor has relied on  him  for  emotional  support  [17].  Though  not
    referred to in the decision, there  was  independent  evidence  from  a
    social worker before the First-tier Tribunal attesting to the fact that
    the Appellant was (to paraphrase) more than a phantom presence,  but  a
    hands-on parent figure whereas the  children's  biological  father  was
    wholly absent from their lives. There  is  no  suggestion  of  criminal
    activity on the part of the Appellant. Adopting  the  approach  of  the
    McCloskey J in Treebhawon (above) to the public interest  questions,  I
    would also  have  allowed  the  appeal  on  freestanding  human  rights
    grounds.



Notice of Decision

The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made an error of law and  his  decision
to dismiss the appeal has been set aside.

I substitute a fresh decision to allow  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
Rules.

No anonymity order is made





Signed   Mark Hill                               Date     4 November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC


                        ANNEXE: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43336/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 September 2016                          |[14 September 2016]           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                                 Cudkour [Y]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Norman, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal from a decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Parkes
    promulgated on 25 February 2016.  Extensive  and  detailed  Grounds  of
    Appeal were originally submitted but when  permission  was  granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Nightingale on 2 August 2016,  the  ambit  of
    the appeal was confined to the judge's interpretation  and  application
    of paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules together with
    the judge's consideration  (or  otherwise)  of  Section  117B(6).   The
    appeal was advanced by Ms Norman on that basis.

2.   Dealing briefly with the factual background, the appellant was born  on
    30 March 1984 and is a citizen of Ghana.  He came to the United Kingdom
    in 2003 and has remained here ever since.   He  has  a  fairly  complex
    immigration history but according to the particular factual findings of
    the First-tier Tribunal he is in  a  subsisting  parental  relationship
    with two children of the named sponsor [22].

3.   Where the decision falls into  error  is  the  judge's  application  of
    paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules consequent  upon
    those factual findings.  Paragraph EX.1 provides as follows:

         "This paragraph applies if
         (a)  (i)      the applicant has a genuine and  subsisting  parental
                  relationship with a child who
                  (aa)     is under the age of 18 [or was under the  age  of
                      18 when the applicant was first granted leave on  the
                      basis that this paragraph applied;
                  (bb)     is in the United Kingdom;
                  (cc)     is a British citizen or has lived in  the  United
                      Kingdom continuously for at  least  the  seven  years
                      immediately preceding the date of application; and
             (ii)     it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                  leave the United Kingdom."

4.   The flaw lies in the manner in which the judge addressed  the  question
    of reasonableness in (ii) above.  He started from the premise that  the
    children would not be expected to leave the United Kingdom  recognising
    that they were settled in this country and that their primary carer was
    the sponsor.  The judge ought to have gone further than  that  and  had
    regard to the policy guidance of the respondent and the  public  policy
    considerations which are a statutory requirement  under  Section  117B.
    That analysis, that balancing exercise, and that general assessment was
    not carried out by the judge. His starting  point  and  his  concluding
    point was that the children would not be leaving the United Kingdom and
    therefore he could deal with the  issue  concerning  the  appellant  in
    something of a vacuum.

5.   In those circumstances there was  a  material  error  of  law  and  the
    decision needs to be remade. Having heard from both representatives, it
    is common ground that the appropriate forum for the re-making  of  this
    part of the  decision  is  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  the  matter  will
    therefore be re-listed so  that  it  can  be  determined  upon  a  full
    consideration of the evidence having regard to relevant  statutory  and
    other guidance.

Notice of Decision

Having found an error of law in relation to  the  application  of  paragraph
EX.1 of Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules, the  decision  of  the  First-
tier Tribunal is set aside.

The decision is to be remade in the Upper Tribunal on a date  to  be  fixed,
with a time estimate of 3 hours.

The findings of fact relating to the subsisting  parental  relationship  are
preserved.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed   Mark Hill                      Date     14 September 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
