
[pic]
IAC-AH-krl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/43380/2014
                                                               IA/43400/2014
                                                               IA/43409/2014
                                                               IA/43423/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 December 2015                  |On 11 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     GHW
                                     OLT
                                     COT
                                     DOT
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms K Cronin, of Counsel, instructed by Bindmans and
Partners


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals, with permission, against a decision  of
    Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Colvin  who  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 9 June 2015 allowed  the  appeals  of  Ms  GHW  and  her
    husband OLT, and their children Miss COT and Master DOT.  Although  the
    Secretary of State is the appellant  before  me  I  will  for  ease  of
    reference refer to her as the respondent as she was the  respondent  in
    the First-tier. Similarly I will refer to Ms GHW, Mr OLT, Miss COT  and
    Master DOT as the appellants as they were the appellants in the  First-
    tier.

2.   Ms GHW and Mr OLT are citizens of Jamaica.  The third  appellant,  Miss
    COT ("C") was born in Britain on 14 May 2005 and the fourth, Master DOT
    ("D"), was born here on 2 October  2008.   OLT  entered  Britain  on  9
    October 1996 on temporary admission  and  remained  without  permission
    thereafter.  Ms GHW entered on 23 January 2003 with a visitor visa  and
    remained.  They married in Britain on 18 August 2007.   An  application
    for leave to remain under Article 8 of the ECHR was made in  June  2010
    and refused the following month.  A further  application  was  made  in
    September 2011 and refused in November that year.   Letters  were  then
    written to the respondent asking for a removal decision to be made  and
    on 22 August 2013 the respondent  agreed  to  reconsider  the  decision
    which had been made on  10  November  2011.   That  led  to  a  further
    refusal.  The appellants appealed that decision but before  the  appeal
    was due to be heard in August 2014 the respondent withdrew the  refusal
    decision in order to reconsider.  A further  refusal  was  made  on  15
    October 2014 and it  is  against  that  refusal  that  the  respondents
    appealed.

3.   All appellants relied on the  provisions  of  Article  8.   The  fourth
    appellant also relied on the provisions of Article 3 of  the  ECHR  and
    the third appellant relied on  the  terms  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    There was no appearance by or on behalf of the Secretary  of  State  at
    the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.

4.   At the time of the hearing the third appellant had made an  application
    for registration as a  British  citizen.   She  has  now  been  granted
    British nationality.

5.   The first and second appellants gave evidence which largely  turned  on
    the special needs of the fourth appellant who was diagnosed at the  age
    of 6 months with West Syndrome, a form of epilepsy.  He  was  initially
    having fits up to ten times a day and suffered brain damage and has now
    been diagnosed as also suffering from autism.  He  is  severely  short-
    sighted  and  has  mobility  problems  and  sees  a  large  number   of
    specialists; he also has one to  one  support  at  school.   The  judge
    recorded his mother's evidence as being:-

         "D's needs dominate their family  life  from  first  thing  in  the
         morning until last thing at night.  He needs to be watched  at  all
         times by an adult as he  is  a  danger  to  himself.   He  is  very
         unsteady on his feet and is hyperactive.  He is now  provided  with
         transport to get him to school.  They receive seven hours'  respite
         care each week from Social Services and there is one  carer  called
         ED at the present time.  They also have 60  hours  of  short  break
         respite available  too.   He  is  easily  unsettled  by  noise  and
         activity.  She looks after him after school which is exhausting  as
         he does not sit down unless he is strapped into a chair.

         His epileptic fits are not as frequent but they can  be  very  bad.
         They often happen when he is sleeping.   They  give  him  emergency
         medication by syringe to the back of his mouth but they  also  call
         the paramedics so that he  is  checked  to  see  whether  he  needs
         additional treatment or hospitalisation if they have been prolonged
         seizures.  ...  He has a statement of special educational needs and
         sees many of the specialists through the  Hackney  Ark,  the  Child
         Development Centre.  ...  D knows the hospitals and clinics and his
         physicians and they know how to respond to him.  He receives  daily
         medication for the fits which is sodium volprate liquid.  He is now
         working with a psychotherapist from CAMHS.  Any change  in  routine
         for D is extremely difficult which  is  not  unusual  for  autistic
         children.   He  hates  even  small  changes  and  causes  him  real
         distress.  He simply cannot understand when  there  is  a  loss  or
         substitution of a carer."

6.   It was GWT's evidence that she did not believe that D would be able  to
    manage with the change of leaving Britain and going to live in Jamaica:
    he simply would not manage with a  huge  change  of  moving  countries,
    home, school, carers, treatment or routine.  She did not  believe  that
    he would ever recover from being uprooted.  She worried about the  loss
    of medical treatment and expertise and support as there  would  not  be
    this help and support in Jamaica.  The family and D would be criticised
    and excluded. They  struggle  to  manage  with  D  even  with  all  the
    professional support.  She is not sure that the family would  cope  and
    believed she would be thrown into despair.

7.   GWT's evidence was that COT  was  aged  10  and  had  good  friends  in
    Britain and was making reasonable progress academically.  She  suffered
    because of her brother's needs and it was  impossible  to  imagine  the
    impact of her having to leave Britain as she had never been to  Jamaica
    and had no connections there.

6.   There were a number of professional reports  submitted  which  included
    letters from a consultant community  paediatrician  and  from  Disabled
    Children's Services in Hackney, occupational therapy  advice,  the  SEN
    statements, reports from the educational psychologist for  the  Hackney
    Learning Trust and reports from Queensbury Primary School.  Details  of
    those reports were set out by the judge in paragraphs  16  onwards.   A
    detailed report from an independent social worker  who  had  spoken  to
    other professionals involved in D's care said that:-

         "It is the opinion of professionals involved in D's  life  that  he
         would be severely negatively impacted if  his  family  were  to  be
         returned to Jamaica and I would share that opinion.  I have further
         concerns about the impact of such a move on C who has grown  up  in
         the UK and where everything is familiar to her  and  where  she  is
         settled and happy".

7.   Having set out the terms of the letter of refusal and  the  submissions
    made to her by Ms Cronin who also represented  the  appellants  in  the
    first-tier, the judge set  out  at  length  a  detailed  self-direction
    regarding the burden and standard of proof under the Immigration  Rules
    and Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR.

8.   In paragraphs 31 onwards the judge set out her  findings  of  fact  and
    her conclusions.  She noted that the Secretary of State had been  aware
    of the second appellant since 2003 and that  the  first  appellant  had
    been seeking to regularise the family status since at least 2010.

9.   She referred to the determinations in  MK  (best  interests  of  child)
    India [2011] UKUT 00475 and the judgments in ZH (Tanzania) [2011]  UKSC
    4 and EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874, quoting the various factors
    set out in that judgment which should be taken into consideration.  She
    commented that the Section  55  consideration  letter  of  refusal  was
    wholly inadequate, pointing out that it made no mention of  the  fourth
    appellant's severe autism or special educational needs nor any  mention
    of the third appellant's education or established social life or indeed
    her own wishes as a 10 year old child.

10.  She then dealt with the position of the third appellant, C  and  stated
    in accordance with the Rules in force on 12 December 2012 the issue was
    whether or not it was reasonable to expect her to leave  Britain.   She
    stated that there is no doubt  that  C  met  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules in terms of her private life  but  also  taking  into
    account her best interests in a Section 55 assessment.  She referred to
    the  independent  social  worker's  report  which,  although   it   had
    concentrated on the fourth appellant, did refer  to  C's  vulnerability
    and the difficulties she would face if the family returned to  Jamaica.
    She noted that that opinion had not  been  challenged.   She  therefore
    concluded that it was in C's best interests that she remain in Britain.



11.  With  regard  to  the  fourth  appellant  she  again  referred  to  the
    background documentation and quoted from Ms Cronin's skeleton  argument
    in which she had written with regard to the fourth appellant that:-

         "He will lose his known and safe routine,  his  known  and  trusted
         carers, will suffer a  frightening  and  highly  distressing  plane
         journey to Jamaica and in Jamaica will be presented with completely
         foreign, noisy and incomprehensible  surroundings,  strange  people
         and places.  All his safe methods for negotiating  the  world  will
         have been removed".

    She noted that when considering the threshold for Article 3 there was a
    clear difference between the application of Article 3  to  children  as
    opposed to adults.  She stated that:-

         "After careful consideration of all the evidence relating to D I am
         fully satisfied that due to the level, duration  and  intensity  of
         the permanent distress that such a move to Jamaica  would  cause  D
         that this amounts to inhuman and degrading treatment of a  severely
         disabled child in all the circumstances so as to be at real risk of
         breaching Article 3".

12.  However she also considered the position of  D  under  Section  55  and
    Article 8, stated that she agreed with Ms Cronin:-

         "That D's private life is  so  significant  as  to  be  essentially
         lifesaving for him.  And it is clear that the carefully constructed
         and nurtured assistance that had been put in place from both in and
         outside of school is what is giving him the optimum  life  chances.
         On the background information  on  Jamaica,  whilst  there  may  be
         medication available to D for his epilepsy, I am in no  doubt  that
         these other support systems are most unlikely to be  available  and
         certainly not to the degree that it is said he  requires.   Without
         this support it is the view of the professionals that he would".

13.  The judge  then  turned  to  the  position  of  the  first  and  second
    appellants and referred to the delay in resolving the position relating
    to the family's immigration  status  since  2010  and  further  to  the
    independent social worker's  report  which  indicated  that  the  first
    appellant's mental health could be at risk because of the stress of any
    attempt at relocation.  She stated that would cause great harm  to  the
    children.  She went on to say, having  referred  to  the  Razgar  tests
    that:-

         "There is no doubt that family life is engaged as the  interference
         of removal will have consequences of such gravity.  The  key  issue
         is whether removal will be proportionate when considering the wider
         public interest in maintaining effective immigration  controls  And
         Section 117B is relevant to the consideration of  public  interests
         in this context".

14.  She referred to the parents' genuine and subsisting  relationship  with
    their children and the fact that  she  had  considered  that  C  was  a
    qualifying child as defined in Section 117D(1) in  that  she  lived  in
    Britain for a continuous period of seven years or more.  Given that the
    children could not leave Britain she concluded that the public interest
    did not require the removal of the first and second appellants.

15.  She then stated that she allowed the appeals of each of the  appellants
    on human rights grounds, the fourth appellant, D was allowed also under
    Article 3 of the ECHR and the third appellant  was  allowed  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

16.  The Secretary of State appealed, arguing that with regard to the  third
    appellant the judge should have applied a "reasonableness" test  as  it
    was required by the amendments in  HC  760  and  HC  820  and  that  in
    considering the position of the third appellant she  had  not  properly
    considered the public interest.  That would include the overstaying  of
    the family which is relevant to  the  broader  proportionately  of  the
    decision and significant  financial  impact  of  the  family  remaining
    stemming from D's requirement for extensive  treatment.   Moreover  the
    judge  had  erred  in  not   taking   into   account   an   appropriate
    proportionality assessment when  considering  the  issue  of  the  best
    interests of the children.  Finally it was stated that at the  date  of
    the application - the relevant date C had only been 6 years old and not
    reached the seven year threshold required by the Rules.

17.  The grounds went on to argue that the judge had  been  wrong  to  state
    that there was a difference in assessing the  Article  3  rights  of  a
    child, rather than an adult and then referred to the  judgment  of  the
    Court of Appeal in GS (India) [2015] EWCA Civ 40 and the judgment in  D
    and N [2005] UKHL 31.  Again it was asserted that  the  judge  did  not
    take into account the public interest when assessing the best interests
    of the fourth applicant.

18.  With regard to the overall assessment it  was  argued  that  there  had
    been no engagement with the  significant  consequences  to  the  public
    purse for a child  to  remain  permanently  in  Britain.   The  grounds
    further emphasised the first two appellants' immigration history.

19.  At the hearing before me Mr Norton relied on  the  grounds  of  appeal.
    His further comment was that the public interest  issue  had  not  been
    taken into consideration and that therefore  the  decision  was  not  a
    balanced one.

20.  Ms Cronin first pointed out that the Secretary of State  when  refusing
    the application had not engaged with the evidence  of  the  independent
    social worker, and that the decision made by the Secretary of State was
    clearly inadequate.  In any event, turning to the issue of the  Article
    3 rights of D she stated that what had been submitted had not been  put
    forward as a loss of medical treatment but it had  been  on  the  basis
    that  the ill-tretemnt  would be suffered by D   because  he  would  be
    removed from  all the support  he had had here  and the environment  he
    was used to.  The judgments in GS, D and N were clearly not appropriate
    the application of the ratios of those judgments simply did not  engage
    with the facts relating to the fourth appellant.

21.  More generally she pointed out that the Secretary of State appeared  to
    regard the children as overstayers when that was not the  case.   Under
    the provisions of paragraph 302 of the Rules the reality was that their
    status was unresolved - they were not illegal entrants as they had been
    born here.  The Section 117 presumptions did  not  apply  when  dealing
    with the children.  In any event she pointed out that C was now British
    and could not be removed.  She argued moreover that  the  reference  in
    the grounds of appeal to the relevant provisions of paragraph 276  were
    incorrect as there had been multiple proceedings and new  decisions  on
    the new information that had been put forward in this case.  It was not
    therefore the case that the third appellant did not  benefit  from  the
    seven year provisions because of the date of application as the further
    information had been put forward after she was aged 7.  The reality was
    that the judge had found that it was not reasonable to  expect  her  to
    leave Britain and that had not been challenged  in  the  grounds.   She
    referred to the very  detailed  self-direction  by  the  judge  in  the
    determination and stated that that showed that the  judge  had  in  the
    forefront of her mind all  relevant  details,  including  that  of  the
    public interest.  Her directions  had  been  properly  made  and  those
    directions and indeed the application of those directions had not  been
    challenged by the Secretary of State.

22.  She referred to the  detailed  evidence  from  the  independent  social
    worker and his conclusions, pointing out that nowhere had the  evidence
    of the independent social worker been challenged.  She took me  through
    that report and stated that on the basis of what the  judge  considered
    would happen should the fourth  appellant  be  removed  did  amount  to
    Article 3 harm.  The difficulties that he would face because of changes
    to his regime, having to travel by plane and being taken away from  all
    his support mechanisms here was treatment which would cross the Article
    3 threshold.  She referred to the case of Pretty v UK [2002]  ECHR  427
    at paragraphs 52 and 53 which showed that suffering caused by  of  lack
    of treatment could amount to Article 3 ill-treatment.

23.  She added, with  reference  to  the  determination  in  Akhalu  (health
    claim: ECHR Article 8) [2013] UKUT 00400 (IAC) that the judge had  been
    entitled to find that the Article 8 rights of D would also be infringed
    under Article 8 as the consequences of removal for his health  and  the
    fact that he would not be  able  to  access  equivalent  healthcare  in
    Jamaica was a relevant question to the issue of  proportionality.   She
    argued moreover that the judge was correct to  take  into  account  the
    interests of the children when assessing whether or not the removal  of
    the first two appellants would be proportionate.

Discussion

24.  I consider that the judge reached findings and conclusions  which  were
    fully open to her on the evidence before  her  and  that  there  is  no
    material error of law in her  determination.  Dealing  first  with  the
    rights of C, I consider that there is merit  in  Ms  Cronin's  argument
    that although when the initial application was made  in  2011  she  was
    under the age of 7, the reality is that the application was renewed  on
    a number of occasions as various decisions were made by the  respondent
    and that by the time the decision was made, and indeed by the time  the
    last set of submissions was made, she was over the age  of  7  and  the
    judge was entitled not only to take that into  account  but  also  take
    into account the effect on her of her removal.   I  consider  therefore
    she was entitled to find that C met  the  requirements  of  the  Rules.
    Even if I were wrong in that regard  the  reality  is  that  C  is  now
    British and could not be removed in any event.

25.  Turning to the position of D, what was put forward was  that  it  would
    be Article 3 ill-treatment for him to be  removed,  given  the  support
    network he has here and his reaction  to  being  without  that  support
    network, let alone the lack of support which he and  the  family  would
    have in Jamaica and indeed the very real  problems  of  him  having  to
    travel to Jamaica.  To that extent the reliance  by  the  Secretary  of
    State on the judgments in GS, D and N miss the relevant  focus  of  the
    application that was being put forward.  Having  considered  as  indeed
    did the First-tier Judge the very considerable evidence put forward and
    having accepted that when assessing Article 3 ill-treatment I  have  to
    take into account that D is a child of 10, I can only conclude that the
    judge was entitled to find that his removal will be  a  breach  of  his
    rights under Article 3, as well as under Article 8 of the ECHR.

26.  I note, of course, that the fact that C is now British  and  the  first
    two appellants are her carers would mean under the  provisions  of  the
    judgment of the European Court in Zambrano they would in any  event  be
    entitled to remain.

27.  I therefore conclude that the removal of both children  now  would  not
    be in accordance with the law.  Moreover, I consider that the judge was
    entitled to take into account the needs of  the  children  and,  having
    reached conclusions with regards to those needs and the fact that their
    removal would breach  their  rights  under  the  ECHR,  the  judge  was
    entitled to conclude that the removal of the first two appellants would
    not be proportionate and therefore to allow their appeals under Article
    8 of the ECHR.

29.  I therefore conclude that there is no material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination of the determination of the First-tier Judge and that her
    decision to allow these appeals under  Article  8  in  respect  of  all
    appellants, Article 3 in respect of the fourth appellant and under  the
    Immigration Rules in  respect  of  the  third  appellant  contained  no
    material error of law.

Notice of Decision

    The appeal of the respondent is dismissed  and  the  decisions  of  the
    Judge in the First-tier shall stand.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

