
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43501/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 January 2017                   |On 6 February 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     Olalekan Olaiwola Benjamin-Oguntade
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Osifeso, Legal Representative of Lannex
                    Immigration & Legal Advice Services


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Thomas promulgated as long ago as 19 May 2015
    in which the appeal brought by Mr Olalekan  Olaiwola  Benjamin-Oguntade
    against a decision to refuse to issue him on the basis of  a  residence
    card as the extended family member of an EEA national was refused.

 2. The judge found that the relationship between  the  appellant  and  his
    partner, Miss Konarska,  a  Polish  national,  was  genuine;  that  the
    relationship was durable; and, that they had  cohabited  from  November
    2010 to date.  She therefore found that  he  met  the  requirements  of
    Regulation 8(5) EEA Regulations.  The judge however  then  went  on  to
    allow the appeal under the EEA Regulations.

 3. The Secretary  of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  against  that
    decision on the  basis  that  what  the  judge  should  have  done  was
    following the decision in Ihemedu (OFMs - meaning) Nigeria [2011]  UKUT
    340 was to allow the appeal to the limited extent that it is  otherwise
    not in accordance with the law and direct that the Secretary  of  State
    should make a fresh decision to consider  her  discretion  pursuant  to
    Regulation 17(4) of the EEA Regulations.

 4. On 9  December  2016  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  McCarthy
    granted permission on the grounds sought and also granted permission on
    the basis that it should  be  granted  because  in  the  light  of  the
    decision in Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal: Albania) [2016] UKUT 411 it is
    arguable that Judge Thomas without knowing it had erred by entertaining
    the appeal whatsoever.

 5. When the matter came before me, Mr  Osifeso  who  appeared  before  the
    applicant, did not seek to persuade me that the decision  in  Sala  was
    wrongly decided, but submitted that given the history of this case that
    discretion and fairness required that the appeal  ought  to  have  been
    entertained.  He did however accept that the decision in Ihemedu  ought
    to have been followed and that the decision should have  been  remitted
    to the Secretary of State for a decision  to  be  made  as  to  whether
    discretion should have been exercised.

 6. I am not persuaded by any of the submissions made that the decision  in
    Sala was wrong or that there is any basis on which I should not  follow
    it.  Further, whether or not the First-tier Tribunal  has  jurisdiction
    is a binary question: either  it  does  or  it  does  not.   Issues  of
    discretion under which fairness would apply do not  arise  in  such  an
    issue, and on that basis I am satisfied in this case  that  unknown  to
    the judge she did not  in  fact  have  jurisdiction  to  entertain  the
    decision.

 7. If, however, I am wrong and the decision in Sala should not  have  been
    followed, I would have found that the judge did make an  error  of  law
    and that the appeal should have been allowed  on  the  basis  that  the
    decision of the Secretary of State was not in accordance with  the  law
    and that  therefore  the  application  was  still  pending  before  the
    Secretary of State, awaiting a proper lawful decision in the  light  of
    the findings of Judge Thomas.

 8. For these reasons I allow the Secretary of State's appeal.  I set aside
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and substitute a decision  that
    the First-tier Tribunal had no jurisdiction to hear the appeal.





SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of  an
    error of law, and I set it aside.

 2. I remake the decision by substituting  a  decision  that  there  is  no
    jurisdiction to consider the appeal,  and  therefore  it  falls  to  be
    dismissed.


Signed                                  Date:  3 February 2017
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

