
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43971/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined at Field House            |Decision and Reasons Promulgations   |
|On: 26 August 2015                   |On 28 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Muhammad Farooq
                                                                  Respondent


                             NOTICE OF DECISION

 1. The Secretary of State brings an appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  against
    the decision of FTTJ Hagan,  allowing  Mr  Farooq's  appeal  against  a
    decision refusing him leave to enter. Permission to appeal to the Upper
    Tribunal was granted on the 22 June 2015.

 2. However, prior to this, on 2 May 2015, the Secretary of  State  granted
    Mr Farooq leave to remain. Mr Farooq's  section  82  appeal  is  to  be
    treated as abandon pursuant to  section  104(4A)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, at the point in time that the grant of
    leave was made. This has a number of possible consequences. It seems to
    me that as a consequence of such abandonment the Upper Tribunal had  no
    jurisdiction to grant permission and such grant is to be treated  as  a
    nullity. That brings these proceedings to an end, and the determination
    of the First-tier Tribunal remains standing.

 3. If I am wrong in treating the appeal before the  Upper  Tribunal  as  a
    nullity then, in any event, Mr Walker sought to withdraw the  Secretary
    of State's appeal thereto. Insofar as is  necessary,  and  for  reasons
    which are obvious, I consent to this course. As such the  Secretary  of
    State's case before the Upper Tribunal is withdrawn and the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination remains standing.


Signed:

Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 27 August 2015

