
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43302/2014
                                                               IA/43304/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 December 2015                  |On 5 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                              PALASH KUMAR DAS
                                  JOYA DAS
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellants:    Mr S. Karim, Counsel instructed by A1 Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The first appellant (hereinafter referred to as "the appellant")  is  a
    citizen of Bangladesh born on 2 February 1985. The second appellant  is
    his wife and dependent.

 2. This appeal arises from the respondent's decision to refuse to vary the
    appellant's leave to remain as a Tier 1  (Entrepreneur)  Migrant  under
    the Points Based System and to  remove  him  from  the  UK  by  way  of
    directions under section 47 Immigration Asylum and Nationality Act.

 3. The reason for the refusal was that the respondent  was  not  satisfied
    that the appellant met the requirement under section (d)(iv) of Table 4
    Appendix A of the Immigration Rules ("section (d)(iv)") under which the
    appellant must have been working in an occupation which appears on  the
    list of occupations skilled to National Qualifications Framework  level
    4 or above.  The ensuing appeal was dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    ("FtT") Judge Coll in a decision that was promulgated on 29 May 2015.

 4. In his application for leave to remain the appellant stated that he was
    a purchasing manager, which is an occupation that meets the requirement
    of section (d)(iv). The FtT did not accept this. Its reasons are  given
    at paragraph [32], where the judge states:

         "... on the evidence before me, the two service contracts  indicate
         clearly that the appellant bought clothes from one company and sold
         clothes  to  another  company.  I  find  furthermore  that  neither
         contract shows the appellant was hired by another company to act on
         their behalf as a purchasing manager. I therefore find  furthermore
         that there was no evidence before the respondent  at  the  date  of
         application that the appellant was engaged  by  any  company  as  a
         purchasing manager."

 5. In reaching its decision, the FtT refused to hear  oral  evidence  from
    the appellant in respect of his job  and  whether  he  in  fact  was  a
    purchasing manager. The reason given by the FtT was that under  Section
    85A(4) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  ("the  2002
    Act") it could only consider  evidence  adduced  at  the  time  of  the
    application and that  this  was  consistent  with  the  Upper  Tribunal
    decision in Ahmed and Another (PBS: admissible  evidence)  [2014]  UKUT
    00365 (IAC). The FtT, at paragraph [30], stated:

         "I find that any oral evidence  produced  today  by  the  appellant
         about his job would amount to new material in that it  would  be  a
         different way of presenting the original  application.  It  follows
         that I cannot allow the appellant to give oral evidence on his  job
         today."

 6. The FtT also considered, and dismissed, the appellant's claim that  his
    removal would breach his right to private and family life under Article
    8 ECHR.

 7. The grounds of appeal argue (a) that the FtT erred by refusing to  hear
    oral evidence about the appellant's role as a purchasing  manager;  (b)
    that the FtT should  have  recognised  that  an  issue  of  common  law
    fairness arose as the  appellant  had  provided  all  of  the  evidence
    required of him  under  the  Points  Based  System  and  there  was  no
    evidential requirement on him  to  produce  pre-emptively  evidence  to
    allay concerns about his job description he could not have expected  to
    arise; and (c) that the FtT erred in concluding the appellant was not a
    purchasing manager. It is also argued that the FtT erred in failing  to
    consider paragraph 245AA of the Immigration Rules.   The  grounds  also
    challenge the FtT's approach to Article 8.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal  on  the  ground
    that there was an arguable error of law in the judge's finding that the
    appellant was not a purchasing manager and the  failure  to  hear  oral
    evidence from the appellant as to his role as a purchasing manager.

 9. In his submissions before me, Mr Karim, for the appellant, expanded  on
    the arguments made in the grounds of appeal.  Inter alia, he argued:

      a. The appellant complied with the requirements of  the  Points  Based
         System and provided the respondent with all specified documents  as
         required by the Rules. The appellant  could  not  have  anticipated
         that the appellant would take issue with the job title he  gave  as
         the respondent did not interview him or  let  him  know  about  the
         concern in  advance  of  making  the  refusal  decision.  In  these
         circumstances the FtT should have concluded that  the  respondent's
         decision making process was unfair.

      b. Ahmed should be distinguished from the present case because in that
         case the Secretary of State accepted further evidence and gave  the
         appellant an opportunity to rebut and address concerns raised -  an
         opportunity that was not afforded to the appellant in this case.

10. Mr Melvin argued that Ahmed makes it  clear  that  the  appellant  must
    provide the relevant evidence with his application and the FtT  hearing
    is not an opportunity to put before the Tribunal evidence that was  not
    before the  Secretary  of  State.  It  is  clear  why  the  appellant's
    application was refused - the evidence did not  show  he  met  the  job
    specification. There was no reason in  this  case  why  the  respondent
    should have had to interview the appellant and there was no requirement
    to do so. Moreover the findings of the judge were clearly based on  the
    evidence before the FtT.

Consideration

11. Section (d)(iv) of Table 4 of  Appendix  A  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    provided at the time of the appellant's application that:

         'Since  before  11  July  2014  and  up  to  the   date   of   this
         application,[the appellant] has continuously  been  working  in  an
         occupation which appears on the  list  of  occupations  skilled  to
         National Qualifications Framework level 4 or above,  as  stated  in
         the Codes of Practice in Appendix J,  and  provides  the  specified
         evidence in paragraph 41-SD. "Working" in this context  means  that
         the core service his business provides to its customers or  clients
         involves the business delivering a service in an occupation at this
         level. It excludes any work involved in  administration,  marketing
         or website functions for the business.'

12. Paragraph 41-SD sets out specified evidence that must be supplied  with
    the application. This includes, at sub-paragraph e(iv),  "one  or  more
    contracts for  service"  that  must  show,  inter  alia,  "the  service
    provided by the applicant's business".

13. The appellant was required, therefore, in accordance with Paragraph 41-
    SD, to provide with his application contracts for service  showing  the
    services provided by his business (i.e.  that  of  being  a  purchasing
    manager). He provided two such contracts. The FtT did not  accept  that
    these contracts showed the appellant was providing the  services  of  a
    purchasing manager. The FtT stated at paragraph [32] that the contracts
    indicate that the appellant bought clothes from one  company  and  sold
    clothes to another rather than that he was hired to act as a purchasing
    manager. Having considered the contracts, I  am  satisfied  this  is  a
    reasonable and proper interpretation of them.

14. It may be that if the FtT  had  given  the  appellant  an  opportunity,
    through oral  evidence,  to  explain  these  contracts  and/or  provide
    further evidence about his business and the services it provides he may
    have been able to satisfy the FtT  that  he  met  the  requirements  of
    section (d)(iv). It is  therefore  understandable  that  the  appellant
    would have wished to give such evidence and was disappointed he was not
    permitted to do so. However, the FtT did not err in law by not allowing
    oral evidence about the appellant's job. It is  well  established  that
    under the Points Based System the onus is on the  applicant  to  ensure
    his application, at the time the application is made, is  supported  by
    evidence to establish he meets  the  specified  requirements  See,  for
    example, EK (Ivory Coast) [2014] EWCA Civ 1517 and  Ahmed  and  Another
    (PBS: admissible evidence) [2014] UKUT 00365 (IAC). At paragraph [5] of
    Ahmed the Upper Tribunal makes the position clear:

         "... where a Points Based application  is  made  and  refused,  the
         assessment by the Judge is to be of the material  that  was  before
         the decision-maker rather than a new consideration of new material.
         In other words the appeal if it is successful is on the basis  that
         the decision-maker with the material before him should have made  a
         different decision, not on  the  basis  that  a  different  way  of
         presenting  the  application  would  have  produced   a   different
         decision."

15. Any oral evidence heard by the FtT in respect of  the  appellant's  job
    would have constituted material that was not before the decision  maker
    and therefore the judge did not err  in  finding  that  to  allow  such
    evidence would be inconsistent with Ahmed, or indeed with  the  wording
    of Section 85A(4) of the 2002 Act, which  limits  the  evidence  to  be
    considered by the FtT to that which was submitted at the time of making
    the application.

16. The appellant argues that Ahmed should be distinguished because in that
    case the applicants were interviewed by the Secretary of State  whereas
    in the present case the appellant has not had an opportunity to address
    the concerns raised by the Secretary of State. I  do  not  accept  this
    argument. Ahmed makes it clear that the purpose of  Section  85A(4)  is
    that the FtT should base its assessment on the material that was before
    the respondent's decision maker. In some cases the decision maker  will
    have interviewed the applicant. In others it will not have. Either way,
    when the matter comes before the FtT, the FtT is required to limit  its
    assessment to the information before the respondent's decision maker.

17. The appellant has also argued that the FtT's  decision  making  process
    was unfair as the appellant could  not  be  expected  to  pre-emptively
    produce documents to  allay  concerns  about  him  being  a  purchasing
    manager when none were required. I do not accept there is any merit  to
    this argument. Paragraph  41-SD(e)(iv)(b)  required  the  appellant  to
    submit, with his application, contracts for service showing the service
    provided by his business. The appellant submitted this evidence, in the
    form of two  contracts.  The  respondent  reviewed  the  contracts  and
    concluded that they did not show the appellant's role  was  that  of  a
    purchasing manager.  It  was  entitled  to  do  so  and  there  was  no
    obligation on the respondent, before reaching its conclusion, to  offer
    the appellant an interview, or invite him to provide further  evidence.
    The design of  the  Points  Based  System  is  such  as  to  allow  the
    respondent to base its  decision  on  the  evidence  submitted  without
    requiring it to give the appellant the opportunity  to  submit  further
    evidence and documents.

18. There are some circumstances  in  which  the  Secretary  of  State  has
    discretionary power to request further documents as set  out  paragraph
    245AA of the Rules. Paragraph 245AA is designed  to  assist  applicants
    where a document has been omitted, is in the incorrect format,  is  not
    the original, or does not contain all of the specified information.  As
    explained in Sultana and Others [2014] UKUT 00540 (IAC) paragraph 245AA
    can, in appropriate cases, operate as  a  mechanism  for  relaxing  the
    strictness of a particular requirement under the Points  Based  System.
    At  paragraph  [25]  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Sultana  commented  that
    paragraph 245AA was "designed to  ensure  that  applications  suffering
    from minor defects or  omissions  which  can  be  readily  remedied  or
    forgiven do not suffer the draconian fate of refusal". The  appellant's
    application, however, did  not  suffer  from  the  type  of  defect  or
    omission that could be saved by paragraph 245AA. Rather,  he  submitted
    contracts that  failed  to  demonstrate  his  occupation  was  that  of
    purchasing manager. Accordingly, there was no error of law by  the  FtT
    in its approach to paragraph 245AA.

19. No submissions were made before me in respect of Article 8 ECHR but for
    completeness I state my finding that there was no error of law. The FtT
    has  considered  and  applied  the  relevant  case  law  and  statutory
    provisions, notably Section 117B of the 2002 Act, and has  carried  out
    the balancing exercise under Article 8 noting in  particular  that  the
    appellant's private life was established whilst his immigration  status
    was precarious. The FtT's conclusion that removal of the  appellant  to
    Bangladesh would not be  disproportionate  and  not  be  in  breach  of
    Article 8 was one that was clearly open to it.

Decision

 a. The appeal is dismissed.

 b. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
    material error of law and shall stand.

 c. No anonymity order is made.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 30 December 2015              |

