
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                  Appeal Number:
IA/43760/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly     |         Decision & Reasons          |
|                                   |Promulgated                          |
|On 19 May 2017                     |         On 31 May 2017              |
|                                   |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between

                                 YASIR YASIR
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:          Mr G Brown counsel instructed by Arshad & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr A Mc Vitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. The Appellant was born on 23 June 1984 and is a national of Pakistan.


3. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
4. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge O Williams promulgated on 26 May 2016 which dismissed  the
   Appellant's appeal against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  17
   October 20114  to refuse the Appellants application for leave  to  remain
   on human rights grounds.
5. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons:
The Judge's Decision
6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge  Williams  ("the  Judge")  dismissed   the   appeal   against   the
   Respondent's decision.
7. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing  that  there  had  been  procedural
   unfairness in refusing the application for an  adjournment  in  order  to
   obtain supporting evidence of the ongoing discussions  in  respect  of  a
   reconciliation between the Appellant and his estranged  wife  from  those
   family members who were  involved  in  the  discussions  and  possibly  a
   statement from his estranged wife. Reliance was placed  on  the  case  of
   Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) to argue that the
   Appellant had been deprived of a fair hearing.
8.  On 29 September 2016 Judge Page gave permission to appeal.

9. At the hearing I heard  submissions  from  Mr  Brown  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that he relied on the grounds of appeal.

10. On behalf of the Respondent  Mr Mc Vitie submitted that :

   a) The Judge identified the issue was one of fairness.

   b) He had to consider the arguments advanced on the day  to  support  the
      application and he concluded that it was vague.

11. In reply Mr Brown on behalf of the Appellant submitted that evidence  of
   reconciliation would be relevant to Article 8. It was unfair  to  suggest
   that such evidence could be obtained by the afternoon which was what  the
   Judge offered.



The Law

12. The 2014 Procedure Rules Rule 4(3)(h) empowers the Tribunal  to  adjourn
   a hearing. Rule 2 sets out the  overriding  objectives  under  the  Rules
   which the Tribunal "must seek to give  effect  to"  when  exercising  any
   power under the Rules.  It  follows  that  they  are  the  issues  to  be
   considered  on  an  adjournment  application  as  well.  The   overriding
   objective is deal with cases fairly  and  justly.   This  is  defined  as
   including  "(a) dealing with the case in ways which are proportionate  to
   the importance of the case, the complexity of the issues, the anticipated
   costs and the resources of the parties and of the Tribunal; (b)  avoiding
   unnecessary formality and seeking flexibility  in  the  proceedings;  (c)
   ensuring, so far  as  is  practicable,  that  the  parties  are  able  to
   participate fully in the proceedings; (d) using any special expertise  of
   the Tribunal effectively; (e) avoiding delay so far  as  compatible  with
   proper consideration of the issues".

13. In Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) it  was  held
   that  If a Tribunal refuses to accede to  an  adjournment  request,  such
   decision could, in principle, be erroneous in law  in  several  respects:
   these include a failure to take into account all material considerations;
   permitting  immaterial  considerations  to  intrude;  denying  the  party
   concerned a fair hearing; failing to apply the correct test;  and  acting
   irrationally.  In practice, in most cases the question  will  be  whether
   the refusal deprived the affected party of his right to a  fair  hearing.
   Where an adjournment refusal is challenged on  fairness  grounds,  it  is
   important to recognise that the question for the Upper  Tribunal  is  not
   whether the FtT acted reasonably.  Rather, the test to be applied is that
   of fairness:  was there any deprivation of the affected party's right  to
   a fair hearing?
Finding on Material Error

14. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

15. This was an appeal against the refusal of  an  application  made  on  22
   August 2014 for leave to remain in the UK based on the Appellants private
   life. Although not mentioned in his application the factual matrix of the
   case was that on 11 October 2012  the  Appellant  applied  for  leave  to
   remain as a spouse and that was granted until 8 November  2015.  However,
   the marriage appears to have broken down and his leave was  curtailed  to
   expire on 25 August 2013.

16. The Judge dealt with the application for an adjournment at paragraphs 6-
   8 of his decision. He noted that although the Appellant and his wife were
   separated  the  respective  families  had  been   seeking   a   permanent
   reconciliation. An adjournment was sought by the  Appellants  counsel  to
   obtain confirmation of ongoing discussions between the families.

17. I am satisfied that the Judge considered the  application  by  reference
   to the Procedure Rules as he set them out at paragraph 7.  He  identified
   that the issue was one of fairness. He also noted that the Appellant  had
   had sufficient time to call evidence regarding  the  supposed  talks  and
   indeed offered to put the matter back until the afternoon to  allow  time
   for evidence to be called.

18. I am satisfied that the Judge then gave  cogent  and  detailed  reasoned
   why he refused the adjournment at paragraph 8 : the adjournment would  be
   for an unknown period of time; the evidence of the discussions  was  very
   vague and no direct evidence that  such  discussions  were  taking  place
   although he ha offered an opportunity for such evidence to be called; the
   reconciliation may or may not be successful and the Appellant was able to
   give evidence of the nature of the discussions himself.

19. I am satisfied that given the Judges detailed  examination  of  all  the
   relevant factors that he was entitled to  conclude  that  adjourning  the
   matter would not be fair and just. I am satisfied  that  the  Judge  took
   into account all of the relevant factors and that the Appellant  was  not
   deprived of a fair hearing and the decision made was  reasonable  in  the
   circumstances.

CONCLUSION

20. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

21. The appeal is dismissed.
Signed                                                              Date
29.5.2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
