
[pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43176/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 16th April 2015                    |On 8th July 2015                      |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                         mrs Harriet Antwiwaa Donkor
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana born on 16th January 1971.  On 14th
    February 2013 the Appellant applied for leave to remain on the basis of
    her  relationship  with  her  partner  and  her  private   life.    The
    Appellant's immigration history was that she had first arrived  in  the
    UK in 2004 with leave to enter as a dependant.  That leave was extended
    on five occasions prior to the current  application.   On  3rd  October
    2013 the Appellant's application was refused on the  grounds  that  she
    failed to qualify for leave by virtue  of  E-LTRP.1.2  of  Appendix  FM
    namely that in order to qualify for leave the Appellant's partner  must
    either be a British citizen present and settled in the UK or be in  the
    UK with refugee leave or humanitarian protection and that he failed  to
    meet any of those requirements.  Further the Secretary of State was not
    satisfied that EX.1 applied in the Appellant's case and her application
    was consequently refused and in addition she did not  qualify  for  the
    leave via the 10-year route.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal  came  before  Immigration  Judge
    Feeney sitting at Taylor House on 21st November 2014.   In  a  decision
    promulgated on 13th  January  2015  Judge  Feeney  concluded  that  the
    Secretary of State  had  failed  properly  to  consider  EX.1  and  its
    application in the present case amounted to an  error  of  law  and  he
    remitted the appeal back to the decision maker for  reconsideration  of
    the application of EX.1 Appendix FM and by way of  consideration  under
    Section 55 of the 2009 Act.

 3. On 20th January 2015 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds of Appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal.  On 23rd February 2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Parkes granted permission to  appeal.   Judge  Parkes  noted  that  the
    grounds argued that the judge was wrong to apply paragraph EX.1 as  the
    Appellant did not meet the relationship requirements of Appendix FM  E-
    LTRP.1.2 and that EX.1 was not freestanding.  Judge Parkes  noted  that
    the Appellant's husband  did  not  have  British  citizenship,  refugee
    status or indefinite leave to remain.  He also noted that it was argued
    that the judge did not properly approach  Section  55.   He  considered
    that there was  merit  in  the  Grounds  of  Appeal.   The  Appellant's
    husband's leave did not appear to be  sufficient  to  comply  with  the
    Sponsor's requirements under Appendix FM and so  paragraph  EX.1  would
    not be reached independently and that it would have to be shown that it
    would not be reasonable to expect the children to  live  in  Ghana.   I
    note that this is an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State  and  for  the
    purpose of continuity throughout the appeal process I refer  herein  to
    the Secretary of  State  as  the  Respondent  and  Mrs  Donkor  as  the
    Appellant.  The Appellant has not had legal  representation  throughout
    these proceedings and she again appears in person.   The  Secretary  of
    State appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr McVeety.

Submission/Discussion

 4. Mr McVeety submits that the judge should have made a decision and  that
    it was open for the judge to give due and  proper  consideration  to  a
    freestanding appeal under Article  8.   He  submits  that  the  correct
    approach is for the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  make  a  decision  under
    Article 8 and  points  out  that  the  Appellant  would  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph EX.1 and that it would be open to the  First-
    tier Tribunal to consider the Article 8 application outside  the  Rules
    but clearly this has not taken place due to the approach adopted by the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.

 5. Mrs Donkor acknowledges the position but indicates that she  wishes  to
    make no further comment or representations therein.



The Law

 6.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 7. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

 8. The First-tier Tribunal Judge has failed to make a decision pursuant to
    Article 8 and I agree entirely with the view expressed  by  Mr  McVeety
    that it was open to the judge to make findings pursuant to  Article  8.
    I  acknowledge  the  point  made  by  Mr  McVeety  that  EX.1  is   not
    freestanding and that was  confirmed  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  the
    decision of Sabir (Appendix FM - EX.1 not free  standing)  [2014]  UKUT
    00063 (IAC).  In this instance there  is  therefore  a  clear  material
    error of law.  It is clear that the judge has  made  no  findings  when
    indeed she should have done so and the correct approach is to remit the
    matter back to the First-tier Tribunal to be reheard.

 9. There is one caveat in this matter.  Mr McVeety acknowledges  that  the
    Appellant's husband was granted indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  10th
    April 2015 i.e. less than a week before this hearing.  Whilst he  urges
    me (and I agree with  him)  to  remit  the  matter  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal he asked me to note this position in the determination  (which
    I do) and indicates that it may  as  a  result  be  a  matter  for  the
    Secretary of State to reconsider but that he is not in  a  position  to
    address this issue at the present time.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material  error  of  law.
The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  therefore  set  aside  and  the
matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be reheard at Taylor  House
on the first available date 28 days hence.  Leave is also  given  to  either
party to file and serve an up-to-date bundle of  documents  at  least  seven
days prehearing.  Should the Appellant require an interpreter  then  she  is
requested to notify the Tribunal Service within fourteen days of receipt  of
this determination.

No anonymity order is made.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

