
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/43477/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 3 December 2015                   |On 14 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                          PERIYASAMY MAKKAN MANGUDI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms W Bremang, instructed by Berkleys Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant, a national of India, appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal
   against a decision by the respondent of 27 October  2014  to  refuse  his
   application to refuse his application for leave to remain  as  a  Tier  1
   (Entrepreneur) under the Points Based System (PBS).  Judge of the  First-
   tier Tribunal Griffith dismissed the appeal. The  appellant  now  appeals
   with permission to this Tribunal.

2.  In summary the background to this appeal is that the appellant  came  to
   the UK on 6 August 2010 with leave to enter as a  Tier  4  student  valid
   until 30 April 2012. He as granted further leave to remain as  a  Tier  1
   (Post study) Migrant until 18 May 21014 and applied for leave as a Tier 1
   (Entrepreneur) Migrant on 15 May 2014. He was interviewed  in  connection
   with his  application  on  21  July  2014.  The  respondent  refused  the
   application under paragraph 245DD (h) of the Rules, having  assessed  the
   points listed at paragraph 245DD (i) and concluded that the appellant had
   not satisfactorily demonstrated that he is a  genuine  entrepreneur.  The
   respondent further decided not to award  the  appellant  any  of  the  75
   points available for Attributes.

3. On the morning of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  a  fax  was
   received from the appellant's representatives requesting  an  adjournment
   on the grounds of the appellant's ill health. A medical certificate  from
   the appellant's GP dated 23 March 2015 was  submitted  stating  that  the
   appellant was suffering from acute back pain and that  he  was  unfit  to
   attend work for a period of 10 days and that he was advised to  have  bed
   rest for 10 days.

4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge refused  the  adjournment  request  on  the
   basis that the evidence did not indicate that the appellant was unable to
   attend the hearing. It appears that a letter to that effect was posted to
   the  appellant  and  his  representatives  that  day  advising  that  the
   application was refused and that the appellant may appear that  same  day
   before 10am for his case to be heard. As this response was not  faxed  or
   emailed it is likely that the appellant was unaware that the adjournments
   request had been refused until after the date of the hearing.

5. The Judge went on to consider the appeal on the papers on 30  March  2015
   and decided the appeal on the basis of  the  evidence  submitted  to  the
   Secretary of State. The Judge noted that  the  appellant  had  failed  to
   submit any documents in advance of the hearing to answer the reasons  for
   refusal and to demonstrate his compliance with the  Rules  and  that  the
   appellant had accordingly not demonstrated that he meets the requirements
   of the Rules for a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant.

6. Permission to Appeal was refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the
   appellant renewed his application to the Upper Tribunal. The grounds rely
   in particular on the cases of Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT
   00418 (IAC) and MM (unfairness; E & R) Sudan  [2014]  UKUT  00105  (IAC).
   Permission to Appeal was granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini  on
   the basis that, as the decision to refuse the adjournment was returned to
   the appellant by post, he would not have known of the adjournment refusal
   and was unable to bring himself to attend on the same day.

Error of Law

7. The issue of fairness in the context of adjournments  was  considered  by
   the Upper Tribunal in the case of Nwaigwe where the  President  gave  the
   following reminder;

    "7.    If a Tribunal refuses to accede to an adjournment request,  such
    decision could, in principle, be erroneous in law in several  respects:
    these  include  a  failure  to   take   into   account   all   material
    considerations;  permitting  immaterial  considerations   to   intrude;
    denying the party concerned  a  fair  hearing;  failing  to  apply  the
    correct test; and acting irrationally. In practice, in most  cases  the
    question will be whether the refusal deprived the affected party of his
    right to a fair hearing. Where an adjournment refusal is challenged  on
    fairness grounds, it is important to recognise that  the  question  for
    the Upper Tribunal is not whether the FtT acted reasonably. Rather, the
    test to be applied is that of fairness: was there  any  deprivation  of
    the affected party's right to a fair hearing? Any temptation to  review
    the conduct and decision of the FtT through the lens of  reasonableness
    must be firmly resisted, in order to avoid a misdirection in law. In  a
    nutshell, fairness is the supreme criterion.

    8.     The cardinal rule rehearsed above is expressed in uncompromising
    language in the decision of the Court of Appeal in SH  (Afghanistan)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011]  EWCA  Civ  1284,  at
    [13]:

         "First, when considering whether the  immigration  Judge  ought  to
         have granted an adjournment, the test was  not  irrationality.  The
         test was not whether his decision was properly open to him  or  was
         Wednesbury unreasonable or perverse. The test  and  sole  test  was
         whether it was unfair".

         [My emphasis]

    Alertness to this test by Tribunals at both tiers will serve to prevent
    judicial error.  Regrettably,  in  the  real  and  imperfect  world  of
    contemporary  litigation,  the  question  of  adjourning  a  case   not
    infrequently arises on the date of hearing, at the doors of the  court.
    I am conscious, of course, that in the typical case the Judge will have
    invested much time and effort in preparation, is understandably anxious
    to complete the day's list of cases  for  hearing  and  may  well  feel
    frustrated  by  the  (usually)  unexpected  advent  of  an  adjournment
    request. Both the FtT and the Upper Tribunal have demanding  workloads.
    Parties and stakeholders  have  expectations,  typically  elevated  and
    sometimes unrealistic, relating to the throughput and output  of  cases
    in the system. In the present era, the spotlight on  the  judiciary  is
    more acute than ever before. Moreover, Tribunals must consistently give
    effect to the  overriding  objective.  Notwithstanding,  sensations  of
    frustration and inconvenience, no matter how  legitimate,  must  always
    yield  to  the  parties'  right  to  a  fair  hearing.  In  determining
    applications for adjournments, Judges will also be guided by  focussing
    on the overarching criterion enshrined  in  the  overriding  objective,
    which is that of fairness."

8. In this case the Judge did act reasonably. I note in particular the  fact
   that the appellant had not submitted any witness statement  or  documents
   in compliance with the directions, the  appellant's  representatives  did
   not attend the hearing to make the adjournment request in person and  did
   not contact the Tribunal that  morning  to  seek  information  about  the
   outcome of the adjournment request. In all of these circumstances  it  is
   easy to understand why the Judge acted as she did.

9. I also note Mr Kotas' submission, in reliance on Ahmed and Another  (PBS:
   admissible evidence) [2014] UKUT 00365  (IAC),  that  any  error  is  not
   material as the appellant could not  produce  any  evidence  not  already
   submitted to the Secretary of State. However it may be that the appellant
   could have contributed oral evidence material  to  the  evidence  already
   submitted, particularly in light of the general grounds of refusal.

10. As is made clear in the decision in Nwaigwe, the issue  is  not  one  of
   reasonableness but of fairness. I note that the Judge did not address her
   mind  to  the  requirements  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration   Tribunal
   (Procedure) Rules 2014, which give the Tribunal discretion to adjourn  in
   the context of the overriding objective which is  to  deal  with  a  case
   fairly and justly. In this case the Judge did not  specifically  consider
   whether the case could be dealt with fairly in the context of the medical
   note and in the context of the method  of  delivery  of  the  refusal  to
   adjourn.

11. In these circumstances and in light of the guidance given in  Nwaigwe  I
   find that the decision to  refuse  to  grant  the  adjournment  requested
   amounted to a procedural unfairness and thus to an error of law. For that
   reason I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

12. I proposed remaking the decision at the hearing in  the  Upper  Tribunal
   however the appellant did not appear at the  hearing  before  me  and  Ms
   Bremang was unable  to  contact  her  instructing  solicitors  to  obtain
   instructions. This was unsatisfactory in light of the  directions  issued
   to the appellant and his representatives for the  hearing  in  the  Upper
   Tribunal.

13. However I considered the following guidance given by  the  President  in
   the decision of MM

    "26.   By section  12  of  the  2007  Act,  where  the  Upper  Tribunal
    concludes that the decision of the  First-Tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law and decides to  set  the  decision
    aside, it must either remit the case  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  or
    remake the decision itself.  We  consider  that,  as  a  fairly  strong
    general rule, where a first instance decision is set aside on the basis
    of an error of law involving the deprivation of the  Appellant's  right
    to a fair hearing, the appropriate course will be to remit to  a  newly
    constituted First-Tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing. This is so because
    the common law right to a fair hearing is generally considered to  rank
    as a right of constitutional importance and it is preferable  that  the
    litigant's statutory right of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  should  be
    triggered only where the former right  has  been  fully  enjoyed."  (my
    emphasis)

14. In light of the procedural error I am satisfied that it  is  appropriate
   in this case to remit the  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  as  the
   appellant has not had his case  properly  considered  by  the  First-tier
   Tribunal. The nature and extent of the judicial  fact  finding  which  is
   necessary in order for the decision to be remade  is  such  that  (having
   regard to the overriding objective  in  Rule  2  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
   Procedure Rules 2008) it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
   tier Tribunal.

Decision

The Judge made an error on a point of  law  and  the  determination  of  the
First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade.


Signed      Date: 3 December 2015

A Grimes

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

