
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/43191/2013,
                                                        IA/43189/2013,
                                IA/43190/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 31st October 2014                          |On 7th November 2014         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Ms nisha sobrun (1)
                           miss ashwina sobrun (2)
                          master vaibhav sobrun (3)
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr S Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr Otchie, Counsel, instructed by Cubism Law


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State I will refer to
       the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

    2. The appellants are citizens of Mauritius. The first appellant is the
       mother the second and third appellants. The first appellant was born
       on 9th March 1980, the second appellant on 9th April  2008  and  the
       third appellant on 3rd March 2002. The first  and  third  appellants
       arrived in the UK on 26th December 2005:  the  first  appellant  had
       leave as a student and the third appellant  as  her  dependent.  The
       second appellant was born in the  UK.  The  appellants  leave  as  a
       student/ student dependents expired on 27th November 2012.  On  23rd
       November 2012 they applied for further leave to  remain  in  the  UK
       based on their right to respect for private life, in accordance with
       Article 8 ECHR. These applications were refused on 4th October  2013
       and the appellants appealed. The appeals against the decisions  were
       allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge AJ Parker  in  a  determination
       promulgated on the 1st September 2014.

    3. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal MacDonald on 24th September on the basis that  it  was
       arguable the First-tier Tribunal had erred  in  law  by  failing  to
       consider the citizenship of the children, and that they did not hold
       British citizenship and the distinctions  made  in  Zoumbas  v  SSHD
       [2013] UKSC 74 and EV (Philippines)  v  SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874
       between the weight to be given to those of British  citizenship  and
       those without.

    4. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of Law

    5. Mr Tarlow relied upon the grounds of  appeal.  These  contended,  in
       summary, that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law  because  as  the
       second and third appellants in  this  case  are  Mauritian  children
       rather than British citizen children the  degree  of  difficulty  in
       relocating to Mauritius did not render  the  decisions  to  relocate
       them disproportionate. This  was  clearly  a  relevant  factor,  see
       paragraph 24 of Zoumbas, as they had no right to be educated in  the
       UK. Further in accordance with Nasim (Article 8) [2014]  UKUT  00025
       (which relied upon Patel & Ors v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72) as they  would
       be removed as a family there was no interference with their right to
       respect for family life and Article 8 had  very  little  utility  in
       cases which did not interfere with a  person's  moral  and  physical
       integrity. Mr  Tarlow  submitted  that  the  citizenship  the  child
       appellants  hold   does   affect   the   reasonableness   of   their
       reintegration if required to leave as it  is  bound  up  with  their
       understanding of the country of removal  in  terms  of  culture  and
       other matters.

    6. Mr Otchie initially began his submissions on the  rather  surprising
       basis that Judge Parker had determined the  appeal  under  paragraph
       276ADE of the Immigration Rules  so  these  wider  issues  were  not
       needed to be considered. However I drew his attention  to  the  fact
       that he had conceded at the hearing that the  appellants  could  not
       satisfy the Immigration Rules, and that it was only Article 8 beyond
       these Rules that was in issue: see paragraph 8 of the determination.



    7. He then argued that in fact that Judge  Parker  had  considered  the
       nationality of the appellants. He had recorded it at paragraph 1  of
       his determination  and  said  that  he  considered  all  factors  at
       paragraph 27. He suggested that Zoumbas did not make  nationality  a
       factor, and referred me to paragraph 10 of the  judgement.  He  said
       that children could not be reasonably removed if they  had  been  in
       the UK for seven years so it was  clear  that  nationality  was  not
       always a factor; and that nationality was an  irrelevance  from  the
       stand-point of the child who may not even be aware which nationality
       they hold thus making it an artificial consideration.

    8. At the end of the hearing I said that I found  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law for the reasons set out below and  that  I
       would set the determination aside in its entirety.  The parties both
       said they were happy to proceed with the re-making of the  decision.
       They were both happy to proceed on the basis that the  evidence  was
       agreed; with no challenge being  made  to  the  credibility  of  the
       appellants or the veracity of the documents before the Tribunal.  It
       was agreed that it was open to Mr Otchie to argue that the appellant
       could meet the requirements of the Article 8 ECHR Immigration  Rules
       at paragraph 276ADE, or generally.

Conclusions - Error of Law

    9. In the findings and conclusions  section  of  the  determination  of
       Judge  Parker  there  is  no  reference  to  the  second  and  third
       appellants being of Mauritian nationality in  the  consideration  of
       Article 8 ECHR outside of the Immigration Rules.

   10. The Supreme Court case of Zoumbas clearly states that nationality is
       a relevant factor when considering the best interests of non-British
       citizen children facing removal with a  non-British  citizen  parent
       who no longer has permission to stay in the UK, but who argues  that
       the family should be allowed to remain on the basis of their private
       life here under Article 8 ECHR outside of the Immigration Rules, see
       paragraph 24 of this judgement. Paragraph 10 of the judgement is the
       submission of counsel for Mr Zoumbas not the decision of the Supreme
       Court. Similarly the Court of Appeal in EV (Philippines)  lists  the
       factors on which the best interest of the child will depend in  such
       a case at paragraph 35, and the final factor is again  consideration
       of any rights the child may have (or not) as a British citizen.

   11. I find that Judge Parker erred in law by failing to be guided by the
       higher courts in not considering the citizenship of the  second  and
       third appellants when deciding if their removal would be a breach of
       their right to respect for private life in accordance with the  UK's
       obligations under  Article  8  ECHR  outside  of  the  private  life
       provisions set out in the Immigration Rules.

   12. It cannot be said that failure to consider  this  factor  might  not
       have led the First-tier Tribunal to come to  a  different  decision,
       particularly as it  was  considered  as  very  significant  in  both
       Zoumbas and EV (Philippines),  so  I  find  this  failure  to  be  a
       material error of law.



Evidence & Submissions - Re-making

   13. As noted above the evidence in its  entirety  was  accepted  by  the
       respondent as being credible.

   14. Mr Tarlow relied upon the refusal letter. In summary  this  says  as
       follows.  It  was  clear  that  there  was  no  argument  that   the
       appellants' family life would be affected by their removal  as  they
       would be removed together.  It  was  not  accepted  that  the  first
       appellant had been in the UK for 20 years or that they had  no  ties
       (social, cultural or family) with the Philippines so she  could  not
       succeed under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules  either.  It
       was not considered that there were any exceptional circumstances  in
       this case which should lead to a grant of leave based on  Article  8
       ECHR outside of the Immigration Rules.

   15. In submissions Mr Tarlow  considered  whether  the  third  appellant
       could meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE as it  was  accepted
       by the Secretary of State that he had (unlike the second  appellant)
       been in the UK for more than 7 years at the time of application  and
       was under 18 years of age. Mr  Tarlow  submitted  however  that  the
       third appellant could not meet the requirement that it would not  be
       "reasonable" to expect him to leave the UK.  He  said  his  lack  of
       British citizenship was a factor in consideration of  reasonableness
       in this paragraph; further he would be returning with his family and
       to a place where his grandmother and great-grandmother lived even if
       he had little memory of  the  place.  If  all  the  appellants  were
       considered outside  of  the  Immigration  Rules  their  removal  was
       proportionate when considered in line with the factors at  paragraph
       35 of EV Philippines.

   16. Mr Otchie submitted that the third appellant was entitled to succeed
       under paragraph 276ADE (iv) of the Immigration Rules because it  was
       not reasonable to expect him to return to the  Philippines.  He  was
       now in year eight at the Royal  Liberty  Secondary  school  and  was
       doing very well. He wanted to become a doctor. If he  had  to  leave
       the UK it would seriously disrupt his education as he did not  speak
       French, the language of education in Mauritius. It was the  view  of
       his school that he should be allowed to remain in this country.  His
       friends were in the UK. In Mauritius the family would not be able to
       be accommodated by his grandmother  or  great-grandmother  as  their
       accommodation was too small. The reasonableness of return  was  also
       affected by the issue of the third  appellant's  father.  There  was
       substantial evidence in the bundle about his domestic  violence  and
       the  fact  he  had  returned  to  the  Philippines.  Further   these
       appellants did not have poor immigration history.

   17. If Article 8 ECHR was considered generally  on  behalf  of  all  the
       appellants it should also be considered that  the  second  appellant
       had lived in the UK all her life, having been born here. Further the
       family would be in a precarious situation if  they  were  forced  to
       return  to  the  Philippines.  They  were  able   to   satisfy   the
       considerations at paragraph 35 of EV Philippines; and  had  children
       who had lived in the  UK  for  longer  and  had  none  of  the  poor
       immigration history as per Zoumbas. The factors as set out in s.117A
       of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 were also in the
       appellants favour.

Conclusions - Re-making

   18. I will first consider whether  the  third  appellant  can  meet  the
       requirements of paragraph 276ADE (iv) of the Immigration  Rules.  It
       is accepted by both parties that the other  appellants  cannot  meet
       the requirements of the Immigration  Rules  relating  to  Article  8
       ECHR. It is accepted by both parties that the third appellant  meets
       all requirements of this  provision,  bar  it  is  disputed  by  the
       respondent that he can show it would not be reasonable to expect him
       to leave the UK.

   19. I do not accept Mr Tarlow's submission that it would be  appropriate
       to find that the fact that the third  appellant  is  not  a  British
       citizen meant it was of itself reasonable to expect him to leave the
       UK. No British citizen child will ever rely  upon  paragraph  276ADE
       (iv) of the Immigration Rules as  they  are  obviously  entitled  to
       reside in the UK on the basis of their private  life  and  it  would
       never be reasonable to expect them to leave.

   20. What is clearly of relevance is the fact that  the  third  appellant
       would be returning to the country  of  his  nationality  and  birth,
       where he would be entitled to have family and private life with  his
       caring parent and sibling (the  first  and  second  appellants)  and
       where his extended family, in the form of his grandmother and great-
       grandmother, live. There is no evidence before me that he would  not
       be entitled to schooling in Mauritius or that his mother  would  not
       be able to obtain employment (she works in the UK  as  a  healthcare
       assistant and has undertaken further studies  in  the  UK:  she  has
       completed an advanced diploma in business administration, has done a
       number of health care short courses and is currently  doing  a  BTEC
       subsidiary diploma in applied  science)  and  support  him  and  his
       sibling. I find he would probably have the basics of a  normal  life
       if he were returned to his country of nationality, Mauritius.

   21. Factors which make go to making the removal of the  third  appellant
       less reasonable are that his stay in the UK has been from the age of
       3 years to 10 years at the date of application - and so will have no
       recollection of Mauritius; has undertaken his  entire  schooling  in
       the UK and has made a private life for himself in this country  with
       friends and bonds with schools  and  teaching  staff.  His  teachers
       believe it is in his best interests to stay in the UK as he is  well
       settled and having to re-start his secondary education would have  a
       seriously detrimental effect on his future learning  prospects  (see
       letter from the Royal Liberty School dated 11th July  2014):  he  is
       doing well in the education system in  this  country.  Returning  to
       Mauritius would obviously set him back  educationally  as  he  would
       need to learn to speak, read and write in  French,  and  reintegrate
       himself into a different education system.

   22. The third appellant's time in the UK has also been marked  with  the
       very traumatic break-up of his parents' marriage: a matter which the
       first appellant says he witnessed and understood  and  which  had  a
       negative impact on him and his schooling,  particularly  during  the
       period 2007 to 2010. The first appellant was subjected  to  horrific
       verbal, emotional, physical and sexual domestic  violence  from  her
       husband, who was also a Mauritian national in the UK as  a  student.
       In October 2008, when the third appellant was  six  years  old,  she
       obtained a non- molestation and prohibited steps order from  Romford
       County Court and an occupation order (excluding her husband from the
       family home). Despite these orders he continued to harass the  first
       appellant, and left the UK and returned to Mauritius in late 2009 as
       he faced the likelihood of being put in  prison  for  breaching  the
       court orders. It is notable  that  the  non-molestation  order  also
       forbad the third appellant's father from coming within 100 meters of
       his primary school at  the  time  when  he  would  be  arriving  and
       leaving.

   23. In considering the reasonableness of the second appellant's return I
       must give proper consideration to his best  interests  and  use  the
       factors at paragraph 35 of EV (Philippines) as  a  useful  guide.  I
       find that the appellant  has  been  in  the  UK  during  his  entire
       memorable childhood for a period of seven years; he has reached  the
       secondary stage of his education in this  country  and  is  entirely
       distanced from his country of proposed return. He has  had  to  deal
       with the very traumatic departure of his father to Mauritius  during
       this time in circumstances where his mother,  the  first  appellant,
       was herself horrifically abused  to  his  knowledge  and  where  she
       expressed fears of the safety of his having contact with his  father
       to the Family Court. I find it a  particularly  relevant  fact  that
       removal would require the appellant to go  through  a  second  major
       upheaval in his short life when he has had already to deal with this
       one which clearly disrupted his  education  and  personal  life.  He
       would have linguistic problems with adapting to  life  in  Mauritius
       which would disrupt his secondary education. It is correct  that  in
       all the circumstances that his mother sees it as being in the  third
       appellant's best interests that he continues to remain in the UK and
       keeps the stability and good progress that has been established here
       particularly since  "overcoming"  the  traumatic  departure  of  his
       father from his life.

   24. Ultimately, on consideration of all of the facts, I do not  find  it
       reasonable to expect the third appellant to leave the  UK  and  thus
       find that he is entitled to leave to remain under  paragraph  276ADE
       (iv) of the Immigration Rules.

   25. I note however that whilst Mr Tarlow strongly  appeared  to  concede
       that the third appellant had been in the UK for seven years  at  the
       time of application on closer analysis the papers before me indicate
       that the application was made some five weeks before  this  was  the
       case.

   26. If it were the case that the third appellant could not qualify under
       paragraph  276ADE  (iv)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  I  would  take
       s.117B(6) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
       (henceforth the 2002 Act) as my starting point for  a  consideration
       of whether the removal of this family would be  proportionate  under
       the general law relating to Article 8 ECHR in light of their private
       life in the UK, the removal otherwise being in accordance  with  the
       law as being in pursuit of  the  legitimate  aim  of  being  in  the
       economic interest of the UK in  upholding  a  consistent  system  of
       immigration control. I note, and take as  my  starting  point,  that
       maintenance of immigration control is an  important  matter  in  the
       public interest.

   27. This provision states that it is not required in the public interest
       to  remove  a  person  with  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
       relationship  with  a  qualifying  child  where  it  would  not   be
       reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.  At
       s.117D of the 2002 Act a qualifying child is one who  is  under  the
       age of 18 years and who has  lived  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
       continuous period of seven years or more. This  provision  does  not
       set the date of application as the point at which  the  age  of  the
       child is assessed: and the  third  appellant  has  at  the  date  of
       hearing been in the UK for eight years and nine months. I  therefore
       find that the third appellant is a qualifying  child.  There  is  no
       doubt that the first appellant has a genuine and subsisting parental
       relationship with the third appellant.

   28. My findings as to the fact that his removal would not be  reasonable
       are set out above but at this stage I find it would be  relevant  to
       add in a consideration that  the  second  appellant  does  not  have
       British citizenship, in the light of the weight given to this factor
       by the  Supreme  Court  and  Court  of  Appeal  in  Zoumbas  and  EV
       (Philippines) respectively. However in this case  I  find  that  the
       weight to be given to the third appellant's private life  ties  with
       the UK, despite his being a Mauritian citizen, is greater due to the
       fact that he has already suffered the trauma  of  domestic  violence
       against his mother and latent threats to his own safety and  had  to
       overcome the impact these had on his education and private life, and
       that in these circumstances despite his lack of British  citizenship
       and entitlement to education in the UK and the fact that he would be
       returning with his mother and  younger  sister  to  his  country  of
       nationality it is not reasonable  to  expecting  him  to  return  to
       Mauritius to re-establish his private life there.

   29. In terms of the other factors set out at s.117B of the 2002 Act  the
       appellants are all able to speak fluent English and thus are  deemed
       likely to be less of a  burden  on  taxpayers  and  better  able  to
       integrate. They  are  also  financially  independent  as  the  first
       appellant has shown herself able to accommodate and support all  the
       appellants without recourse to public funds since her  arrival,  and
       has legally obtained employment and has higher level qualifications.
       The appellants have all been continuously lawfully resident, and  at
       least the vast majority of their  time  (up  until  the  refusal  in
       October 2013 since when they have had leave on the basis of s.3C  of
       the 1971 Immigration Act) has not been precarious. I thus  find  all
       these public interest factors fall in the appellants favour and  add
       to my conclusion that their removal would not be proportionate.

   30. In these circumstances I find that it would be a breach of the right
       to respect for family life for the second appellant not to  be  able
       to remain in the UK  with  her  mother  (the  first  appellant)  and
       brother (the third appellant) which would not  be  proportionate  to
       the legitimate aim given the strength of the family  life  ties  and
       her own private life in the UK which includes birth in this country,
       six and a half years of residence here and the start of her  primary
       schooling, and the considerations at s.117B of the 2002 Act set  out
       above.

Decisions

   31. The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  an
       error on a point of law.

   32. The decisions of the First-tier Tribuanl are set aside and remade de
       novo.

   33. The appeals are remade  allowing  the  appeals  in  accordance  with
       Article 8 ECHR.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley
4th October 2014


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no fee award
as I was not requested to do this and it appears that evidence given at the
appeal and further documentation provided at the appeal stage were key to
the success of this appeal.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley
4th October 2014

