
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43529/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 19th September 2014                          |On 26th September 2014     |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                       mr mutsvene darlington chikono
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Shenaz Ahmad (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr Richards (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Obhi promulgated on 21st May 2014, following a hearing at Sheldon Court
    on 9th May 2014.  In the determination, the judge allowed the appeal of
    Mutsvene  Darlington  Chikono.   The  respondent  Secretary  of   State
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Zimbabwe, who was  born  on  27th
    May 1973.  He appeals against the decision of the Respondent  Secretary
    of State dismissing his application for further leave to  remain  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR, following the grant previously of  discretionary
    leave to remain, in a decision dated 8th October 2013.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he has been in the UK  since  1997.   The
    Secretary of State has removed him on two separate occasions.   He  has
    returned within days of being removed.  However, he has  established  a
    private and family life with his wife, Mrs Vongai  Gondo  Chikono,  and
    his son, Darren Muneshe Giles Chikono, who is presently aged 15  years.
    Both of these family members are British citizens and  settled  in  the
    UK.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge held that the Appellant, notwithstanding his illegal entry on
    two occasions at least, "had been frank in  his  evidence  and  it  was
    accepted that he had been removed twice and returned, but he had waited
    a  long  time  to  make  any  application  ..."  (paragraph  12).   The
    Presenting Officer did not refute the evidence that the  Appellant  had
    been in the UK since 1997.  The Appellant's own case was  that  he  had
    been here for seventeen years.  The Home Office did not have records.

 5. The judge heard evidence from the Appellant's wife and found her to  be
    "a largely credible witness" who was aware of the  Appellant's  removal
    on two occasions (paragraph 14).  However, the judge had regard to  the
    fact that both the Appellant's wife and son were British  citizens  and
    settled in the UK.  She held that it was unlikely that the  Appellant's
    wife would go to Zimbabwe  with  the  Appellant  (paragraph  18).   The
    appeal was allowed on the basis of Article 8 considerations.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of  application  state  that  the  judge  had  committed  a
    material error of law in that, in considering Article 8  of  the  ECHR,
    she had failed to have regard to the case of Gulshan [2013]  UKUT  640.
    This case required a judge to justify by way  of  reasons  a  departure
    from the Immigration Rules.

 7. On 25th June 2014, permission to appeal was granted.





Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me on 19th September 2014, Mr Richards, appearing
    on behalf of the Respondent Secretary  of  State,  submitted  that  the
    judge had erred in not making any reference  to  Gulshan,  although  he
    would have to accept that at paragraph 16 she does  give  consideration
    to the essence of what  appears  in  Gulshan,  pointing  out  that  the
    Immigration Rules are a complete code.  However, even  if  one  accepts
    that she had had poor consideration to the factors in Gulshan, she  had
    proceeded then to engage  in  freewheeling  Article  8  proportionality
    exercise.  This was not open to her.  I should make  a  finding  of  an
    error of law and set aside the decision.

 9. For  her  part,  Mrs  Ahmad  submitted  that  the  judge  had  given  a
    comprehensive determination.  The Appellant's criminal convictions  had
    been taken into account.  They  were  only  driving  offences  and  the
    convictions had been spent.  She would to accept that Gulshan  was  not
    mentioned, but the outcome would have been the  same,  because  of  the
    impact of the Appellant's removal on his wife and son, Darren, who  was
    now at the impressionable age of 15  years.   In  Gulshan  itself,  the
    judge had referred (at paragraph 13) to the fact that there was a  vast
    amount of Article 8 case law now and there should be no further  reason
    to add to this case law, which meant that one should  not  pedantically
    refer to cases, just for the sake of doing so.

10. There was no further reply from Mr Richards.

No Error of Law

11. I am satisfied that the making of the decision that the judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law see (Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside this decision.  The judge  does
    in terms refer to Gulshan, but that is neither here nor there, when  it
    is recognised that at paragraph 16  of  the  determination,  the  judge
    begins her consideration of Article 8 by an explicit reference  to  the
    fact that the Rules are effectively a complete code.  She follows  that
    up with the statement that,

         "The only basis upon which I can go beyond the Rules and carry  out
         a balancing exercise to assess whether the impact on the  Appellant
         of his failure to meet the  requirements  creates  disproportionate
         interference to his private and family life is if I find that there
         are compelling circumstances which require  me  to  go  beyond  the
         Rules" (paragraph 16).

12. Nothing could be clearer than this.  The judge looked  for  "compelling
    circumstances".  This was after having found  that  the  Appellant  had
    been involved in the care of his son and that it was "in Darren's  best
    interest to have his father around", and that "He is at a crucial stage
    of his development ..." (paragraph 15).

13. In the consideration  of  "compelling  circumstances"  the  judge  then
    adverted to the fact that the removal of  the  Appellant  (who  has  an
    undisputed quality of being able to re-enter the  UK  at  will  despite
    repeated and determined efforts at removal by the UK  state)  would  be
    "depriving him [the Appellant] of his fundamental right  to  live  with
    his family" in a way that was disproportionate (paragraph 18).

14. This was despite  the  judge's  clear  finding  that,  "I  have  little
    sympathy with the Appellant".  However, regard had to be given  to  the
    fact that the Appellant's wife was legally settled and that she now had
    British citizenship.  Importantly, the judge held that, "It is unlikely
    that she will go to Zimbabwe".  In addition, the judge weighed  in  the
    balance the fact that "The removal of  the  Appellant  will  impact  of
    Darren in a manner which in the  long  run  will  not  serve  his  best
    interest" as a teenage boy (paragraph 18).

15. It was after these findings of fact that the  judge  then  applied  the
    Razgar principles on proportionality (paragraph 19), and found  herself
    coming on the side of the balance of considerations being in favour  of
    the Appellant.  This was a matter that the judge was entitled to decide
    as she did, given that she had followed through  with  care  the  basic
    principles as apply to Article 8  determinations.   Another  judge  may
    well have taken a different view.

16. However, it cannot said, in view of the clear findings in  relation  to
    the status of the Appellant's wife and son, and the need for the son to
    have his father around in the UK, that the decision is unreasonable.

Decision

17. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  judge's  decision.   The
    determination shall stand.

18. No anonymity order is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 26th September 2014


