
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43613/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 11th September 2014                          |On 18th September 2014     |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

                               Mr Lucky Ahmed
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Bellara, Counsel instructed by Edward Alam &
Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
                             EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT

 1. The Appellant appeals with permission  a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Monro) promulgated on 16th May 2014 in which the  judge
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the refusal of an  application
    for  leave  to  remain  brought  on  private  life  provisions  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 2. The judge records at paragraph 32 that  there  was  a  factual  dispute
    between the parties as to whether or not the Appellant had submitted an
    in-time application in 2010, i.e. considerably prior to the  making  of
    the application the subject  of  the  appeal  proceedings.   The  judge
    resolved that dispute against the Appellant and did  so  on  the  basis
    that the Appellant's assertion that he had made a valid application, in
    particular by attaching a cheque in respect of the fees, was  not  made
    out before him because there was "an absence of a paper  train"  as  he
    described it, to support that contention, in particular, the contention
    that he attached a  cheque  to  his  application.  As  a  result,  when
    assessing the Appellant's position in respect of his private  life  the
    judge treated him as being someone who had been  without  leave  since,
    and at paragraph 25 2000 is mentioned but it is clear that  that  is  a
    typographical error and  May 2010 is intended.  Accordingly  the  judge
    treats his application as one of regularisation rather than extension.

 3. The Grounds of Appeal take issue with the judge's finding on the  basis
    that contrary to the judge's assertion at paragraph 32 the cheque  that
    the Appellant relied upon was both produced at court and also  accepted
    by the Home Office to have been received by them.    That  argument  is
    not contested before me.  In the circumstances I am satisfied that  the
    judge's finding at paragraph 32 is not sustainable on the basis of  the
    evidence at the hearing. I have considered the issue of the materiality
    of that factual error.  Mr Bellara has submitted that in the event that
    a valid application was outstanding the Respondent's decision would  in
    any event be "not in accordance with the law".  That  is  a  submission
    that I find has little merit bearing in mind jurisprudence to the point
    that the fact of an outstanding application does not of itself  make  a
    subsequent immigration decision unlawful, one only  needs  to  look  at
    cases concerning legacy in order to see the approach  of  the  Tribunal
    with regard to the second decision. However I  am  satisfied  that  the
    failure to resolve the relevant disputes as to fact is material because
    it feeds directly into the issue of the status of the Appellant,  which
    is important as a precursor to the assessment of his Article 8  rights.
    Further in light of the inadequacy of the findings of fact I am not  in
    a position to remake the decision today. Both  representatives  are  of
    the view, and I agree with them, that in light  of  the  need  for  the
    substantial  fact  finding  exercise  to  be  conducted  again   it  is
    appropriate for the matter to be remitted. It will  be  for  the  judge
    hearing the evidence to decide whether or not a valid  application  had
    been made in 2010 and what if any impact that has in the  context  both
    of the Appellant's status, and also in terms of his Article 8 rights.

 4. I remit the case to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  resolution  of  the
    factual disputes  between  the  parties,  and  a  reassessment  of  the
    Appellant's position in respect  of  Article  8  based  such  a  proper
    consideration of the facts.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge

