
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43975/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision and Reasons  promulgated    |
|on 27 October 2015                   |On 6 November 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

              The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey and
                        Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan


                                   Between

                              KARAM KAUR KUNDI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
Appellant:    Sponsors
Respondent:   T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

INTRODUCTION

 1. This is an appeal with permission against the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal ("FtT") dated 12  May  2015.   The  original  appeal  was
    against the Secretary of State's refusal  to  grant  further  leave  to
    remain to the Appellant, Mrs Karam Kundi, who is the grandmother of the
    sponsors concerned, her grandchildren, each of whom has  attended  this
    appeal hearing today.

 2. There was no appearance  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  at  the  first
    hearing.  In [23] the judge recorded that the Appellant had  failed  to
    file any evidence with regard to her medical conditions.  This  can  be
    linked to the grounds of appeal.  The judge then referred to a one page
    letter from a medical practitioner dated 09 October 2014.  This  letter
    evidently detailed medication being taken and ongoing care.  I note the
    reference to the Warfarin clinic so, obviously, one of  the  conditions
    was the deep venous thrombosis.  The  judge  then  said  there  was  no
    evidence to show the Appellant is incapable of travel or that treatment
    is not available to her in Canada.

 3. As a result of the application  for  permission  to  appeal  the  Upper
    Tribunal is now aware, thanks to the meticulous  efforts  of  the  Home
    Office Presenting Officer, Mr Wilding, of the sequence of events which,
    in broad terms, spans the period 27 April 2015 - 02 June 2015. We  need
    not rehearse the details.

 4. There are two aspects to the appeal.  One is  that  evidence  that  was
    available, which the sponsors attempted to bring to  the  attention  of
    the Tribunal, was not considered.   The  second  is  that  the  hearing
    proceeded without an adjournment.  Now no one is at fault here, but  in
    questions of fair hearing fault is irrelevant.  Equally  irrelevant  is
    the criterion of reasonableness. This Tribunal has made that clear in a
    series of decisions, beginning with  the  case  of  MK  (duty  to  give
    reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC), the Upper Tribunal  conducts
    a detached, clinical review of the fairness of  the  hearing  at  first
    instance.

 5. In circumstances where medical  evidence  was  sent  approximately  two
    weeks before the hearing began and was sent to one of the  parties  but
    was not brought to the attention of  the  Tribunal  and  was  obviously
    material to the issues, the unavoidable conclusion is that the  hearing
    at first instance was unfair.

 6. We comment briefly on the question of adjournment.   It  is  frequently
    said that the question of  whether  an  adjournment  should  have  been
    granted entails a consideration of whether the first instance judge  or
    tribunal acted reasonably. That is a fatally flawed proposition in law.
     Fairness is the sole criterion: see the Upper Tribunal's  decision  in
    Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness)  [2014]  UKUT  00418  (IAC).   However,
    given that we have allowed the appeal on the first of the grounds  that
    we have identified it is unnecessary to  proceed  any  further  on  the
    question of the adjournment.

 7. It follows that we set aside the decision of the FtT.  We shall  remit,
    given the nature of the error of law which  has  been  identified.   It
    will be considered by a differently constituted FtT.

    [Ladies, we are acceding to the appeal. What that means is the case  is
    being remitted for  a  further,  new  hearing  in  the  FtT,  before  a
    different judge.  You will have to be very careful next time to  ensure
    that all the medical evidence is sent to  the  Tribunal,  copy  to  the
    Secretary of State of  course.   The  primary  recipient  must  be  the
    Tribunal].


                                                                       [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                      Dated: 29 October 2015
