
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/43258/2013
                                                               IA/43259/2013
                                                               IA/43260/2013
                                                               IA/43262/2013
                                                               IA/43263/2013
                                                               IA/43264/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House               |Determination Promulgated            |
|On : 5 January 2016                  |On : 3 February 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                            MR JAMES OSBORN NANJO
                          MRS ANTONINA MARIE NANJO
                                     H N
                                     J N
                                    J E N
                                    J J N
                       (ANonymity directioN not maDE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Olanwanle, Del & Co Solicitors
For the Respondents:   Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are a family unit.  The first appellant was born  on  21
    February 1973 and is a citizen of Ghana.  The second appellant  is  his
    wife.  She is a citizen of the United States of America (USA)  and  was
    born on 25 June 1979.  The  third  to  six  appellants  are  the  minor
    children of the first and second appellants who were all born in the UK
    and they too have citizenship of the USA.

 2. The respondent in decisions dated 1  October  refused  the  appellants'
    applications for leave to remain (which had been made  on  the  grounds
    that refusal would breach the UK's obligations under Article 8  of  the
    European Convention on Human  Rights)  and  indicated  that  directions
    would be given for the appellants' removal from the UK under Section 10
    of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

 3. Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Abebrese  allowed  the  appellants'
    appeals on human rights grounds in a decision promulgated  on  13  June
    2014.  That decision was set aside by the Upper Tribunal on 3  November
    2014.  The appeals were again considered by the First-tier Tribunal  on
    9 June 2015.  Judge of the First-tier Tribunal K W Brown dismissed  the
    appellants' appeals under the Immigration Rules  and  on  human  rights
    grounds.

 4. Judge Brown found that the  appellants  could  not  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules and that although the eldest child, [HN] had  resided
    in the UK in excess of 7 years at the  date  of  the  application,  the
    judge was satisfied that it would be reasonable to expect her to  leave
    the UK with her family in respect  of  paragraph  276ADE  (1)(iv).   In
    relation to Article 8 outside of the Immigration Rules, the judge noted
    that both [HN] and [JN] are now over the age of 7  and  in  considering
    section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  the
    judge was satisfied that it would not be  unreasonable  to  expect  the
    family to be removed together to the USA and for the  appellant  to  be
    removed to Ghana.

 5. The appellants applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    on  the  grounds  that:  the  judge  erred  in  his  consideration   of
    reasonableness as it was submitted it did not apply as the  application
    was  made  in  June  2012  and  the  transitional  provisions  of   the
    Immigration Rules meant that an earlier version  of  paragraph  276ADE,
    which did not contain a reasonableness test  in  respect  of  paragraph
    276ADE (1)(iv) applied; it was also argued that the  judge   failed  to
    properly apply Huang v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2007] UKHL 11 and ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2011] 2 WLR  148;  the  judge's  reasoning  in  respect  of
    section 117B of the Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  was  flawed;  that
    the balance struck between  the  public  interest  and  other  relevant
    circumstances was incorrect.  Permission was  granted  on  the  grounds
    that it was possible that the judge had applied the  wrong  version  of
    paragraph 276ADE.





Ground 1

 6. Mr Olawanle raised the  issue  of  what  version  of  paragraph  276ADE
    applied at the date of the application,  at  the  appeal  before  Judge
    Brown.  Judge Brown, at [49] did not accept that reasoning as he was of
    the view that Singh & Khalid [2015] EWCA Civ 74 was authority  for  the
    proposition that by 'reason  of  the  date  of  decision  in  this  the
    respondent  was  entitled  to  consider  the  appeal  under  the  newly
    published rules.  Singh & Khalid is authority for the proposition  that
    the Secretary of State is entitled to apply the new  immigration  rules
    (Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE-276DH  in  relation  to  private  and
    family life applications) other than in respect of decisions  taken  in
    the two month window between 9 July and 6 September 2012.

 7. However, Mr Whitwell accepted that the point being made by Mr  Olawanle
    was not whether the new immigration  rules  applied,  but  rather  what
    version applied.  Mr Olawanle, as directed, had provided a copy of  the
    relevant Statement of  Changes  in  Immigration  Rules.   Statement  of
    Changes in Immigration Rules HC 760, dated 22 November  2012  indicated
    that all changes (other than exceptions set  out)  take  effect  on  13
    December  2012;  the  Statement  of  Changes  includes  the   following
    implementation provisions:

    'The changes in paragraph 316 to 326 and 442 set out in this  Statement
    shall take effect on 1 January 2013.  In respect of these  changes,  if
    an applicant has made an application for leave before  1  January  2013
    and the application has not been decided before that date, it  will  be
    decided in accordance with the rules in force on 31 December 2012.

    The changes set out in paragraph 334 shall take effect from 28 February
    2013.  In respect of  these  changes,  if  an  applicant  has  made  an
    application for leave before 28 February 2013 and the  application  has
    not been decided before that date, it will  be  decided  in  accordance
    with the Rules in force on 27 February 2013.

    In respect of the other changes  set  out  in  this  Statement,  if  an
    applicant has made an application for entry clearance or  leave  before
    13 December 2012 and the application has not been decided  before  that
    date, it will be decided in accordance with the Rules in  force  on  12
    December 2012'

 8.  The  consolidated   immigration   rules   indicates   that   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv) reads as follows:

    '(iv)    is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the
         UK for at least 7 years (discounting any  period  of  imprisonment)
         [and it would not be reasonable to expect the  applicant  to  leave
         the UK]

The Note indicates that  'words  inserted  in  subparagraph(1)(iv)  from  13
December 2012 subject to savings  for  applications  made  before  that  (HC
760)'.

9.    I  therefore  accept,  and  Mr  Whitwell  conceded  he  was  in   some
difficulties arguing otherwise, that applications made  before  13  December
2012 and not decided were to be decided in accordance with  the  immigration
rules in force on 12 December 2012.

10.  The October 2012 immigration rules  were  provided.   These  show  that
paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) read as follows:

    '(iv)    is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the
         UK for at least 7 years (discounting any period of imprisonment)'.

11.  It was not disputed that the appellants' application was made  in  June
2012 and was refused on 1  October  2013.   I  accept  that  the  applicable
version  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  did  not  contain  a   reasonableness
requirement.  Mr Whitwell  conceded  therefore  that  [49]  of  the  judge's
decision, where he indicated that Singh & Khalid  applied,  appeared  to  be
incorrect.

12.   I am satisfied that given the  applicable  immigration  rules  at  the
time, the appeal of [HN] succeeds under paragraph 276ADE.

13.  However in respect of the remaining appellants  Mr  Olanwanle  conceded
that none of these appellants could succeed  under  the  immigration  rules.
In addition, although the judge had considered  Appendix  FM  EX.1  (and  Mr
Olanwanle accepted that the applicable  version  of  Appendix  FM  EX.1  did
properly contain a 'reasonableness' requirement) and was satisfied  that  it
was reasonable to expect the family to leave, as set out by  the  respondent
in the reasons for refusal letter  dated  1  October  2013,  the  appellants
failed the mandatory eligibility requirements of E-LTRPT.2.3  and  therefore
the appellants could not meet R-LTRPT.1.1(d).  Mr Olanwanle did not  dispute
this and therefore there is no route for  the  remaining  appellants  to  be
considered under Appendix FM.  This remains the  case  notwithstanding  that
[HN] succeeds under the immigration rules and would have been the case  when
the respondent made the 1 October 2013 decisions.  The judge therefore  made
no material error in deciding as he did at [57] that 'the  exception  within
the rules does not apply'.

14.  The judge nonetheless considered Section EX.1 in some  detail  and  was
satisfied that it would be reasonable to require [HN] as a qualifying  child
to leave the UK with her family.  The fact that the family cannot  meet  the
requirements of Appendix FM EX.1, as set  out  in  Judge  Brown's  findings,
whilst not necessary given that  the  family  cannot  meet  the  eligibility
requirements and therefore  no  EX.1  assessment  follows,  is  nevertheless
relevant to the wider proportionality assessment which was  carried  out  by
Judge Brown, outside of the immigration rules.

15.  I am satisfied that [HN] herself qualifying for leave to  remain  could
not have made any material difference to the  substance  of  those  findings
which considered, in their entirety.  Mr Olanwanle was unable  to  point  to
any specific advantage that [HN] might  have  from  so  qualifying,  or  any
additional consideration that was not taken into account by the judge.

16.  The judge, in considering whether it was reasonable  for  the  children
(and specifically [HN]) to leave the UK,  considered  their  best  interests
and took into account a number of factors including (at  [56])  the  age  of
the children, that they are supported by their parents, that their  marriage
is likely to survive, that it was a matter  of  parental  choice  that  they
receive their education in the UK, that  they  will  lose  friendships  they
have  formed  in  the  UK  and  will  find   the   change   of   environment
difficult/challenging for a period of time, that there was no evidence  that
they will have any specific mental or physical problems to which  the  judge
should give any weight, by reason of a change in environment, that  children
are often stronger for having to adapt and change including  through  moving
internationally, that there  are  no  language  difficulties  by  virtue  of
removal to the USA.

17.  The judge also, properly, considered that the children  were  born  and
brought up in the UK and  considered  relevant  case  law  including  Azimi-
Moayed and others (decisions  affecting  children;  onward  appeals)  [2013]
UKUT 197.  The  judge  also  considered  (at  51  and  52)  that  the  first
appellant would be removed to Ghana and considered that  he  would  have  to
apply to join the family in the USA (although he noted  that  there  was  no
reason  why  the  entire  family  could  not  live  in  Ghana).   The  judge
considered that although  the  second  appellant  stated  that  she  had  no
contacts in the USA, the US government has some  responsibility  to  protect
and assist its citizens, especially minor citizens.   The  judge  considered
that any difficulties  would  be  short  term  and  took  into  account  the
qualifications and resourcefulness of the adult appellants in  that  careful
assessment.

18.  Mr Olanwanle whilst accepting that the remaining appellants could  only
be considered under Article 8 outside of the immigration rules  was  of  the
view that the findings of the judge in this respect were  materially  flawed
as the judge had not been aware that [HN] succeeded  under  the  immigration
rules.

19.  However, it was accepted by Mr Olanwanle that ultimately  the  test  to
be applied was still one of whether it is reasonable for  [HN]  (and  indeed
[JN]) to leave the UK.  Although [HN] succeeds under the immigration  rules,
in considering the remainder  of  the  family  outside  of  the  immigration
rules, Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  Act
(as considered by Judge Brown from [54] onwards)  imports  a  reasonableness
test as follows:

    '117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases

    ...

    (6)  In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
    public interest does not require the person's removal where-

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
         with a qualifying child, and

         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
         UK'.

20.  Therefore the judge's reasoning in respect of [HN] (which  was  not  in
fact required  given  the  version  of  the  immigration  rules  applicable)
nevertheless applies equally to the judge's assessment of the  remainder  of
the  family  outside  of  the  immigration  rules  including  the  statutory
assessment required under Section 117B.  Any error therefore in  respect  of
[HN] qualifying for leave, is not material in the overall  consideration  of
the remainder of the family.

21.  The judge stated at [57] that for the  reasons  already  set  out  (and
summarised above) he considered  it  reasonable  to  expect  the  qualifying
children (and it was accepted that this is both [HN] and  [JN]  who  at  the
date of the appeal were both  over  the  age  of  7)  to  leave  the  United
Kingdom.  The judge at paragraph 43  considered  the  one  family  unit  and
ultimately found that it would not be unreasonable  for  the  family  to  be
removed.

22.  The judge was also required to give little weight, as recorded  in  his
findings at [55] to a private life established at a time when the person  is
in the UK unlawfully and at a time when the person's immigration  status  is
precarious.  The judge noted  that  the  first  appellant  'has  flouted  UK
immigration laws and continued to work despite being illegally in the UK.

23.  Although therefore the appeal of the third appellant must  succeed  and
there is an error of law to that extent, any error made by the judge in  his
assessment of the remaining family outside of the immigration  rules  cannot
be material.

Remaining Grounds

24.  Mr Olanwanle did not specifically pursue any of the  remaining  grounds
before me.  I have nevertheless considered all the grounds.  In relation  to
the claim that the judge misapplied the relevant  case  law  in  respect  of
Article  8,  there  is  no  merit  in  this  argument  which  is  simply   a
disagreement with the weight that  the  judge  has  placed  on  the  various
factors before him.

25.  The one issue raised by  Mr  Olanwanle  was  the  fact  that  [HN]  had
applied to be registered as a British Citizen and there was nothing  to  say
that she would not succeed.  However, the judge was clearly aware  of  this,
noting as he did at [28] that the application had been submitted  but  there
was no decision as at the date of the hearing.   The  judge  is  not  to  be
faulted  for  not  giving  more  weight  to  the  possibility   of   British
Citizenship, given that he was required to consider the circumstances as  at
the date of the appeal before him.

26.  In relation  to  the  judge's  consideration  of  paragraph  117B,  the
grounds  argued  that  the  reasonableness  test  was  incorrectly   applied
correctly, again this amounts to  a  disagreement  with  the  Judge  Brown's
findings which are clear and well-reasoned and took into account  (at  [56])
the jurisprudence of Azimi-Moayed including in relation to the  age  of  the
children, the eldest of whom was 10 at the date of the appeal.

27.  The judge was entitled to give the weight that he did to  the  evidence
before him and in concluding  that  the  weight  in  favour  of  the  public
interest outweighed the factors in the  appellants'  favour.   There  is  no
merit in the arguments made.

DECISION

28.  The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  in  respect  of
the third appellant involved an error of law and is  set  aside.   I  remake
that  decision  allowing  [HN]'s  appeal  under   paragraph   276ADE(1)(iv).
However, the making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  in  respect
of the remaining five appellants did not involve an error on a point of  law
and shall stand.


Signed:  Dated: 12 January 2016

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
