
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43816/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 24 September 2014                            |On 6 October 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON



                                   Between

                          miss Shamena Muthuthamby
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Professor Rees, Counsel instructed by Jein
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Specialist Appeals Team


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against the decision  by  the
    Secretary of State to refuse to issue her  with  a  residence  card  as
    confirmation of her right  to  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  an
    extended family member of an  EEA  national  exercising  treaty  rights
    here. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity order, and I do
    not consider that such an order is required for  these  proceedings  in
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, whose date  of  birth  is  15
    December 1983.  In her application form, she said that her EEA national
    sponsor was her "cousin brother",  a  French  national.   He  had  been
    employed by Compass Group UK & Ireland Ltd since March 2013.

 3. On 15 October 2013 the Secretary of State gave her reasons for refusing
    the application, which was made on 10 August 2013.  She had  failed  to
    show that she was dependent upon her sponsor prior to  her  arrival  in
    the United Kingdom.  On 11 August 2011 she had been  granted  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant.   Her  sponsor  had  been
    issued with a registration certificate on 19  May  2006.   This  showed
    that she did not enter the UK with her sponsor  or  soon  after.   That
    meant she was not dependent on her EEA sponsor  prior  to  her  arrival
    here.

The Hearing Before, the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The appellant's appeal came before Judge Keane sitting at Taylor  House
    in the First-tier Tribunal on 3  July  2014.   Mr  Solomon  of  Counsel
    appeared on behalf of  the  appellant,  and  Miss  Jones,  Home  Office
    Presenting  Officer,  appeared  on  behalf  of  the  respondent.    The
    appellant's case before Judge Keane was that the sponsor had encouraged
    her to embark upon a course of study in the United  Kingdom.   She  had
    entered the United Kingdom as a student, and the sponsor has  supported
    her from the date of her arrival.  He had also  paid  for  her  college
    education in Sri Lanka.  She had completed a Masters  in  international
    finance and accounting, and was currently undertaking an ACCA course.

 5. The judge received oral evidence from the appellant  and  the  sponsor,
    and both these witnesses were cross-examined by Miss Jones.

 6. In his closing submissions, Mr Solomon  confirmed  that  no  Article  8
    claim was being advanced in the alternative.  He  submitted  that  past
    dependency had been  established  because  the  sponsor  had  paid  the
    appellant's tuition fees in Sri Lanka.  He submitted that the  core  of
    her account, namely that she had been dependent upon the sponsor whilst
    she lived in Sri Lanka, was supported by a letter from her uncle  which
    can be found at page 9 of the appellant's bundle.

 7. At paragraph 9 of his subsequent determination, Judge Keane found  that
    the appellant had not been dependent on the sponsor when living in  Sri
    Lanka.  He went on to identify the reasons and features of the evidence
    which had influenced him towards reaching this finding.

 8. Firstly, the witnesses' contentions on  this  topic  were  "couched  in
    vague language" and did not  condescend  to  any  reasonable  level  of
    detail.  Secondly, an important discrepancy was discerned by him in the
    course of the appellant's  cross-examination.   The  judge  set  out  a
    verbatim note of the  evidence  in  the  Record  of  Proceedings  which
    contained the relevant exchange of questions  and  answers.  The  judge
    found that the appellant  was  plainly  stating  in  this  sequence  of
    questions and answers that her  uncle  had  supported  her  during  her
    initial period of study.  He found that  such  evidence  could  not  be
    reconciled with the vague assertion in paragraph 13 of the  appellant's
    witness statement that the sponsor took care of her  college  education
    in Sri Lanka.

 9. Thirdly, the documentary evidence did not  support  the  all  embracing
    claims of support which the witnesses were advancing.  They were saying
    that the sponsor had discharged all the cost  generated  in  connection
    with the appellant's college studies in Sri Lanka.  The judge  went  on
    to analyse the documentary evidence of  remittances  contained  in  the
    appellant's bundle. He was  prepared  to  find  that  the  sponsor  had
    dispatched two sums of money to the appellant, namely E250  on  9  July
    2009, and E275 on 6 September 2009.  The documentary evidence  did  not
    "encourage" a finding that other remittances had been made, nor did  it
    demonstrate their value.

10. The judge observed that it was for the appellant to  establish  he  had
    been dependent on the sponsor  while  she  lived  in  Sri  Lanka.   Two
    isolated payments over a period  of  many  years  did  not  suffice  to
    establish dependency.  The appellant, according to her  oral  evidence,
    was supported for a time by her uncle and was living with her  parents.
    The sponsor's financial assistance, of which he  could  only  find  two
    instances, was "a welcome relief" but it did not and could  not  amount
    to a dependency.  The appellant had not discharged the burden of proof.



The Application for Permission to Appeal

11. Mr Solomon settled an application for permission to appeal to the Upper
    Tribunal on the appellant's behalf.  Ground 1 was the judge had  failed
    to take adequate or any account of  the  supporting  documents  in  the
    appellant's bundle substantiating the appellant's dependency  upon  the
    sponsor prior to her arrival in the UK.  Ground 2 was that the decision
    was vitiated by procedural unfairness.  Neither the appellant  nor  the
    sponsor was asked to quantify the cost discharged by the sponsor.  This
    reason did not feature in the letter  of  refusal,  and  was  thus  not
    addressed in the witness  statements  or  during  examination-in-chief.
    The witnesses were not cross-examined  on  quantification.   The  judge
    also did not raise the issue at the hearing.  It  had  arisen  for  the
    first time in the determination.  This was not an obvious  matter,  and
    in fairness it should have been raised earlier.  The appellant and  her
    sponsor had thus been deprived of a reasonable opportunity  to  address
    the judge's concerns on this question.

12. Ground 4 was that the judge had failed to adequately direct himself  on
    the meaning of dependency.  This vitiated his ultimate finding,  as  he
    reduced the question to a bare  calculation  of  financial  dependency.
    The test was not whether a person was wholly or mainly  dependent,  but
    instead if she was reliant on her sponsor  for  material  support:  see
    Reyes  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  (EEA  Regs:
    dependency) [2013] UKUT 314.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

13. On 5 August 2013 First-tier Tribunal Judge P  J  G  White  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal.  He identified three arguable errors of
    law.  It was arguable that in reaching his conclusion the judge  failed
    to have proper regard  to  the  evidence  produced  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant, as adumbrated at ground 1.  It was arguable  the  judge  had
    unfairly held against the appellant and the sponsor vagueness in  their
    evidence  when  the  appellant  and  sponsor  had  not  been  given  an
    opportunity at the hearing to address the concerns of the judge in that
    regard.  Finally, it was arguable  that  the  judge  was  in  error  by
    regarding the issue  of  dependency  as  being  confined  to  financial
    dependency.

The Rule 24 Response

14. On 21 August 2014 Mr Glyn  Saunders  of  the  Specialist  Appeals  Team
    settled the Rule 24 response on behalf of the respondent  opposing  the
    appeal.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

15. At the hearing before me, Professor Rees developed the arguments raised
    in the grounds of appeal.  Mr Tufan adopted the same position  as  that
    taken by Mr Saunders in the Rule 24 response.

Discussion

16. The judge did not remind himself that in the context of EU law the test
    of dependency is not whether a person is wholly  or  mainly  dependent,
    but whether he or she is reliant on others for essential living  needs.
    In Reyes, the Tribunal held at paragraph 19 as follows:

         First, the test of dependency is a purely  factual  test.   Second,
         the court envisages the questions of dependency must not be reduced
         to a  bare  calculation  of  financial  dependency  but  should  be
         construed broadly to involve the holistic examination on  a  number
         of factors, including financial, physical and social conditions, so
         as to establish whether there is dependence that is  genuine.   The
         essential focus has  to  be  on  the  nature  of  the  relationship
         concerned and whether it is one characterised  by  a  situation  of
         dependence based on examination of all the  factual  circumstances,
         bearing in mind the underlying objective of maintaining  the  unity
         of the family.

17. I do not however consider that the absence of an express  reference  to
    either of the above (either "the essential living needs" test or a self-
    direction that questions of dependency must not be reduced to  a  basic
    calculation  of  financial  dependency)   renders   the   determination
    erroneous in law.

18. Firstly, there was no suggestion of emotional or  physical  dependency.
    Prior financial dependency was the sole issue. Secondly, there  was  no
    specific evidence as to the level of funding allegedly provided by  the
    sponsor to the appellant in Sri Lanka, and how that  level  of  funding
    compared to the total level of funding that the appellant  received  in
    Sri Lanka from all sources.

19. The appellant did not have to  show  that  she  was  wholly  or  mainly
    financially dependent on the sponsor in Sri Lanka.  But she  still  had
    to show that she was reliant on the sponsor for  her  essential  living
    needs in Sri Lanka.  The reasoning of the judge is just as  appropriate
    to a finding of non-dependency in an EU law  context  as  it  is  to  a
    finding of non-dependency under the immigration Rules.  This was not  a
    case where the evidence led to a potential distinction between a  level
    of financial dependency sufficient to  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Rules, as against a lower level of financial dependency  sufficient  to
    meet the requirements of the Regulations 2006.   The  judge's  findings
    squarely cover dependency as defined by EU law.

20. I do not consider that there  was  any  procedural  unfairness  in  the
    question of quantification not being flagged up in the  course  of  the
    hearing.  The appellant was represented by solicitors and Counsel,  and
    it was apparent from the refusal decision  that  prior  dependency  was
    disputed. The appellant's legal  representatives  also  knew  that  the
    burden of proof rested with the appellant to  prove  prior  dependency.
    Clearly, if the appellant was able to give specific figures as  to  the
    level of financial support allegedly provided by  the  sponsor  in  Sri
    Lanka, this  was  going  to  enhance  the  credibility  of  the  claim.
    Conversely, the failure to condescend to any detail was obviously going
    to be less persuasive.

21. Ground 1 makes  reference  to  witness  statements  from  other  family
    members corroborating the core claim of prior dependency.  But none  of
    them condescended to any detail, and it was thus open to the  judge  to
    attach much greater weight to the lack of primary documentary evidence,
    in the form of remittances, covering the period  when  the  sponsor  is
    supposed to have paid for the appellant's studies in Sri Lanka from  19
    May 2006 onwards.

22. In conclusion, I find that the error of law  challenge  amounts  to  no
    more than  an  expression  of  disagreement  with  findings  that  were
    reasonably open to the judge on the evidence and the case that was  put
    before him.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity order.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
