

                                            [pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/43072/2013


                                         THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Determination Promulgated|
|On September 17, 2014           |On September 18, 2014    |
|                                |                         |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                        mr serge eric stephane gohou

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Diavewa (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett (Home Office Presenting
      Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, born November 23, 1974 is a citizen of the Ivory  Coast.
    He entered the United Kingdom as a student in  December  2002  and  his
    leave was extended until June 9, 2005.  On  October  27,  2005  he  was
    granted a certificate of approval for marriage and on January 12,  2006
    he married Tania Gladys  Marcelle  Assi  Kacou  Epse  Gohou,  a  French
    national. On November 27, 2007 he was granted a  residence  card  as  a
    family member of an EEA national. On November  16,  2012  he  sought  a
    permanent residence card as confirmation of his right to reside in  the
    United Kingdom. The respondent refused his application on September 10,
    2013, as she believed the marriage was a marriage of convenience.

 2. On October 14, 2013 the appellant appealed under Section 82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and Regulation 26  of  the
    Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  arguing  the
    Regulations had been met because the appellant was living with his wife
    and his marriage was not a marriage of convenience.

 3. The matter was listed before Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Troup
    (hereinafter referred to  as  "the  FtTJ")  on  June  25,  2014.  In  a
    determination promulgated on July 8, 2014 he dismissed the appeal under
    2006 Regulations.

 4. The appellant appealed that decision on July 17,  2014.  Permission  to
    appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Osborne on  July
    30, 2014. He found the FtTJ may have erred in finding the marriage  was
    a marriage of convenience.

    PRELIMINARY ISSUES

 5. Mr Diavewa indicated he  wished  to  call  additional  evidence  but  I
    advised him that as this was primarily an error of law hearing  further
    evidence would not be admitted. If permission was given  then  I  would
    consider the additional evidence and whether to admit it.

 6. I also raised with Mr Diavewa the fact that the FtTJ had also found the
    appellant's wife had not been working for the five years pre-dating the
    date of the  application.  He  insisted  that  as  the  respondent  had
    originally granted a permanent residence permit then that part  of  the
    Regulations (Regulation 15) was met. I indicated to him  that  I  would
    need persuading on that issue because the FtTJ's findings had not  been
    appealed.

    ERROR OF LAW ARGUMENTS


 7. Mr Diavewa relied on his grounds of appeal and submitted that the  FtTJ
    had attached too much weight to the evidence of Miss  Francis  and  had
    failed to have regard to the evidence of the appellant  and  his  wife,
    the fact they had been married for sometime, they had a child and other
    supporting evidence contained in the  appellant's  bundle.  He  further
    argued the FtTJ should have had regard to  the  best  interest  of  the
    child  (Maxendre)  and  whilst  his  colleague  had  not   specifically
    addressed this issue in the First-tier Tribunal it was an obvious point
    for the FtTJ to deal with. Finally, he re-iterated that the  respondent
    had previously been  satisfied  with  the  appellant's  wife's  working
    record and therefore the requirement of Regulation 15 had been met.

 8. Ms Everett adopted the  Rule  24  letter  dated  August  7,  2014.  She
    submitted that even if the FtTJ had been wrong about the  marriage  the
    appeal had been refused on financial grounds and this finding  had  not
    been appealed. As regards the findings on the  marriage  she  submitted
    the decision was not perverse as alleged in the grounds of appeal.  The
    FtTJ  had  taken  a  great  deal  of  evidence  and   had   noted   the
    inconsistencies  in  Miss  Francis's  evidence  but  had  concluded  in
    paragraph [43] of his determination that her answers to the immigration
    officer were unprepared and at paragraph [45] her evidence was accepted
    as compelling. He accepted her evidence that she and the appellant  had
    had an affair and cohabited for two years and he preferred her evidence
    to that of the appellant.  She  noted  the  appellant's  wife  had  not
    attended and she submitted that the FtTJ had carefully  considered  all
    of the evidence and gave reasons for dismissing the  appeal.  The  FtTJ
    was entitled to attach weight to the appellant's wife's absence despite
    the explanation proffered. With regard  to  the  previous  grant  of  a
    permanent residence card the respondent  had  reviewed  this  grant  in
    light of the disclosure by Miss Francis and that was  why  the  address
    had been visited and the application reviewed and refused.  The  FtTJ's
    findings on finances remained and in so far as the child was  concerned
    she submitted the child lived in France with his grandparents and  this
    issue did not go to the merits of this appeal.

 9.  Mr  Diavewa  responded  to  these  submissions  and  referred  me   to
    correspondence in the bundle from Ealing Council regarding occupants at
    Miss Francis's address. He also reiterated the FtTJ had failed to  have
    regard to the best interests of the child.

    ERROR OF LAW ASSESSMENT


10.  The  FtTJ  dismissed  this  appeal  and  it  is  apparent   from   the
    determination that he dismissed the appeal on two grounds namely:

     a. The marriage was a sham marriage.
     b. He was not satisfied  the  appellant's  wife  had  been  exercising
        treaty rights for five years preceding the date of application.

11. Mr Diavewa insisted that the  financial  issue  was  not  a  matter  to
    concern me but that overlooked the fact the FtTJ made  findings.  Those
    findings remain unless challenged.  The  appellant  did  not  challenge
    those findings and they are binding today. Even though leave to  appeal
    had not been sought on that issue I invited submissions on why I should
    not be bound by them. The only response was  that  the  respondent  had
    earlier issued a permanent residence card on the  same  evidence.  This
    submission carries no weight in light of the  fact  concerns  had  been
    raised  about  the  relationship  and  therefore  the   whole   marital
    circumstances were up for assessment.

12. I am satisfied that regardless of any  finding  on  the  state  of  the
    marriage this appeal must fail  because  the  FtTJ's  findings  on  the
    appellant's wife's  working  history  remained  and  consequently  this
    appeal could not succeed on the current facts.

13. I turn now to the main thrust of the argument. This  appeal  was  fully
    contested and the appellant and Miss Francis both gave evidence on  two
    occasions. Unusually, both witnesses were recalled  to  address  issues
    that had arisen over Miss Francis's  evidence.  An  extremely  detailed
    record of the evidence is contained  in  the  determination.  The  FtTJ
    noted the absence of the appellant's wife and made findings on this.

14. The FtTJ was fully aware of the appellant's marriage  and  the  fact  a
    child had been born. In paragraph [41] he noted the burden of proof  in
    showing the marriage was a sham marriage lay  on  the  respondent.  The
    case law of IS (marriages of convenience) Serbia [2008] UKAIT 00031 and
    Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage of convenience)  Greece  [2012]  UKUT
    00038(IAC) deals with  the  approach  to  be  taken.  The  Tribunal  in
    Papajorgji stated-

            1. There is no burden at the outset  of  an  application  on  a
               claimant to demonstrate that a marriage to an  EEA  national
               is not one of convenience;
            2.  IS  (marriages  of  convenience)  Serbia  [2008]  UKAIT  31
               establishes only that there is an evidential burden  on  the
               claimant to address evidence justifying reasonable suspicion
               that the  marriage  is  entered  into  for  the  predominant
               purpose of securing residence rights;


            3. The guidance of the EU Commission is noted and appended. The
               Tribunal in  Papajorgji made it clear at paragraph  33  that
               they did not accept there  was  a  burden  as  such  on  the
               Appellant and  at  paragraph  39  stated  "In  summary,  our
               understanding is that, where  the  issue  is  raised  in  an
               appeal, the question for the judge will therefore be 'in the
               light  of  the  totality  of  the  information  before   me,
               including the assessment of the claimant's answers  and  any
               information  provided,  am  I  satisfied  that  it  is  more
               probable than not this is a marriage of convenience?"

15. The FtTJ was satisfied there was  reasonable  suspicion  and  was  then
    obliged to consider  the  evidence.  He  was  not  satisfied  with  the
    appellant's explanations and whilst he  noted  the  inconsistencies  in
    Miss Francis's evidence he nevertheless preferred her evidence  to  the
    other evidence.

16. The FtTJ stated at paragraph [45] that the inconsistent evidence  would
    "on the face of it  undermine  irretrievably  the  credibility  of  the
    witness" but he concluded in paragraph [47] that  the  marriage  was  a
    marriage of convenience.

17. This is a determination that contained reasons and whilst not examining
    each piece of evidence the FtTJ gave sufficient reasons  for  rejecting
    the appellant's claim. Ms Everett accepted a different judge  may  have
    reached a different finding but that does not mean  this  determination
    was flawed. The FtTJ considered the evidence and reached findings  open
    to him.

18. The best interest of the child was raised today but  this  was  not  an
    argument presented on the last occasion. In any event, the child  lives
    in France and there were no persuasive arguments to support  the  claim
    that this would have made a  difference.  If  the  child  was  here  or
    intending to live here and the appellant's wife had attended there  may
    have been a different outcome.

19. In summary I find:-

     a. The findings on the marriage were open to the FtTJ. He  gave  ample
        reasons for his conclusions.


     b. The child has been living in France and there is no  evidence  that
        the child ever intends to be brought here to live  and  this  issue
        was not raised before the FtTJ in any event.

     c. The FtTJ's findings on the appellant's wife's employment were  open
        to him and remain unchallenged.

     d. The additional new witness evidence does not assist me in assessing
        whether the FtTJ erred.

    Decision

20. There is no material error of  law  and  the  original  decision  shall
    stand.

21. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    request for anonymity has been and no order is made


22. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order has been made and no request for an order was submitted to me.


Signed:                           Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


TO THE RESPONDENT

I do not make a fee award for the same reasons as previously given.

Signed:                           Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
