
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43949/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |                    Decision & Reasons  |
|                                      |Promulgated                             |
|On 15 December 2015                   |                    On 12 January 2016  |
|                                      |                                        |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  MRS A A K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Aslam, Counsel for Bedfords Solicitors, Luton


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of State.  However,
    for convenience I shall now refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant was born on 28 December 1969 and is a citizen  of  Ghana.
    She appealed against the decision of the respondent  dated  21  October
    2014 refusing her application for the issue of a residence card in  her
    favour as the family member of an  EEA  national  who  is  a  qualified
    person under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.
     Her appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Colyer  on  3
    June 2015.  He allowed  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 in a  determination  promulgated  on  2
    July 2015.  An application for permission  to  appeal  was  lodged  and
    permission was granted by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Wellesley-
    Cole on 29 September 2015.  The permission states that it  is  arguable
    that the First-tier Judge  made  a  material  misdirection  of  law  in
    paragraph 32 by finding that the sponsor has satisfied him  as  to  the
    qualification under section 3(1) (c)  of  the  Customary  Marriage  and
    Divorce (Registration) Law of 1985 as there  is  no  evidence  on  what
    basis the decision was reached and no documentary evidence  to  support
    that the sponsor is of Ghanaian  descent  and  went  on  to  marry  the
    appellant by proxy.  The permission  refers  to  paragraph  38  of  the
    judge's decision, stating that it is arguable that the judge  erred  in
    concluding that the appellant has satisfied the burden of proving  that
    the marriage is valid in Germany and therefore should  be  accepted  as
    valid in the United Kingdom,  as  there  was  no  indication  that  any
    application had been made by the appellant  and  no  proof  before  the
    court that the marriage is accepted under German law.   The  permission
    then refers to the judge  finding  that  the  appellant  satisfies  the
    requirements  of  a  "durable  relationship"  as  parties  to  such   a
    relationship are considered to be extended family members and  as  such
    the Secretary of State should be given the opportunity under Regulation
    17(4) (EEA Regulations) to apply her discretion.  The permission states
    that the correct course of action is to allow the appeal to  a  limited
    extent that it is "otherwise not in accordance with the law" and  remit
    it back to the Secretary of State in order that she may be  allowed  to
    consider whether she is willing to exercise her discretion.   The  case
    of Ihemedu (Nigeria) [2011] UKUT 00340 (IAC)  is  referred  to  in  the
    permission.

 3. There is no Rule 24 response.

The Hearing

 4. The Presenting Officer submitted that  with  regard  to  the  customary
    marriage being recognised under German law, the  judge  made  an  error
    when he stated that all the conditions have been met. He submitted that
    there was a lack of evidence and a lack of reasoning in  the  decision.
    He submitted however, that even if I find this to be an error, there is
    merit in the third ground on which permission was granted, relating  to
    "durable relationship".  He submitted that the only  challenge  is  the
    result of the judge allowing the appeal outright.  He submitted that if
    I find that there is sufficient evidence for the proxy marriage  to  be
    recognised in German law there is no error, but if I agree  that  there
    was not sufficient evidence before the First-tier Judge then the appeal
    should not have been allowed outright.

 5. He referred me to the said case of Ihemedu submitting that the  correct
    approach relating to durable relationship would be to  remit  the  case
    back to the Home Office for  the  issue  of  a  residence  card  as  an
    extended family member.  He submitted that if I find that that  is  the
    way forward, I should allow the appeal to the limited extent that it is
    otherwise not in accordance with the law  and  remit  it  back  to  the
    Secretary of State in order that she may be allowed to consider whether
    she is willing to exercise her discretion in favour of the appellant.

 6. Counsel directed me to the appellant's bundle relating to the challenge
    that there was not  sufficient  evidence  before  the  judge  that  the
    sponsor is of Ghanaian descent, submitting that this is the bundle that
    was before the First-tier Judge.  The respondent states that there  was
    no documentary evidence before the judge to support this and so nothing
    to show that he was entitled to marry by proxy.  Counsel referred me to
    pages 146 to 151 of  the  appellant's  bundle,  in  particular  to  the
    sponsor's birth certificate showing that he was born in Ghana  and  his
    German passport and ID document, both of which refer to him being  born
    in Ghana.

 7. Counsel then referred me to the statutory declaration which is referred
    to in  the  grounds.  The  grounds  suggest  that  its  terms  are  not
    satisfactory. He referred me to pages 152 to  157  of  the  appellant's
    bundle which was before the First-tier Judge and which  contains  legal
    documents,  including  the  statutory  declaration,  which  is  in  the
    required form with the relevant details therein and is  signed  by  the
    fathers of the appellant and the sponsor.

 8. Counsel submitted that on that basis the judge was satisfied that there
    is a legal marriage and I was referred to the expert report, (mentioned
    in Ground 2 of the application), by Frau Isabelle Ghobril at  page  172
    of the appellant's bundle. I was referred  to  the  list  of  documents
    therein which includes  the  appellant's  and  the  sponsor's  identity
    documents, marriage documents,  divorce  documents  and  the  statutory
    declaration. Counsel submitted that based on these documents, which are
    those which were before the First-tier Judge, Frau Ghobril  finds  that
    the marriage is genuine.  She refers; at page 6 of her report,  to  the
    recognition of the marriage conducted in  Ghana,  according  to  German
    law, stating that it could only be opposed by a violation of the German
    Ordre Public.  She then states that there is no information hinting  at
    a  forced  marriage  and  so  there  is  no  violation  of  the  German
    Substantive Ordre Public.  Her decision is that the marriage  would  be
    recognised in Germany.

 9. Counsel submitted that the First-tier Judge was therefore  entitled  to
    find that the proxy marriage is lawful in accordance with German law.

10. Counsel then went on to  deal  with  the  "durable  relationship".   He
    referred to the case of Ihemedu and submitted that that case  makes  it
    clear that in relation to Regulation 17(4) the appeal only requires  to
    be remitted to the Secretary of State to enable  her  to  exercise  her
    discretion in favour of the appellant if the Secretary of State has not
    considered it under Regulation 85.  He submitted that in this case  the
    Secretary of State has considered it under Regulation 85 and has  found
    that the parties are not in a durable relationship. He  submitted  that
    discretion has been exercised so if I find that the parties  are  in  a
    durable relationship the appeal can be allowed outright.  He  submitted
    that the First-tier Judge considered all the evidence before him  along
    with the oral evidence.  He found the appellant and the sponsor  to  be
    credible and found them to be in a genuine and durable relationship.  I
    was referred to the Presenting Officer's submissions  relating  to  the
    durable relationship and submitted that it is  not  necessary  for  the
    appeal  to  be  remitted  back  to  the  Secretary  of  State,  as  the
    circumstances are different to those in Ihemedu.

11. I have noted the First-tier permission to appeal  and  the  grounds  of
    application and have carefully considered all the  documentation  which
    was before the First-tier Judge.

12. With regard to Ground 1, I am satisfied that the sponsor is of Ghanaian
    dissent based on the birth certificate, passport and ID document in the
    appellant's bundle.  I have also noted the statutory declaration  which
    is in the appellant's bundle and which was before the First-tier  Judge
    and I am satisfied that all the requirements are noted therein  and  it
    has been signed by the fathers of the sponsor and the appellant.

13. With regard to Ground 2 I  have  noted  the  expert  report  from  Frau
    Ghobril.  She has made a list of the documents before her which are the
    same as the documents which were before the  First-tier  Judge.   I  am
    satisfied that this marriage would be recognised in  Germany  and  that
    proxy marriages are valid in Germany if certain  conditions  have  been
    met and I find that these conditions, in this case, have been met.

14. With regard to "durable relationship" I have  noted  the  argument  put
    forward by Counsel for the appellant.  For the case of Ihemedu to apply
    and for the necessity of returning the case to the Secretary  of  State
    for her discretion to be exercised, this should only  happen  when  the
    Secretary of State has not already exercised  her  discretion.   It  is
    clear from  the  refusal  letter  that  the  respondent  exercised  her
    discretion when the claim was originally decided. She found there to be
    no durable relationship.  However based on what is before me  and  what
    was before the First-tier Judge I have noted the  judge's  decision  at
    paragraph 48 in which he states, "On the balance of probabilities I  am
    prepared to accept the oral evidence and statements  of  the  appellant
    and her sponsor with regard to the time they have lived together  as  a
    couple and that it is their intention to continue to live  together  as
    husband  and  wife".   The  judge  found  that  there  is  a   "durable
    relationship". He was entitled to this finding.

15. I find that the First-tier Judge was correct in his determination  when
    he allowed the appeal outright under the Immigration (European Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006. There was sufficient evidence before the First-
    tier judge for the proxy marriage to be recognised in German law.

                                  DECISION

16. The First-tier Tribunal's decision that  the  appeal  is  allowed  must
    stand.

17. Anonymity has been directed.


Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray
