
[pic]
IAC-HW-MP/DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43863/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th November 2015                |On 21st December 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                               mr andrew adams
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H. Gove of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms S. Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana, born  on  20th  August  1982.   He
    appealed against a decision of the Respondent dated 21st  October  2014
    to refuse the Appellant's application for a residence card as a  family
    member of his partner,  Ms  Edeva  Edene  Gama  Jesus  de  Carvalho,  a
    Portuguese national exercising treaty  rights  in  the  United  Kingdom
    ("the Sponsor").  His appeal was allowed at first instance by Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Scott, sitting at  Taylor  House  on  15th  May
    2015, who rejected the Appellant's claim to be a family member  of  the
    Sponsor under Regulation 7 of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)
    Regulations  2006  ("the  2006  Regulations")  but  accepted  that  the
    Appellant was an extended family member of the Sponsor as the Appellant
    and Sponsor were in a  durable  relationship.  The  Judge  allowed  the
    appeal outright under  Regulation  8  of  the  2006  Regulations.   The
    Respondent appeals with leave against that decision.  For  the  reasons
    which I have set out below (see paragraphs 14 to 16), I have  found  an
    error of law and have set aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision  and
    re-made the decision in this case. For the sake of convenience I  shall
    continue to refer to the parties as they were known at first  instance.



2.   The Judge summarised the Appellant's evidence at paragraphs 5 to 12  of
    his determination.  The Appellant had arrived in the United Kingdom  in
    2009 and had lived here ever since.  He met the Sponsor in July 2010 at
    a party and proposed to her on Christmas Day  2011.   They  decided  to
    have a Ghanaian customary marriage which took place by proxy in  Accra,
    Ghana on 12th February 2012.  The Appellant applied for  his  residence
    card in June 2012 but the application was refused on the basis that the
    Sponsor was already married.  That appears to have been a mistake,  the
    Sponsor had a twin sister who is married and the Sponsor  was  mistaken
    for her.  The Sponsor has never been married before but does  have  two
    children from a previous relationship now aged 7 and 4, both at school.
     The Appellant's evidence was that he had a good relationship with both
    children.

3.   The Appellant made a fresh application for a  residence  card  in  June
    2014 and he and the Sponsor were invited for interview in Liverpool  on
    8th October 2014 but did not attend.  Their explanation was that it was
    the younger child's first day at school.  The couple received a  second
    invitation to attend for interview on 23rd October 2014 but  could  not
    confirm their attendance because the Sponsor's twin sister was ill  and
    they were unable to arrange for the  children  to  be  picked  up  from
    school.  By the time they were able to make suitable  arrangements  and
    sought to confirm their attendance they were told that it was too  late
    the application was refused.  The  Sponsor  gave  similar  reasons  why
    neither she nor the Appellant had attended both interviews.  The  Judge
    noted that both the Appellant and Sponsor were asked  in  detail  about
    their  relationship,  "questions  which  might  have  been   asked   at
    interview".  The Judge also heard evidence from two other witnesses who
    confirmed they were family friends of  the  couple  and  confirmed  the
    relationship.

The Explanation for Refusal

4.   The Respondent refused the application citing  Regulation  20B  of  the
    2006 Regulations. On two occasions the Appellant and Sponsor had failed
    to attend for interview without good reason.  Regulation  20B  provides
    that where the Respondent has reasonable doubt as to whether  a  person
    has a right to reside under Regulation 14  (the  right  to  reside  for
    qualified persons and their family members)  or  wants  to  verify  the
    eligibility of a person to apply for a residence card, she  may  invite
    the applicant to attend an interview.  Sub-paragraph (4) of  Regulation
    20B states that if without good reason  either  the  applicant  or  the
    Sponsor fail to provide the additional information requested or  on  at
    least two occasions fail to attend an  interview  if  so  invited,  the
    Respondent may  draw  any  factual  inferences  about  the  Appellant's
    entitlement  to  a  right  to  reside  as  appear  appropriate  in  the
    circumstances.  Sub-paragraph (6) states that the Respondent  must  not
    decide that the Appellant does not have or ceases to have  a  right  to
    reside on the sole basis that  the  Appellant  failed  to  comply  with
    Regulation 20B and the Regulation may not be invoked systematically.

The Determination at First Instance

5.   At paragraph 20 the Judge stated that the Ghanaian proxy  marriage  was
    insufficient to make the Appellant a family member of his  Sponsor  for
    the purposes of the 2006 Regulations  if  only  because  there  was  no
    evidence that such marriages were valid under the law of  Portugal  see
    TA (Kareem explained) Ghana [2014] UKUT 00316.  Instead the Judge found
    the Appellant's position fell to be  assessed  as  an  extended  family
    member under the 2006 Regulations.  In  order  to  qualify  under  that
    category  the  Appellant  had  to  show  that  he  was  in  a   durable
    relationship with the  Sponsor.   The  Judge  noted  a  great  deal  of
    consistency between the evidence of the Appellant and the Sponsor.

6.   There were said to be three matters relied upon by  the  Respondent  as
    undermining the credibility of the Appellant and Sponsor's evidence set
    out at paragraph 22 of the  determination.   There  was  a  discrepancy
    between the Appellant saying that only the Sponsor's  twin  sister  and
    the children were present when he  proposed  marriage  to  the  Sponsor
    whereas the Sponsor had  said  that  the  Appellant's  friend  and  the
    Appellant's friend's wife were also there.  The Judge did not find this
    discrepancy to be at all  significant  as  the  marriage  proposal  had
    occurred three and a half years ago.  The  second  claimed  discrepancy
    was that the Appellant had said that on the Sunday  before  the  appeal
    hearing he had stayed at home while the Sponsor took  her  children  to
    church.  By contrast the Sponsor's evidence was that when she took  the
    children to church the Appellant went to pray in the  mosque.   As  the
    Appellant had said that he had gone to the mosque on the  previous  day
    with the children there was scope for faulty recollection.   The  third
    and potentially greater discrepancy was that  the  Appellant  had  said
    that apart from her twin sister who lived in  the  United  Kingdom  the
    Sponsor had two brothers in Portugal while the Sponsor  said  that  she
    has one other sister and one brother  who  are  both  in  Africa.   The
    Appellant had not met the Sponsor's other siblings but was able to name
    them and knew that they both lived abroad. He  may  have  assumed  that
    they were in Portugal and could then  have  been  confused  as  to  the
    gender of one  of  those  siblings.   As  the  evidence  was  otherwise
    consistent the Judge did  not  find  this  discrepancy  concerning  the
    Sponsor's siblings to be sufficient to undermine the credibility of the
    account given.

7.   Assessing other evidence the Judge noted that the council tax bill  for
    2015 had recorded the Sponsor as a single occupant but that explanation
    was plausible, because it reflected the position before  the  Appellant
    came to live with  the  Sponsor  after  their  Ghanaian  marriage.  The
    council's  record  had  not  been  altered  since  then.   Of   greater
    significance was a Post Office letter showing  that  in  May  2012  the
    Appellant and Sponsor were taking out a life insurance policy in  joint
    names.  The Judge came to the conclusion that the Appellant and Sponsor
    had given him credible evidence and were in a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship.   He  allowed  the  appeal  outright   under   the   2006
    Regulations.

The Onward Appeal

8.   The Respondent appealed against this decision arguing  that  the  Judge
    had made a material  misdirection  of  law.   The  Respondent  had  not
    exercised her discretion in this case under  Regulation  17(4)  of  the
    2006 Regulations  which  provides  that  the  Respondent  may  issue  a
    residence card to an extended  family  member  if  it  appears  to  the
    Respondent to be appropriate to issue the residence card.  That confers
    a discretion on  the  Respondent  which  must  be  exercised  before  a
    residence card can be granted.  The Judge had not specified under which
    part of the 2006  Regulations  he  was  allowing  the  appeal.  If  the
    Tribunal's intention was to  allow  the  appeal  as  an  extended/other
    family member under Regulation 8(2), the Tribunal should have  remitted
    the case back  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for  consideration  under
    Regulation 17(4) (see Ihemedu [2011] UKUT 00340).

9.   The headnote to Ihemedu states:
         "i)  Article 3(2) of Directive  2004/38/EC  ("Citizens  Directive")
         treats other family members ("OFMs") as a residual category and, in
         contrast to close family members ("CFMs")  within  the  meaning  of
         Article 2(2), does not limit it to particular  types  of  relatives
         (plus  spouses  or  civil  partners).  There  is  nothing  in   the
         Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 akin  to  the
         Immigration Appeals (Family Visitor) Regulations 2003 which in  our
         domestic  immigration  law  seeks  to  specify   exhaustively   the
         categories of family relationship that can qualify a  person.  Only
         relatives are covered, albeit with focus on  those  relatives  with
         whom the Union citizen has significant factual ties.
         ii)  An important  consideration in the context of an  OFM/extended
         family member case is that if a claimant had come to the UK without
         applying for a family permit from abroad (for  which  provision  is
         made  in  reg  12  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
         Regulations 2006), this will mean that the UK authorities have been
         prevented  from  conducting  the  extensive  examination   of   the
         individual's personal circumstances envisaged by reg 12(3)  and  in
         the  course  of  such  an  examination  check   the   documentation
         submitted. If an applicant chooses not to apply from abroad  for  a
         family permit under reg 12 of the 2006 Regulations, thereby denying
         the UK authorities an opportunity to  check  documentation  in  the
         country concerned, he cannot expect any relaxation in the burden of
         proof that applies to him when seeking to establish an EEA right.
         iii) Regulation 17(4) makes the issue of a  residence  card  to  an
         OFM/extended family  member  a  matter  of  discretion.  Where  the
         Secretary of State has not yet exercised that discretion  the  most
         an Immigration Judge is entitled to do is to allow  the  appeal  as
         being not in accordance with the law leaving the matter of  whether
         to exercise this discretion in the appellant's favour or not to the
         Secretary of State."

10.  The Respondent's onward appeal was considered on the papers  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Colyer on 20th August 2015 who  granted  permission
    to appeal writing:
         "It was arguable that the Judge made a material misdirection in law
         by allowing the Appellant's appeal outright.   The  Respondent  has
         not exercised her discretion in this case under Regulation 17(4) of
         the 2006 Regulations.  As the Appellant was found to be an extended
         family member  under  Regulation  8(5)  it  is  arguable  that  the
         Immigration  Judge  should  have  remitted   the   case   for   the
         Respondent's  consideration  under  Regulation  17(4)  instead   of
         allowing the appeal outright."

    There was no Rule 24 reply filed on behalf of the Appellant in response
    to the grant.

The Hearing Before Me

11.  Counsel for the Appellant argued that this was  not  a  case  to  which
    Ihemedu applied  because  the  decision  in  this  case  was  based  on
    Regulation 20B that the Appellant had not attended for interviews.  The
    only issue in the  case  was  what  the  Judge  had  in  fact  decided.
    Regulation 20B made clear  that  the  Respondent  must  not  refuse  an
    application solely on the basis that  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor  had
    failed to attend for interview. As there had to be  other  reasons  the
    Judge was entitled to examine them and reach the decision he  did.   He
    had not made a direction that the Respondent  must  issue  a  residence
    card.  The Respondent had misunderstood what the Judge had done and was
    now seeking to blame the Judge for doing the right thing.

12.  For the Respondent it was argued that the case was on  all  fours  with
    Ihemedu and the Judge  should  have  remitted  the  case  back  to  the
    Respondent.  In conclusion Counsel for the Appellant stated that if one
    looked at the second paragraph on page 2  of  the  refusal  letter  the
    Respondent had stated that the reasons for inviting the  Appellant  and
    EEA national Sponsor for interview combined with the failure to  attend
    the two interviews implied that the Appellant did not have a  right  to
    reside  under  the  2006  Regulations.   The  crucial  word  here   was
    "combined".  The Respondent was not  refusing  the  application  purely
    because of a failure to attend interviews, but rather  because  of  the
    reasons why the Respondent had wanted to interview  the  Appellant  and
    the Sponsor.  Since the Judge had not taken against the  Appellant  and
    Sponsor that they had failed to attend the interviews it meant that the
    Judge had dealt with the reasons  why  the  Respondent  had  wanted  to
    invite the Appellant and Sponsor for interview. It was  therefore  open
    to  the  Judge  to  conclude  that  the  parties  were  in  a   durable
    relationship.

Findings

13.  This appeal came to me initially on the issue of an error of law.   The
    Judge rejected the submission at paragraph 20 that the  Ghanaian  proxy
    marriage made the Appellant a family member of the Sponsor. I take  the
    Respondent's point that at paragraph 28 of the determination the  Judge
    did not make clear which Regulation he was referring  to.  However  the
    earlier paragraph, 20, contained a clear indication that the  Appellant
    could not satisfy Regulation 7 of the  2006  Regulations.  The  Judge's
    subsequent remark that the Appellant's position fell to be assessed  as
    an extended family member indicated that the case had to be  considered
    under Regulation 8.

14.  Paragraph 2 of the determination stated that because the Appellant  and
    Sponsor failed to attend for interview, the Respondent found  they  had
    not demonstrated that they were in a durable  relationship.   That  was
    not in fact what the Respondent had decided. What  the  Respondent  had
    decided was that the Appellant could not demonstrate he was entitled to
    reside under the 2006 Regulations.  In other words the  Respondent  had
    not considered the issue of whether  the  parties  were  in  a  durable
    relationship as opposed to being family members in a marriage, contrary
    to the impression given by paragraph 2 of the determination. It is  not
    clear whether the Judge was referred in argument during the hearing  to
    the case of Ihemedu but whether or not it was referred to  him  as  the
    case was relevant it had to be taken into account. As it was  not  that
    was a material error of law. Following Ihemedu it was not open  to  the
    Judge to allow the appeal outright under Regulation  8  but  rather  to
    declare the Respondent's decision to be not in accordance with the  law
    such that it remained outstanding before the Respondent to take a valid
    decision.  .

15.  It was argued  before  me  that  Ihemedu  did  not  apply  because  the
    Respondent had refused the  application  for  reasons  other  than  the
    failure to attend the interview and the  Judge  had  dealt  with  those
    reasons. I do not accept that argument.  The Judge  evidently  felt  he
    was  dealing  with  a  case  where  the  Respondent  had  refused   the
    application under Regulation 8. If that was right the Judge would  have
    been entitled to allow the appeal outright but a careful reading of the
    refusal letter shows that that was not  the  case.   What  the  refusal
    letter said (on page 1, paragraph 4) was:
         "After assessing the above documentation  [the  application  form],
         the Home Office noted that there  was  clear  cultural  differences
         between you and your EEA national spouse.  The evidence of marriage
         that you had provided within the application was marriage via proxy
         in Ghana.  Your Sponsor is not Ghanaian.  The combination of all of
         these factors gives the Home Office cause to suspect  that  you  do
         not have a right to reside in the  United  Kingdom.   Therefore  to
         verify  that  your  right  is  genuine  and  in   accordance   with
         Regulations 20B, 1(b) and 20B, 2(b) of  the  2006  Regulations  the
         Home Office invited you and your spouse to attend an  interview  on
         8th October 2014.  You have failed to attend this interview and did
         not give the Home Office good reason for this  failure.   The  Home
         Office then invited you to a second interview on 23rd October 2014.
          Again you failed to attend the interview and did not give the Home
         Office good reason for this failure."

16.  What the refusal letter makes clear  is  that  the  Appellant  has  not
    demonstrated that he has a right to reside under the  2006  Regulations
    because of the cultural differences between him and  his  EEA  national
    spouse and the failure  to  attend  the  two  interviews  (which  could
    otherwise have clarified matters). This led the Respondent  to  suspect
    the proxy marriage.  In other words the  Respondent  had  not  at  that
    stage even considered whether Regulation 7 applied  let  alone  whether
    the application could be considered under Regulation 8.  The  confusion
    in this case may have been caused by  the  Judge  reading  the  refusal
    letter as being a refusal of an application under Regulation 8 but that
    is not what the refusal  letter  in  fact  says.  Allowing  the  appeal
    outright  prevented  the  Respondent  from  conducting  the   extensive
    examination of the Appellant's personal circumstances envisaged by  the
    2006 Regulations.

17.  There are two further issues arising out of the refusal letter,  namely
    the failure to attend the two respective interviews offered. To explain
    the first failure the Appellant claimed that he and the Sponsor had had
    to attend the first day at school of the Sponsor's child. In support he
    produced a letter from Shaftesbury Primary  School  dated  3rd  October
    2014 which invited the Sponsor for an informal visit to the school.  An
    informal visit is not the same  as  a  child's  first  day  at  school.
    Indeed it would be somewhat unusual for a school term to begin as  late
    as October when it would otherwise be expected that a school term would
    begin in or about the first week of September.  The Judge merely  noted
    the  existence  of  the  letter  and  stated  that  it  was  "regarding
    attendance" at the school  on  the  same  day  as  the  intended  first
    interview. The Judge does not  in  terms  say  that  he  accepted  that
    explanation and some further enquiry of the Appellant and Sponsor could
    be made why they could not postpone an informal visit as opposed to the
    child's first day at school.

18.  The Respondent cancelled the  second  interview  because  she  did  not
    receive confirmation from the Appellant and Sponsor  within  a  certain
    time limit that they would  be  able  to  attend  the  second  proposed
    interview which was to be on 23rd October.  The Appellant's  solicitors
    appear to have sent an email to the Respondent  on  15th  October  2014
    after time for confirmation had expired indicating that  the  Appellant
    and Sponsor were still willing to attend on 23rd October at 12 noon and
    that they  had been unable to confirm attendance  within  the  required
    period because they were unable to arrange childcare.  That explanation
    given in the emails is again noted by the Judge but  it  sits  uneasily
    with the explanation recorded at paragraph 8 of the determination  that
    the Appellant and Sponsor were unable to attend for interview  on  23rd
    October 2014 "because the Sponsor's twin sister was ill and  they  were
    unable to arrange for the children to be picked up from school".  It is
    difficult to see how the Appellant  and  Sponsor  would  know  on  15th
    October 2014 that the Sponsor's twin sister was  going  to  be  ill  in
    eight days' time.

19.  The explanation given by the Appellant and Sponsor why they  failed  to
    attend for interview is not satisfactory but it is  a  matter  for  the
    Respondent to explore generally in the light of  my  finding  that  the
    decision on the application remains outstanding for the  Respondent  to
    take.  If the Judge had analysed the explanations  and  given  adequate
    reasons why those explanations could be accepted they would  not  still
    be an issue but for the reasons which I have set out above  they  still
    are.  It is not for me to make a  final  decision  on  the  Appellant's
    explanations  for  his  non-attendance  on  two  occasions.  Since  the
    Respondent's decision is not in accordance with  the  law  all  matters
    remain to be considered.

20.  It was an error for the Judge  to  have  allowed  the  appeal  outright
    rather than declaring the decision to be not in accordance with the law
    and thus remaining outstanding before the  Respondent.   The  ratio  in
    Ihemedu applies to this case.  The parties are not validly married  for
    the reasons given by the Judge (which are preserved) and therefore  the
    Appellant  cannot  come  under  Regulation  7.   It  will  be  for  the
    Respondent to consider whether this is an appropriate case to  exercise
    discretion  under  Regulation  17(4)  and  issue   a   residence   card
    thereafter.

21.  The Respondent has not thus far been able to  interview  the  Appellant
    and Sponsor.  Although the Judge makes reference to the Appellant being
    cross-examined in questions which the Appellant might have  been  asked
    at interview, he did not set out those questions  and  answers  in  the
    determination itself but instead referred to his notes of the  hearing.
    The Respondent may wish to see the Judge's notes of evidence (I do  not
    consider it necessary for the Judge to produce a typed transcript).  If
    so the Respondent can write in and ask for a copy  which  can  be  then
    sent to the Respondent and Appellant for  consideration  prior  to  any
    further interview the Respondent might wish to have with the Appellant.
     The Respondent  will  have  before  her  the  evidence  filed  by  the
    Appellant for the purposes of the hearing including the  statements  of
    the parties. Alternatively the Respondent may be satisfied on the basis
    of the determination that this  is  an  appropriate  case  to  issue  a
    residence card under Regulation 8 without further interview.   At  this
    stage it is a matter for the Respondent.

22.  I allow the Respondent's appeal against the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal which I set aside.  There was a material error of law  in  the
    Judge's decision to allow the appeal outright rather  than  to  declare
    the matter still outstanding before the Respondent for discretion to be
    exercised under Regulation 17(4) following the authority of Ihemedu .

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law.  I therefore set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
remake  the  decision  by  allowing  the  Appellant's  appeal  against   the
Respondent's decision to the extent that the Respondent's  decision  is  not
in accordance with the law and remains outstanding before the Respondent  to
take.

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 9th day of December 2015
.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The Judge made no fee  award  in  this  case  notwithstanding  that  he  had
allowed the appeal because the outcome of the appeal had  been  due  to  the
submission of evidence which was not before  the  Respondent.   In  my  view
that decision was entirely correct, and I uphold his decision to  refuse  to
make a fee award in this case.


Signed this 9th day of December 2015

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft

