
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43140/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 17th April 2015                            |On 27th April 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     mp
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No legal representation


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a decision of Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal P J Clarke promulgated on 26th June 2014.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and I will refer to her as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a female Jamaican citizen  who  on  18th  October  2012
    applied for a derivative residence card on the basis that  she  is  the
    primary carer of her British citizen child born 27th August  2003,  and
    her child would be unable to  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom  if  the
    Claimant were required to leave.

 4. The application was refused  on  3rd  October  2013.   In  summary  the
    Secretary of State referred to regulations 15A(4A), (7) and 18A of  The
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  (the   2006
    Regulations).  The Secretary of State noted that the child obtained her
    British nationality through her father, and was not satisfied that  the
    father would not be in  a  position  to  care  for  the  child  if  the
    Appellant was forced to leave the United Kingdom.  In addition  it  was
    not accepted that the Claimant had proved that she is the primary carer
    of the child.

 5. The appeal was heard by Judge Clarke (the judge) on 9th June 2014.  The
    judge heard evidence from the Claimant and allowed the appeal  pursuant
    to the 2006 Regulations, finding that  the  Claimant,  if  required  to
    leave the United Kingdom, would have to take  her  daughter  with  her.
    The judge made a finding that the Claimant is the primary carer of  the
    child.

 6. The appeal was also allowed with reference to Article  8  of  the  1950
    European Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention).

 7. This decision prompted the Secretary of State to apply  for  permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  In summary it was contended that  the
    judge had made a material misdirection of law.  There was no  challenge
    to the finding that the Claimant is the primary carer of the child, but
    it was contended that the judge  had  erred  in  his  consideration  of
    regulation 15A(4A)(c) and Article 8.

 8. The Secretary of State submitted that the child  could  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom with her father, and that an unwillingness  rather  than
    an inability to care for the child did not satisfy the requirements  of
    the 2006 Regulations.  It was submitted that there  had  been  entirely
    insufficient evidence before  the  judge,  to  show  that  the  British
    citizen child would be unable to remain in the United  Kingdom  if  the
    Claimant had to leave.  The Secretary of State placed reliance upon  MA
    and SM Iran [2013] UKUT 00380 (IAC).

 9. Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Zucker in the following terms;


         "The grounds submit  that  there  was  evidence  that  the  British
         citizen child could have remained in the United  Kingdom  with  her
         father and that the approach of  the  judge  was  to  misunderstand
         regulation 15A(4A)(c).  It is further argued that the human  rights
         decision was premised on a finding that the British  citizen  child
         would be compelled to leave the United Kingdom when  such  was  not
         the case; it was possible for the British  citizen  child  to  live
         with her father.
         All grounds may be argued."

10. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal to decide  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision should be set aside.



The Upper Tribunal Hearing

11. The Claimant attended the hearing.  She was not legally represented and
    confirmed that she was content to proceed without legal representation.



12. I explained to the Claimant the role of those present  in  the  hearing
    room, and ensured that she understood the purpose of the hearing was to
    decide whether the First-tier Tribunal had made a mistake of law.

13. Mr Smart had provided the Claimant with a copy of MA and  SM.   Neither
    Mr Smart nor the Claimant had seen a copy of the grant of permission to
    appeal, and therefore both were provided  with  copies.   The  Claimant
    confirmed that she had with her  a  copy  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    determination, and she had seen the grounds prepared by  the  Secretary
    of State, contending that the decision should be set aside because of a
    mistake of law.

14. I firstly heard submissions from Mr Smart who relied upon  the  grounds
    contained within the application for permission to appeal and  referred
    me specifically to paragraph 41(ii), (v), and paragraph 56, of  MA  and
    SM.  Mr Smart submitted that a British child would not be compelled  to
    leave simply because it would be inconvenient for the remaining  parent
    to look after the  child,  and  the  judge  had  failed  to  grasp  the
    principles in MA and SM.  I was referred to paragraph 14(viii)  of  the
    First-tier decision.  Mr Smart  submitted  that  it  was  unclear  what
    findings the judge was actually making in that paragraph.

15. As the judge's finding that the child would be compelled to leave  also
    related to his consideration of Article 8, I was asked to find that the
    Article 8 consideration was also  flawed  and  therefore  the  decision
    should be set aside as a whole.

16. I invited the Claimant to make representations  to  me,  reminding  her
    that my task was to decide whether the judge had made a mistake of law.
     The Claimant told me that she is the main carer of her child  and  has
    been since birth.  They have lived together in one room  for  the  last
    three and a half years.  It would not be in the best interests  of  her
    daughter to be separated from her mother.

17. Having listened to the representations I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

18. I observe that the judge erred in  paragraph  14(vii)  when  commenting
    that there is no definition of the term "primary carer".  There  is  in
    fact a definition contained within regulation 15A(7) which was set  out
    at page 4 of the First-tier Tribunal decision.  However the judge  went
    on to find, that the Claimant is the primary carer of her daughter, and
    that finding has not been challenged, and therefore the  error  is  not
    material.  In my view the evidence before the judge  clearly  indicated
    that the Appellant is the primary carer of her daughter,  as  not  only
    was  this  confirmed  in  the  Claimant's  evidence,  and  the  witness
    statement of the child's father,  but  there  were  further  statements
    confirming this which are referred to at paragraph 13(xiv)  and  (xvii)
    of the decision.

19. The judge also erred at paragraph 14(x) in finding that it was  unclear
    whether the Secretary of State had considered regulation 15A(4A).  This
    was clearly considered by the Secretary of State and is set out at  the
    top of page 2 of the reasons for refusal letter dated 3rd October 2013,
    and the refusal letter confirms  the  Secretary  of  State  decided  to
    refuse  to  issue  a  derivative  residence  card,  with  reference  to
    regulations 15A(4A), 15A(7) and 18A of the 2006 Regulations.   However,
    I do not find this to be a material error.

20. The Secretary of State in applying for permission to  appeal  correctly
    relies upon MA and SM, although this decision which was published prior
    to the reasons for refusal letter, was not referred to in that  letter,
    nor was the judge referred to this decision at the hearing, even though
    the Secretary  of  State  was  legally  represented.   One  would  have
    expected this decision to have been brought to  the  attention  of  the
    judge.

21. The judge had to decide if regulation 15(4A) was satisfied and this  is
    set out below;

         P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if -
         (a)  P is the primary carer of a  British  citizen  ("the  relevant
             British citizen");
         (b)  the  relevant  British  citizen  is  residing  in  the  United
             Kingdom; and
         (c)  the relevant British citizen would be unable to reside in  the
             UK or in another EEA state if P were required to leave.

22. The judge had to decide whether the Claimant is the primary carer of  a
    British citizen and he found that she was.  This was clearly a  finding
    open to him on the evidence and is not challenged.

23. It was not in dispute that the British citizen child is residing in the
    United Kingdom.

24. The judge then had to decide whether the British citizen child would be
    unable to reside in the UK if the Claimant had to leave.  Guidance  was
    given on this issue in MA and SM at paragraph 41, in which  conclusions
    reached by Hickinbottom J in Jamil Sanneh v (1) Secretary of State  for
    Work and Pensions and (2) the Commissioners for Her  Majesty's  Revenue
    and Customs [2013] EWHC 793 (Admin) were  adopted.   I  set  out  below
    paragraph 41(ii) in part, together with 41(iii) and (iv);


         (ii) The rights of an EU child will not be infringed if he  is  not
             compelled to leave.  Therefore, even where a non-EU  ascendant
             relative is compelled to leave EU territory,  the  Article  20
             rights of an EU child  will  not  be  infringed  if  there  is
             another ascendant relative who has the right of  residence  in
             the EU, and who can and will in practice care for the child.
         (iii)    It is for the national courts to determine, as a  question
             of fact on the evidence before it, whether an EU citizen would
             be compelled to leave the EU to follow a non-EU national  upon
             whom he is dependent.
          (iv)    Nothing less than such compulsion will engage Articles  20
             and 21 of the TFEU.  In particular, EU law will not be engaged
             when the EU citizen is not compelled to leave the EU, even  if
             the  quality  or  standard  of  life  of  the  EU  citizen  is
             diminished as a result of the non-EU national upon whom he  is
             dependent is (for example) removed or prevented from  working;
             although (a) diminution in the quality of life might engage EU
             law if (and only if) it is sufficient in  practice  to  compel
             the relevant ascendant relative, and hence  the  EU  dependent
             citizen,  to  leave,  and  (b)  such  actions  as  removal  or
             prevention of work may result in  an  interference  with  some
             other right, such as the right  to  respect  for  family  life
             under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

25. It may be argued that the  finding  made  by  the  judge  in  paragraph
    14(viii) of his decision could have been more clearly explained, but  I
    do not find that his finding that  the  child  would  be  compelled  to
    leave, amounts to a material error of law.

26. This is because the evidence before the judge from the child's  father,
    in the form of a witness statement dated 12th October 2012, was that it
    would be impossible for him, because of  his  wife,  to  care  for  his
    daughter.  The evidence of the father was that he had never  cared  for
    his daughter on a  full-time  basis  since  her  birth,  and  this  was
    confirmed  by  the  Claimant's  evidence,  who  described  him   having
    occasional contact sometimes once or twice a year, and his daughter had
    never stayed overnight with him.

27. The judge had to decide, in  accordance  with  the  final  sentence  of
    paragraph 41(ii) of MA and SM whether there was an  ascendant  relative
    who had the right of residence in the EU, and  "who  can  and  will  in
    practice care for the child".  There was no dispute  that  the  child's
    father is a British citizen and therefore has  the  required  right  of
    residence, but in my view it was open to the judge to conclude that  he
    would not in practice care for the child.  MA and SM made it clear that
    whether a child would be compelled to leave the EU to follow  a  non-EU
    national is to be decided as a question of fact on the evidence  before
    the Tribunal or court.

28. I therefore conclude that the judge did not err in finding that if  the
    Claimant had to leave the United Kingdom, then her  daughter  would  be
    unable to reside in the United Kingdom, and the judge was  entitled  to
    allow the appeal pursuant to regulation 15A(4A) of the 2006 Regulations
    and did not materially err in law in so doing.

29. The nature of the challenge made by  the  Secretary  of  State  to  the
    conclusions reached by the First-tier Tribunal  on  Article  8  is  not
    entirely clear from the grounds contained within  the  application  for
    permission to appeal.  The judge granting  permission  interpreted  the
    challenge to be based upon the error made by the judge in finding  that
    the child would be  compelled  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  if  the
    Claimant had to leave.   As  I  have  found  that  the  judge  did  not
    materially err in law on that issue, I conclude that he did not err  in
    his consideration of Article 8.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law such that  the  decision  must  be  set
aside.

I do not set aside the decision.  The appeal of the Secretary  of  State  is
dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity  direction  and  I  continue  that
order pursuant to rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008 for the reasons given by the First-tier Tribunal.






Signed                              Date 21st April 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and  therefore  so  does  the
decision not to make a fee award.






Signed                              Date 21st April 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

