
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/43096/2014
                                                               IA/43092/2014
                                                               IA/43082/2014
                                                               IA/43086/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 January 2016                    |On 28 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN


                                   Between

                       mr DHARMENDRA JASHVANTLAL patel
                        mrs VAISHALI DHARMENDRA PATEL
                        miss AASHNA DHARMENDRA PATEL
                                     V P
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr J M Rene, Counsel, instructed by Messrs Eagles
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Appellants, a husband and wife and  their  two
    children who are all Indian nationals, although VP was born in  the  UK
    on 16 June 2012 and as Mr Rene rightly made clear at the outset of  the
    hearing, the focus of this appeal centres on this  minor  child,  whose
    father was born on 16 March 1974, his mother on 30  May  1976  and  his
    sister Aashna on 12 March 1997.

2.   They appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Haria
    who following a hearing at Hatton Cross on  27  April  2015  and  in  a
    decision subsequently promulgated on 7 July 2015, dismissed the appeals
    of the Appellants against the  decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  28
    October 2014, to refuse to grant to them leave to remain in the  United
    Kingdom and to remove them by way of directions under Section 10 of the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

3.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge helpfully pointed out at paragraph  6  of
    his determination, that the Reasons for Refusal Letter  of  28  October
    2014, explained that the application for further leave  to  remain  was
    reconsidered under Article 8 of the ECHR further  to  an  agreement  to
    reconsider the Appellants' application, taking into account Section  55
    of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009   and   the
    Immigration Rules put in place on 9 July 2012 under Appendix FM.

4.   The brief immigration history of the  Appellants  has  been  succinctly
    set out by the First-tier Tribunal Judge in his  determination,  namely
    that on 1 February 2007 Mr Patel entered the UK with  leave  to  remain
    until 18 July 2007 and had remained in the UK unlawfully ever since.

5.   On 10 November 2008, Mrs Patel entered the United Kingdom on a  visitor
    visa for business valid until 4 May 2009 and her  daughter  Aashna  was
    granted entry clearance  in  line  with  her  mother.   They  too  have
    remained in the UK unlawfully ever since.

6.   On 16 June 2012, VP was born in the UK.

7.   On 10 September 2012,  the  Appellants  applied  for  leave  to  remain
    outside of the Immigration Rules and their application was  refused  on
    14 October 2013, because Mr  Patel's  partner  and  children  were  not
    British citizens or settled in the  UK  and  that  it  was   considered
    reasonable for them to return to India as a family unit.

 8. Subsequently an application for judicial review was made, as  a  result
    of which,  the  Respondent  by  way  of  a  Consent  Order,  agreed  to
    reconsider the Appellants' application. Following that reconsideration,
    the Respondent issued the Reasons for  Refusal  Letter  of  28  October
    2014.

 9. VP is 3 years old and, as set out in the  grounds,  is  physically  and
    mentally  handicapped.   Indeed  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge   at
    paragraph 42 of his determination accepted that VP had  cerebral  palsy
    affecting his left  side  and  also  left  sided  hemiplegia  that  was
    confirmed by the medical evidence produced.  VP had been having  speech
    and language therapy as well as physiotherapy.  The Judge continued  at
    paragraph 42:

         "He is only 3 years old ... and given his young age and  dependency
         on his parents he would not have acquired a family or private  life
         in the UK independent of his parents and it is clear that his  best
         interest lies  in  conserving  the  exceedingly  powerful  and  not
         insignificant caring and nurturing relationship between himself and
         his parents.  So if both his parents are to be removed then  it  is
         in his best interests to be removed with them.  Since VP  is  still
         quite young it is reasonable to expect that he will easily adapt to
         life in India with the support of his parents".

10.  The Judge continued over paragraphs 43 and 44 as follows:

         "43. I note the letter  from  Dr  Dinesh  N  Thakkar  a  Consultant
             Orthopaedic Surgeon from Long Life  Hospital  Ahmedabad  which
             states the treatment for VP's condition can take a  long  time
             and is costly.  I also note that the Respondent  submits  that
             the Indian Institute of Cerebral Palsy (IICP) which  is  based
             in Kolkata but works on a national level in partnership with a
             closer network of NGOs in many districts in  West  Bengal  and
             eleven other States of India, offers a specialist resource for
             cerebral palsy including school services.  It  is  clear  that
             treatment for his condition is available in India.

         44.  Considering all the evidence I do not accept that there  would
             be very significant obstacles to VP's integration into India".



11.  The Judge noted the Appellants' Counsel submission, that in  the  event
    that the Appellants did not satisfy the  relevant  parts  of  paragraph
    276ADE, that the remaining issue in the case was the  consideration  of
    their Article 8 rights outside the Immigration Rules and in the case of
    VP, there were issues as to his health and considerations under Section
    55.

12.  The Judge found that since the Appellants for the reasons given,  could
    not meet the Immigration Rules, it was incumbent upon him  to  consider
    the application outside of the Rules with reference to Article 8 of the
    ECHR.

13.  At paragraph 49 of his determination, the  Judge  recognised  that  the
    Respondent and the Tribunal were subject to a duty under Section 55  to
    assess the best interests of children who were in the  United  Kingdom.
    He referred to the case law guidance given in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC
    4 and in Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74.  The Judge noted that  in  the  latter
    case, the Supreme Court confirmed that the best interests  of  a  child
    formed an integral part of the proportionality assessment under Article
    8 and that those  best  interests  must  be  a  primary  consideration,
    although they would not always be the only  primary  consideration  and
    did not themselves have the status of a  paramount  consideration.   He
    noted that the best interests of a child might  be  outweighed  by  the
    cumulative effect of other considerations.  The Judge observed that  "a
    child must not be blamed for matters which he or she is not responsible
    such as the conduct of a parent".

14.  The Judge continued by giving a recent example of the correct  approach
    in EV (Philippines) and Others [2014] EWCA Civ  874,   noting  that  in
    that case it was held, that the Tribunal had been entitled to find that
    the need to maintain immigration control outweighed the children's best
    interests, notwithstanding a finding of fact that those best  interests
    lay in continuing their education in the United Kingdom in the care  of
    their parents whom the Secretary of State proposed to remove  with  the
    whole family as a unit. In that regard the  Judge  noted  that  in  the
    present case, the Appellants lived together as a family unit.   It  was
    accepted by the  Respondent  that  Mr  and  Mrs  Patel  had  a  genuine
    marriage.

15.  The Judge proceeded  to  undertake  a  comprehensive  consideration  of
    relevant case law that he set against the  backdrop  of  the  facts  as
    found and he concluded inter alia, for example at paragraph 54, that on
    the facts of the case it seemed to him that:

         "... this is a case where over the  seven  or  so  years  that  the
         Appellants (except for VP who is in  my  view  too  young  to  have
         established a private life of his own) have been  in  the  UK  they
         must have at the very least established a private  life  and  as  a
         result Article 8 is engaged".

16.  The Judge was entirely satisfied  that  to  remove  the  Appellants  to
    India would amount to an interference with their right to  respect  for
    at least their private life and possibly even  their  family  life  and
    that such interference would be of such gravity as to engage Article 8.



17.  The Judge referred to the oral evidence given before him by Mr and  Mrs
    Patel and their daughter Aashna finding  all  of  them  to  be  "honest
    truthful and credible" and that they did not seek "to  embellish  their
    case and responded to questions in an open and sincere manner".

18.   He  noted  the  evidence  that  Mr  and  Mrs  Patel  had  no  academic
    qualifications and had been working in various jobs while in the UK and
    that they claimed that their employment prospects in  India  were  poor
    and that they  would  be  able  to  get  jobs  in  the  UK  once  their
    immigration status was resolved.

19.  The Judge continued at paragraph 58 of his determination as follows:

         "In relation to their children, if they  were  to  be  returned  to
         India, there is no guarantee that they would be able to get VP into
         a suitable school and Aashna into university.  They would  have  to
         have a job so that they could pay for their education.  They do not
         own a property in India so they would have  to  find  somewhere  to
         live on return to India.  Mrs  Patel's  parents  are  not  able  to
         assist them financially but they may be able  to  accommodate  them
         initially".

20.  Within the Judge's  consideration  of  relevant  case  law,  he  placed
    particular emphasis on the decision of the Upper Tribunal in  MK  (Best
    interests of child) [2011] UKUT 00475 (IAC).

21.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge referred to the comments  of  Jackson  LJ
    in  EV  Philippines,  at  paragraph  60,  that  he  considered  to   be
    particularly relevant to the present case  as  the  circumstances  were
    very similar, noting as follows:

         "In our case none of the family is a British citizen.  None has the
         right to remain in this country.  If the  mother  is  removed,  the
         father has no independent right to  remain.   If  the  parents  are
         removed then it is entirely reasonable to expect the children to go
         with them ... it is obviously in their  best  interests  to  remain
         with their parents.  Although it is, of course a question  of  fact
         for the Tribunal, I cannot  see  that  the  desirability  of  being
         educated at public expense in the UK can outweigh  the  benefit  to
         the children of remaining with their parents.  Just  as  we  cannot
         provide medical treatment for the world, so we cannot  educate  the
         world".

22.  The Judge noted at paragraph 35 of EV Philippines further guidance  had
    been offered regarding consideration of the best interests of children.



23.  At paragraph 66 and 67 of his determination the Judge had this to  say:



         "66. Applying the principles  and  bearing  in  mind  the  guidance
             offered in the above cases, in my view in this case  the  best
             interest of VP certainly lies in remaining with  his  parents.
             In relation to Aashna she is now 18 years old and she could if
             she wishes remain in the UK to pursue her studies  subject  to
             obtaining a LTR to do so in her own right".

24.  I have already cited above what the Judge had to say in relation to  VP
    at paragraph 42 of his determination and in terms repeated at paragraph
    67.

25.  The Judge continued by observing that the Appellants were  not  British
    citizens, they were overstayers  and  they  had  no  rights  to  future
    education or healthcare in this country.

26.  The Judge in continuing his assessment of the Appellants' human  rights
    appeal under Article 8, returned specifically to the question  of  VP's
    medical condition at paragraph 76 as follows:

         "76. I  note  VP's  medical  condition.   There  was  no  objective
             evidence before me that any treatment required  would  not  be
             available in India. In  fact  the  letter  from  Dr  dinesh  N
             Thakkar, a  Consultant  Orthopaedic  Surgeon  from  Long  Life
             Hospital, Ahmedabad states that treatment for  VP's  condition
             that can take a long time and is costly.  The  respondent  has
             put forward evidence that the  Indian  Institute  of  Cerebral
             Palsy (IICP) which is based  in  Kolkata,  works  or  national
             level in partnership with a close network  of  NGO's  in  many
             districts in West Bengal and 11 other states of India offer  a
             specialist resource for cerebral palsy included in the  school
             services. It is  clear  from  this  that  treatment  for  VP's
             condition is available in India. I  appreciate  the  treatment
             may not be provided free by the state in India, but  to  allow
             VP and his family to remain in the UK would be an undue burden
             on the UK taxpayer. For the reasons given, I do  not  consider
             that   VP's   medical   condition   amounts   to   exceptional
             circumstances and I find that his removal to India in the care
             of his parents would not amount to a serious detriment to  his
             well-being."

27.  In considering proportionality the Judge took into account the  factors
    set out in Sections 117A and 117B of the 2002 Act that required him  to
    take into account the considerations listed  in  Section  117B  in  all
    cases.  He considered "the public interest" question namely whether  an
    interference with a person's right to respect for  private  and  family
    life was justified under Article  8(2).   In  that  regard,  the  Judge
    continued by reciting further case  law  guidance  that  included  Dube
    (ss.117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 00090 (IAC) that recognised that Judges were
    duty bound to have regard to the specified considerations not least  in
    relation to the public interest.  He noted that 117B(4)  and  (5)  were
    clear that little weight should be given to a  private  life  that  was
    established by a person at a time when the person  was  in  the  United
    Kingdom unlawfully and that established by a  person  at  a  time  when
    his/her immigration status was precarious.

28.  The Judge concluded over paragraphs 82 and 83 of his  determination  as
    follows:

         "82. For the reasons given above and having regard to  the  age  of
             the children, the nature and extent of their integration  into
             UK society, the length of time they have been in the UK  being
             seven years (in the case of Aashna during her  most  formative
             years of her life) and the close family  unit  in  which  they
             live, the fact that it is intended they will be removed  as  a
             family unit, that for the reasons stated  above  the  need  to
             maintain effective immigration control outweighs their  rights
             to family and private life.  Mr and Mrs  Patel  do  not  speak
             English, they have not shown they have integrated into society
             in the UK.  They have both been working on odd jobs but  there
             is no evidence before me  that  they  have  paid  any  tax  or
             National Insurance.  There will obviously be  some  burden  on
             the taxpayer in that children will be entitled  to  education,
             if Aashna decided to go to university depending on Mr and  Mrs
             Patel's earnings it is  highly  likely  that  Aashna  will  be
             entitled to the grant funding for both her  tuition  fees  and
             living expenses and VP  would  be  entitled  to  State  funded
             education.  The family will be entitled to access the National
             Health Service.  This will be a burden on the taxpayer.

         83.  On balance for the reasons stated  above  I  find  the  public
             interest considerations are not in the Appellants' favour  and
             the removal decisions are proportionate".

29.  The  Judge  thus  proceeded  to  dismiss  the  appeal  under  both  the
    Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

30.  In granting permission to appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  P  J  M
    Hollingworth  noted  in  summary,  that  at   paragraph   44   of   his
    determination, the  Judge  had  stated  that  in  considering  all  the
    evidence it was not accepted  that  there  would  be  very  significant
    obstacles  to  VP's  integration  into   India.    Judge   Hollingworth
    considered it  arguable  that  the  Judge  had  failed  to  assess  the
    consequences of VP's integration into India "if in fact he is unable to
    receive treatment because of costs."

31.  FtJ Hollingworth concluded:

         "An arguable error of law has arisen in relation to the presence or
         adequacy of any findings as to the relationship between the  length
         and cost of treatment  of  VP  and  the  effect  upon  VP  of  such
         treatment or the absence of such treatment and the implications for
         his integration and of the significance of such a  finding  in  the
         context of the application of Section 55 and in the proportionality
         exercise".

32.  Thus this appeal came before me on 7 January 2016, when my  first  task
    was to decide whether the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge disclosed an error or errors on a point of law such as  may  have
    materially affected the outcome of the appeal.

33.  At the outset of the hearing, I drew  to  the  parties'  attention  the
    guidance of the Upper Tribunal in Akhalu (health claim: ECHR Article 8)
    [2013] UKUT 400 (IAC) and GS (India) and Others v SSHD [2015] EWCA  Civ
    40.

34.  The head note in Akhalu reads as follows:

         "(1) MM (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
             [2012] EWCA Civ 279 does not  establish  that  a  claimant  is
             disqualified from accessing the protection of Article 8  where
             an aspect of her claim is a difficulty or inability to  access
             healthcare in her country of nationality unless  possibly  her
             private or family life has a bearing upon her prognosis.   The
             correct approach is not to leave out of account  what  is,  by
             any view a material consideration of central importance to the
             individual concerned but to recognise that the  countervailing
             public interest in removal will outweigh the consequences  for
             the  health  of  the  claimant  because  of  a  disparity   of
             healthcare facilities in all but a very few rare cases.

         (2)  The consequences of removal for the health of a  claimant  who
             would not be able to access  equivalent  healthcare  in  their
             country of nationality as was available in  this  country  are
             plainly relevant to the  question  of  proportionality.   But,
             when weighed against the public interest in ensuring that  the
             limited resources of this country's health service are used to
             the best effect for the benefit of those  for  whom  they  are
             intended, those consequences  do  not  weigh  heavily  in  the
             claimant's favour but speak cogently in support of the  public
             interests in removal" (emphasis added).

35.  The Court of Appeal  in  GS  (India)  followed  a  consistent  line  of
    domestic and Strasbourg authority when it was  held  (indeed  upholding
    the Upper Tribunal's decision that was  referred  to  in  Akhalu)  that
    foreign nationals may be removed from the UK even where by reason of  a
    lack of adequate healthcare in a destination State, their  lives  would
    be drastically shortened.  Such action would  not,  save  in  the  most
    exceptional case infringe Articles 3 or 8 of the ECHR.  However Laws LJ
    at paragraph 86 went on to say:

         "If the Article 3 claim fails  (as  I  would  hold  it  does  here)
         Article 8  cannot  prosper  without  some  separate  or  additional
         factual element which brings the case within the Article 8 paradigm
         - the capacity to form and enjoy relationships  -  or  a  state  of
         affairs having some affinity with the paradigm".

36.  Notably the court referred  to  what  had  been  said  in  its  earlier
    decision in MM Zimbabwe at paragraph 23:

         "The only cases I can foresee where the absence of adequate medical
         treatment in the country to which a person is to be  deported  will
         be relevant to Article 8 is where it is an additional factor to  be
         weighed in the balance  with  other  factors  which  by  themselves
         engage Article  8.   Suppose,  in  this  case,  the  Appellant  had
         established firm family ties in this country, then the availability
         of continuing treatment here, coupled with his  dependence  on  the
         family here for support,  together  establish  private  life  under
         Article 8 ...

         Such a finding will not offend the principle expressed above,  that
         the United Kingdom is under no  Convention  obligation  to  provide
         medical treatment here when it is not available in the  country  to
         which the Appellant is to be deported".

37.  Under the subheading "The Article 8 claims" at paragraph  85,  Laws  LJ
    continued as follows:

         85.  It is common ground that in cases where the  claimant  resists
             removal to another State  on  health  grounds,  failure  under
             Article 3 does not necessarily entail failure under Article 8.
              In her skeleton argument at paragraph 55  Ms  Giovaneeti  for
             the  Secretary  of  State  cites  JA  (Ivory  Coast)  and   ES
             (Tanzania) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 1353 in which the Appellants
             had been given a "de facto  commitment"  that  they  would  be
             allowed to remain in the UK for  treatment.   Sedley  LJ  with
             whom Longmore and Aikens LJJ agreed said this at paragraph 17:



                  "There is no fixed  relationship  between  Article  3  and
                  Article 8.  Typically a finding  of  a  violation  of  the
                  former may make a decision on the latter unnecessary;  but
                  the latter is not simply a more easily accessed version of
                  the former.  Each has to be approached and applied on  its
                  own terms and Ms Giovaneeti is accordingly  right  not  to
                  suggest that a claim of the present kind must come  within
                  Article 3 or fail.  In this respect  as  in  others  these
                  claims are in Mr Knafler's submission distinct from  cases
                  such as D and N in both of which the Appellant's  presence
                  and treatment in  the  UK  were  owed  entirely  to  their
                  unlawful entry".

38.  Thus it followed that Article 8 might be taken in  circumstances  where
    the combination of family life and problematic health could lead to  an
    Article 8 "health case".

39.  Notably Mr Rene for the Appellants confirmed to me, that the  challenge
    to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  decision  in  this   case   was
    essentially predicated upon his findings in relation to  VP.   Mr  Rene
    accepted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had made reference  to  all
    relevant case law but felt "she has erred - mindful of whether it is a
    material error of law when she records at paragraph 33 that the  father
    had debts and family problems in India and no  property  there.   There
    were no credibility issues in relation to that".

40.  Mr Rene also referred to paragraph 58 of  the  determination  when  the
    Judge was clear that there was "no guarantee that they would be able to
    get VP into a suitable school ...".

41.  Mr Rene continued, that the Judge had thus made clear  findings  as  to
    the difficulties the Appellants would face on return to India and in VP
    accessing medical treatment in India because of the  cost  factor.   He
    continued that when one looked at EV (Philippines) it was important for
    the Judge to have  borne  in  mind,  that  the  precarious  immigration
    history of the parents should not be held against the children.

42.  In that regard and to put the Judge's  findings  in  that  regard  into
    their  proper  context,  not  least  in  his   recognition   that   the
    circumstances of the Appellants were not  dissimilar  to  that  of  the
    Appellant in EV,  I referred Mr Rene to what the Judge had  to  say  at
    paragraph 62  when  quoting  from  paragraph  60  of  EV  and  then  at
    paragraphs 64 and 67 .

43.  Mr Rene further submitted that the guidance  in  GS  (India)  concerned
    adults.  I do not share that view, the guidance  in  terms  of  "health
    cases" referred to applicants in general.

44.  Mr Rene further submitted that it was not for the Respondent  in  terms
    of the  consideration  of  Section  55,  to  pay  lip  service  to  its
    provisions but to approach the matter with care.

45.  Upon my consideration of the letter of refusal, it is apparent that  in
    terms of Mr and Mrs Patel's children and in particular  that  of  their
    youngest child VP, that such care on the part  of  the  Respondent  was
    clearly demonstrated.  Indeed I note  under  the  subheading  "Decision
    under Exceptional Circumstances" the Respondent stated inter alia:

         "Whilst you have raised the fact that your clients' youngest  child
         VP Dharmendra suffers from  Subdural  haemorrhage  with  a  midline
         shift and cerebral palsy which has a  debilitating  effect  on  his
         gross motor skills,  you  have  also  raised  the  fact  that  your
         clients' son does  not  currently  take  any  regular  medications.
         However evidence such as NHS reports dated 29  May  2014  confirmed
         that  your  clients'  son  VP  ...  has  been  making   significant
         improvements in his motor skills.  He can  now  work  independently
         and is steadier on his feet.

         Based upon current research into India's  medical  facilities  from
         doctors and other experts working there in the Indian Institute  of
         Cerebral Palsy (IICP) there is a  specialist  resource  centre  for
         cerebral palsy working since 1974 for the rights  of  persons  with
         disability particularly cerebral palsy.  IICP is based  in  Kolkata
         but works on a national level in partnership with a  close  network
         of NGOs in many districts of West Bengal and another eleven  States
         of India.  It has vast international linkages and is  working  with
         advocacy   groups   nationally   and   internationally   for    the
         implementation of the UN Convention on the Rights of  Persons  with
         Disabilities.

         IICP offers multifaceted services to infants, children  and  adults
         with cerebral palsy and a range of training programmes for  persons
         with  disability,  parents  and  family   members,   professionals,
         students and personnel working in the community.

         IIPC also offer school services which your clients'  son  would  be
         able to enter.  The schools offer different types of facilities and
         therapy for students that take  into  account  their  strength  and
         needs [reference is then made to the appropriate website].

         Therefore  it  is  not  accepted   that   there   are   exceptional
         circumstances which would mean removal  is  inappropriate  in  your
         case whilst this may involve a degree of disruption to your private
         life this is considered to be proportionate to the  legitimate  aim
         of maintaining effective immigration control".

46.  The Respondent in her letter, separately considered  matters  in  terms
    of Section 55, pointing out that the situation as relating to  the  two
    children had been carefully considered and that:

         "Your clients would be returning to India with their  children  and
         would be able to support them whilst they  became  used  to  living
         there and enjoying their full rights as citizens  of  India.   Your
         clients' children may be currently enrolled  in  education  in  the
         United Kingdom but it  is  clear  from  the  objective  information
         available that India has a functioning education system which their
         children would be able to enter.  Your clients  have  not  provided
         any evidence which indicates that they would be unable to  maintain
         their children in India, or that they would be  unable  to  provide
         for their safety and welfare.

         Your clients and their children would return to India as  a  family
         unit and continue to enjoy their family life together.  Whilst this
         may involve a degree of disruption to their private  life  this  is
         considered to be proportionate to the legitimate aim of maintaining
         effective immigration control and is in accordance with our Section
         55 duties.  It has been decided that a grant of leave  outside  the
         Rules is not appropriate.  Your clients' application for  leave  to
         remain in the United Kingdom is therefore refused".

47.  The above referred matters were of course clearly  taken  into  account
    by the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in  the  course  of  his  reasoned
    determination.

48.  Mr Rene further submitted that there was  an  absence  of  findings  in
    relation to whether VP would be able to access the medical treatment he
    required. In that regard I referred him, not least to paragraph  76  of
    the Judge's determination, that made reference to the IICP and which  I
    have set out in full above.

49.  Notably Mr Rene  concluded  his  submissions  by  accepting  that  "one
    cannot go behind case law".

50.  Mr  Walker  in  response,  considered  that  the  Judge's  findings  at
    paragraph 76 were most important and that the  Judge  had  gone  on  to
    consider VP's medical condition appreciating that the medical treatment
    might not be provided free of charge in India.

51.  Upon a reading of the Judge's  determination  as  a  whole,  Mr  Walker
    submitted that it did not disclose any material error of law.

52.  There was no response from Mr Rene to Mr Walker's submissions.

53.  I reserved my decision.

Assessment

54.  I am entirely  satisfied  that  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge discloses no material error on a point of law. Indeed  I
    find that this was a detailed determination prepared with evident  care
    in which the Judge gave the most careful consideration to relevant case
    law guidance in terms of Article 8 that he applied against the backdrop
    of the facts as found, not least in relation to the Appellant VP Patel.
     It is apparent to me that in considering the  proportionality  of  the
    Appellants' removal to India and in the light of his treatment  of  the
    authorities, I find that it cannot reasonably be said  that  the  Judge
    did not have the correct principles in mind nor do I think  that  there
    was any basis for saying that he misdirected himself  by  applying  the
    wrong legal test.

55.  It is apparent that the Judge for reasons supported by and open to  him
    on the evidence, was not satisfied not least in relation  to  VP,  that
    there were any compelling circumstances in the present case, such as to
    show  that  the  removal  of  the   family   as   a   unit   would   be
    disproportionate.  Indeed, had the Judge allowed this appeal  it  would
    suggest that anyone admitted to the United Kingdom on a temporary basis
    who was in need of medical treatment that he could not find in his  own
    country would be entitled to the benefit of Article 8.

56.  In any event and in the present case, the Judge found  that  VP  indeed
    could access any such medical  treatment  from  the  IICP,  the  Indian
    Institute of Cerebral Palsy that as was noted,  worked  on  a  national
    level in partnership with a closer network of NGOs in many districts in
    West Bengal and eleven other States  in  India  offering  a  specialist
    resource for cerebral palsy, including school services.

57.  As a matter of law this appeal cannot succeed. The Secretary  of  State
    of course retains a broad discretion notwithstanding that, but that  is
    a matter for the Secretary of State and not the Tribunal.

58.  I note  that  in  the  course  of  his  determination,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge also referred to  the  submissions  of  the  Appellants'
    Counsel with reference to the decision in Iftikhar Ahmed v SSHD  [2014]
    EWHC 300 (Admin) where the "Partner and ECHR  Article  8  guidance"  of
    October 2013 provided guidance for  officials  as  to  the  meaning  of
    exceptional circumstances and insurmountable obstacles from  which  the
    Judge quoted that included the following:

         "However leave can be granted outside the Rules  where  exceptional
         circumstances  apply.   Where  an  applicant  fails  to  meet   the
         requirements of the  Rules  caseworkers  must  go  on  to  consider
         whether there are exceptional  circumstances.   'Exceptional'  does
         not mean 'unusual' or 'unique'.   Whilst  all  cases  are  to  some
         extent unique, those unique factors do not  generally  render  them
         exceptional.  For example a case is not  exceptional  just  because
         the criteria set out in EX.1 of Appendix FM have been missed  by  a
         small margin.  Instead 'exceptional' means circumstances  in  which
         refusal would result in unjustifiably harsh  consequences  for  the
         individual or their family such that  refusal  of  the  application
         would not be proportionate.  That is likely to  be  the  case  only
         very rarely".

59.  It is apparent on the basis of the Judge's comprehensive  and  reasoned
    findings in the present case, that the circumstances of the  Appellants
    and in particular VP, simply did not cross this high and  rarely  found
    threshold.  Such of course was reflected  by  the  Tribunal  in  Akhalu
    (above) not least at subheading (2) and in the guidance of the Court of
    Appeal in GS (India).

60.  Mindful of the guidance of the Court of Appeal in R (Iran) [2005]  EWCA
    Civ 982 I find that it cannot be  said  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's findings were irrational and/or Wednesbury  unreasonable,  such
    as to  amount  to  perversity.   It  cannot  be  said  that  they  were
    inadequate.  This is not a case where the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    reasoning was such that the Tribunal  were  unable  to  understand  the
    thought process that he employed in reaching his decision.

61.  I find the Judge properly identified and recorded the matters  that  he
    considered to be critical in his decision on the material issues raised
    before him in this appeal.

Decision

62.  The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error  on
    a point of law and I order that it shall stand.

63.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 23 January 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein

