

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/43562/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                        |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 23 October 2014                           |On 18 November 2014         |
|                                             |                            |
|                                             |                            |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

                             MISS VALARIE OFILIA
                        (anonmity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Blundell of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitworth, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant is a national of the Philippines  born  on  23  October
       1973. The appellant's appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  was  against
       the decision of the respondent dated 7 October  2013  to  refuse  the
       appellant leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  pursuant  to  the
       Immigration Rules and Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human
       Rights.  First-tier Tribunal Judge in a decision  dated  August  2014
       dismissed the appellant's appeal. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Davidge
       refused to grant the appellant permission to appeal on 10 July  2014.
       Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins gave the appellant permission to  appeal
       11  September  2014  stating  that  the  Judge  only   consider   the
       discrepancies in  the  oral  evidence  but  failed  to  consider  the
       documentary evidence that demonstrated that  the  appellant  and  her
       sponsor were co-habiting.


    2. The First-tier Tribunal Judge in his determination made the following
       findings which I summarise. Due to the discrepancies in the  evidence
       of the four witnesses, the appellant has not demonstrated that she is
       in a subsisting relationship with her sponsor in the United  Kingdom.
       She cannot succeeded pursuant  to  the  Immigration  Rules  there  is
       nothing exceptional in her case that she should succeed under Article
       8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.


    3. The appellant and her grounds of appeal states  the  following.  That
       the Judge should have balanced the discrepancies in the  evidence  of
       the witnesses at the hearing, which is  accepted  by  the  appellant,
       with the extensive documentary evidence provided  which  demonstrated
       that the parties have cohabited at the sponsor's  property,  59  sent
       Stefan's  Close  Walthamstow.  The  Judge  failed  to   give   proper
       consideration to the documentary  evidence  and  fell  into  material
       error.


   The Error of Law Hearing


    4. I heard submissions from Mr Blundell  which  I  summarise  in  brief.
       The appellant has accepted there were discrepancies  in  the  witness
       statements.  However  the  Judge  should  have  also  considered  the
       documentary evidence against the discrepancies in the oral  evidence.
       There was cogent evidence of  cohabitation.  The  appellant  and  her
       sponsor live in a one-bedroom house. There  is  evidence  that  since
       2005 the address given by the appellant to the NHS  and  British  Gas
       which is the joint names as the same address as that of her sponsor.


    5. Mr Whitworth made the following submissions which  I  summarise.  The
       factual evidence such as cohabitation between the appellant  and  the
       sponsor has never  been  disputed.  Mr  Bose  before  the  first-tier
       Tribunal withdrew his concession that the appellant and  her  sponsor
       were in a subsisting relationship in light of the  inconsistent  oral
       evidence by the appellant's witnesses. There are  discrepancies  such
       as to when they started living together and when they met.


    6. In reply Mr Blundell stated that it is accepted  that  the  appellant
       and her sponsor are living together but the respondent  alleges  that
       they are not in  a  subsisting  relationship.  The  appellant  and  a
       sponsor live in a one-bedroom flat and have done since 2005. This  is
       evidence of a subsisting relationship.


   Decision on error of law


    7. The First-tier Tribunal Judge fell into material error by her failure
       to consider the documentary evidence provided  by  the  appellant  to
       demonstrate  that  she  and  her  sponsor   are   in   a   subsisting
       relationship. She relied on inconsistencies in the oral  evidence  of
       her witnesses without considering the documentary evidence and make a
       decision on the evidence in the round.


    8. It was accepted by the respondent at the hearing that  the  appellant
       and her sponsor are cohabiting but  said  that  they  are  not  in  a
       genuine  or  subsisting  relationship.  It  was  accepted  that   the
       Presenting  Officer  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  withdrew  his
       concession that they were in  a  subsisting  relationship  given  the
       inconsistencies in the oral evidence.


    9. The documentary evidence on the face of  it,  demonstrates  that  the
       appellant and the sponsor have  been  living  together  at  the  same
       address since  2005.  Mr  Whitworth  submitted  that  the  respondent
       accepts that the appellant and his sponsor have been living  together
       but they are not in a genuine and subsisting relationship.



   10. Consequential to my finding that there is a material error of law,  I
       set aside the determination of Judge Scott  preserving  none  of  the
       findings.


   11. Both parties agreed in such an event, the appeal  ought  to  be  sent
       back to the First tier- Tribunal so that  findings  of  fact  can  be
       made. I agreed that this was the proper course of action to  take  in
       this appeal in accordance with  section  7.  2  (b)  (i)  the  Senior
       President's Practice Statement of 25 September 2012 as we were of the
       view that the appeal requires judicial fact-finding and should to  be
       considered by the First-tier Tribunal.



   12. The re-making of the decision on appeal will be undertaken by a First-
       tier Judge in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  other  than  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Kamara on a date to be notified

   Decision



   13. The appellant's appeal is allowed and the determination of First-tier
       Tribunal Judge is set aside.  The case is remitted to the  First-tier
       Tribunal for re-determination.


Signed by

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Mrs Chana
                                        Dated this 14th day of November 2014



