
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/43437/2014
     IA/43439/2014
     IA/43441/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |                Decision & Reasons   |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On  6th January 2016                   |                On 20th January 2016 |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD

                                   Between


                 MR KAZI MUSHFIQUR RAHMAN (FIRST APPELLANT)
                     MRS REZIA AHMED (SECOND APPELLANT)
                  MS KAZI RAISA NOORAEEN (THIRD APPELLANT)
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Turner, Direct Access Barrister
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1.  The  Appellants  are  citizens  of  Bangladesh  who  appealed  against
    decisions made on 24th June 2013 to refuse their applications for leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom under the points-based system as a Tier
    4 Student and his dependants.

 2. The applications were refused  and  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Wylie it was argued on Article 8 ECHR grounds only that they should  be
    granted leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

 3. Judge Wylie dismissed the appeal.

 4. The grounds of application narrate that the judge made  an  unequivocal
    finding at paragraph 25 of the decision namely that the  children  were
    not qualifying children and thus a consideration of Section 117B(6)  of
    the 2002 Act was not  required.   As  the  grounds  observe  the  Third
    Appellant had in fact been in the United Kingdom for seven years, three
    months and nine days and in the light of that  the  judge's  conclusion
    that she was  not  a  qualifying  child  was  factually  incorrect  and
    amounted to a misapplication of the law.  It was said  that  the  judge
    had failed to properly consider the best interests of the child.   Both
    children were plainly settled here and one of them had a heart problem.
     In all the circumstances it was inappropriate for the Third  Appellant
    to be removed from the United Kingdom.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted.  The Secretary of State lodged a Rule
    24 notice acknowledging that the judge should have  considered  whether
    the provisions of  Section  117B(6)  applied  but  any  error  was  not
    material.  The Appellants status was always precarious.

 6. Thus the matter came before me on the above date.

 7. For the Appellants Mr Turner relied on his grounds indicating that  the
    starting point should be the best interests of the child and  that  the
    judge had made a fundamental error concluding that the eldest child was
    not a qualifying child in terms of the  statute.   Furthermore  as  the
    child had come here in January 2008 a very relevant part of their  life
    had been in the United Kingdom.  The judge had made no reference to any
    relevant jurisprudence relating to how the best interests  of  children
    should be dealt with.  Nothing  was  said  about  the  educational  and
    social integration of the children.  I was asked to find that there was
    a material error of law and send the  appeal  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh decision.

 8. For the Home Office Mr Staunton relied  on  AM  (Section  117B)  Malawi
    [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC) and to headnote 5 which supported the proposition
    that the Appellants status here  was  precarious.   Reliance  was  also
    placed on the Rule 24 notice.  The judge had gone on  to  consider  the
    best interests of the children.  While there had been a clear error  by
    the judge it was not material.

 9. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

10. It seems clear to me that the judge made  a  serious  error  concluding
    that the "children are not qualifying children and I need not  consider
    Section 117B(6)."  The Home Office acknowledge that this  is  an  error
    but argue that this would have had little effect on the decision.

11. However both parties acknowledged before me that the eldest child was a
    qualifying child within the meaning of the Act that is to  say  someone
    who under paragraph 117D has lived here  for  a  continuous  period  of
    seven years or more.  The  importance  of  this  is  reflected  in  the
    legislation under paragraph 117B(6) where it is said that in  the  case
    of a person who is not liable to deportation (this is not a deportation
    case) the public interest does not require the person's  removal  where
    the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  with  a
    qualifying child and it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to
    leave the United Kingdom.  In my view that was the starting  point  for
    the judge namely that he was bound to  recognise  what  Parliament  has
    enshrined in legislation namely  that  the  public  interest  does  not
    require  the  person's  removal  in  certain  circumstances  which  may
    appertain here.  In my view the failure to acknowledge  the  provisions
    of 117B are fatal to  the  soundness  of  this  decision  in  that  any
    decision has to be reached through the prism of what  is  set  down  in
    legislation.  That being so it seems to me that decision  cannot  stand
    and must be  set  aside.   I  observe  that  there  is  a  Rule  15(2A)
    application before me.  Mr Turner did not urge me to allow it  at  this
    stage but confined himself to seeking a fresh hearing before the First-
    tier Tribunal which seemed to me to represent a sensible way forward.

12. In all the circumstances the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    therefore set aside in its entirety.  No  findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal are to stand.  Under Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007  Act  and
    of Practice Statement 7.2 the nature and extent of the  judicial  fact-
    finding necessary for the decision to be re-made is  such  that  it  is
    appropriate  to  remit   the   case   to   the   First-tier   Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald

