
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43535/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 October 2015                    |On 12 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                 munira qazi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms A. Jones, Counsel instructed by Farani Javid
Taylor Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E. Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 9 November 1980. She  is
    appealing against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal,  promulgated
    on 29 April 2015,  to  dismiss  her  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    decision to refuse her application for indefinite leave  to  remain  on
    the basis of long residence in the United Kingdom.

 2. On 21 April 2015, at  Hatton  Cross,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  R  A
    Britton determined the appeal on the papers as neither party attended.

 3. The grounds of appeal submit that the only reason the appellant did not
    attend the hearing is that she was given  incorrect  information  about
    the date.  It is submitted that she was sent a notice of hearing for 24
    April 2015 and that she and counsel  attended  on  that  date  only  to
    discover the matter had been listed for and heard three  days  earlier.
    The argument is made  in  the  grounds  that  the  appellant  has  been
    deprived of her right to a fair hearing.

 4. At the Upper Tribunal hearing, Ms Jones submitted that  in  consequence
    of an administrative error the appellant  had  experienced  significant
    unfairness. Mr Tufan accepted that in  the  interests  of  justice  the
    appeal should be heard again in the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. It is clear that the only reason  the  appellant  did  not  attend  the
    hearing before Judge Britton was that she believed it was listed for  a
    different day. She has provided evidence, in the form of an  attendance
    note from her Counsel, that she attended on the wrong day and  she  has
    provided a copy of the notice of hearing  listing  the  hearing  for  a
    different day to that on which she attended.

 6. The appellant has, through no fault of her  own,  been  prevented  from
    giving evidence and making submissions  such  that  there  has  been  a
    deprivation of her right to a fair hearing. Accordingly, I  find  there
    has been an error of law such  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal shall be set aside and the appeal remitted  to  a  differently
    constituted First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.

Decision

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law such that it should be set aside in its  entirety  and  the  appeal
    heard afresh.

 8. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  hearing  afresh
    before a judge other than First tier Tribunal Judge R A Britton.

 9. No anonymity order is made.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 9 October 2015                |

