
 [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/43770/2014
                                                               IA/43777/2014
                                                               IA/43784/2014
                                                               IA/43789/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 20 October 20115                  |On 28 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                             NUNES JODEILTO LIMA
                          FABIANA LOPES De OLIVEIRA
                         GABRIELA NUNES De OLIVEIRA
                       SAMUEL LUCAS NUNES De OLIVEIRA
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr S A Canter (counsel) instructed by Proficient
                    immigration Services
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of these Appellants. Having considered all the circumstances and evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    These are appeals by four Appellants against the  decision  of  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Metzer promulgated on  02  June  2015,  which  dismissed
each Appellants' appeal.

Background

3.    The first and second Appellants are a couple in  a  relationship  akin
to marriage. The third and fourth appellants are their children.  The  first
appellant was born on 5 April 1969. The second appellant was born on 6  July
1972. The third appellant was born on 9 December 1996. The fourth  appellant
was born on 7 January 2001. All four appellants are Brazilian nationals.

4.    On 3rd April 2014 the Appellants applied for leave to  remain  in  the
UK on the basis of their private lives in the  UK.  On  21st  May  2014  the
Secretary of State refused the Appellants' applications. On 5 June 2014  the
appellants submitted a pre-action protocol  to  challenge  the  decision  of
21st May 2014. On 10 July 2014 the  respondent  served  a  one-stop  warning
statement of additional grounds in terms of section 120 of the 2002  Act  on
each of the appellants. On 1 September 2014 the respondent refused  each  of
the appellant's applications for leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  and  served
decisions to remove the appellants on 3 September 2014.

The Judge's Decision

5.     The  Appellants  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Metzer  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeals  against  the
Respondent's decision.

6.    Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 26 August 2015 Judge Fisher  gave
permission to appeal stating inter alia

    ".... It is  arguable  that  the  judge  erred  in  saying  that  "all"
    appellants had spent "many" years in Brazil when the  fourth  appellant
    was only five years old when he arrived in the UK. It is also  arguable
    that,  in  commenting  that  the  third  appellant  had   developed   a
    relationship as a result of her continued unlawful presence in the  UK,
    he was erroneously importing considerations from section  117B  of  the
    2002  Act  into  the  test  of  reasonableness  under   paragraph   276
    ADE(1)(iv)."

The Hearing

7.    (a)   Mr Cantor for the appellants argued  that  the  Judge  had  made
material errors of both fact and law. He focused on [15] to [18] and  argued
that although the Judge correctly identified the "reasonableness test"  when
considering paragraph 276 ADE (1)(iv) of the rules, he failed to  apply  it.
He argued that at [15] the Judge had incorrectly found the third and  fourth
appellants shared responsibility with the first and  second  appellants  for
their poor immigration history. He argued  that  the  Judge  at  [15]  makes
errors of fact when considering the circumstances pertaining  to  the  third
and fourth appellants, and that the  Judge  had  confused  consideration  of
section 117B of the 2002 Act with the requirements of  paragraph  276ADE  of
the rules.

    (b)    Mr Cantor argued that  when  the  Judge  moves  on  to  consider
article 8 ECHR out-with the rules his proportionality assessment was  flawed
and that an inadequate balancing exercise was carried out by the  Judge.  He
argued that the Judge had not considered the distinct claims of each of  the
appellants; instead he treated all four  appellants  as  one.  Although  the
case of  Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions  affecting  children;  onward
appeals)[2013] UKUT 197(IAC) is cited by the Judge, Mr  Cantor  argues  that
the guidance contained in that case was not applied by the Judge,  and  that
the Judge failed to  consider  section  55  of  the  Borders  Citizenship  &
Immigration Act 2009.

    (c)    Mr Cantor told me that the Judge had not engaged the  submission
that the decision was not in accordance with the law  because  paragraph  37
of the reasons for refusal letter  sets  out  an  exceptional  circumstances
test before considering article 8 ECHR.

8.    For the respondent Ms Everett told me that although  the  decision  is
brief, it does not contain a material error of law. She  conceded  that  the
third and fourth appellants had been in the UK for more than seven years  at
the date of hearing and argued that there was only one of  the  factors  for
consideration in these four appeals. She relied on the case of AM  (S  117B)
Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC), and told me that the  decision  sets  out  all
the  relevant  considerations  and  that,  on  the  particular   facts   and
circumstances pertaining to these appellants, the conclusion reached by  the
Judge was a conclusion open to him on the evidence presented. She  asked  me
to dismiss the appeals & allow the decision to stand.

Analysis

9.    The first ground of appeal is that the Judge made errors  in  applying
the "reasonableness test". Counsel for the appellant argued that the  errors
are contained in [15] of the decision. He said that it  is  there  that  the
Judge held  the  first  and  second  appellants'  poor  immigration  history
against third and fourth  appellants.  He  also  argued  that  in  the  same
paragraph the judge demonstrated a lack of understanding of  the  length  of
time the third and fourth appellants have been in the UK, & the  short  time
they have each spent in Brazil.

10.   The criticism of what is said at [15] is misplaced.  When  every  word
of that paragraph is read it can be seen that the Judge narrates "the  third
appellant was 10 years old when she arrived in the United  Kingdom  and  the
fourth appellant was five years old when he arrived in the United Kingdom".

11.   It is argued that the Judge conflated consideration to section 117  of
2002 Act with consideration of paragraph 276 ADE of the  Immigration  Rules,
particularly in relation to the third appellant, but the judge  specifically
refers to section 117B of the  2002  act  at  [20].  It  is  clear  from  an
holistic reading of the decision that between [13] and  [18]  the  Judge  is
considering the appellants' cases in terms  of  paragraph  276  ADE  of  the
Immigration Rules.

12.   The second and third grounds of appeal amounts to a challenge  of  the
Judge's assessment of proportionality, and a suggested refusal to deal  with
the contention that the respondent's decision was  not  in  accordance  with
the law. A full reading of the  determination  makes  it  quite  clear  that
although the judge did not refer to  the  case  of  Razgar,  he  follow  the
guidance contained therein. The  third  question  which  the  Judge  answers
implicitly in the affirmative (he must have done so to move on  to  consider
proportionality) is a finding that the decisions are in accordance with  the
law.

13.    The  real  thrust  of  this  appeal  drives  at  the  assessment   of
proportionality. The Judge's assessment of proportionality  is  carried  out
in [19] [20] and [21]. It is there that I  find  a  material  error  of  law
exists. The assessment is brief. The assessment should be set out with  more
structure and greater clarity. The parties to the appeal should be  able  to
read the assessment and see what factors were weighed against  one  another,
and why the  judge  reach  his  conclusion.  Those  basic  features  of  the
proportionality analysis are missing. I therefore set  aside  the  decision.
There is however no  great  dispute  about  the  facts  of  these  cases.  I
therefore proceed to decide each of these appeals of new.

Findings of Fact

14.   The appellants are all members of  the  same  family.  The  first  two
appellants are in a relationship akin to  marriage.  The  third  and  fourth
appellants are their children. The  third  appellant  has  now  attained  18
years of age and so is (now) an adult.

15.   The first appellant arrived in  the  UK  5  August  2004.  The  second
appellant entered the UK with a visit visas on 27 April 2005. The third  and
fourth appellants entered the UK in possession of valid visit  visas  on  27
December 2006. The four appellants have lived together as one  family  since
then.

16.   On 26 March 2009 the appellants  made  an  application  for  leave  to
remain in the UK, which the respondent refused  on  29  March  2011.  On  17
November 2011 the respondent issued notices to each of the  appellants  that
they were liable to removal. On 29 November 2011  the  appellants  submitted
applications for asylum. Those applications were refused by  the  respondent
and certified as clearly unfounded on 26 January 2012.

17.   On 14 February 2012 the appellants submitted  applications  for  leave
to remain claiming that their article 8 ECHR rights  would  be  breached  by
removal. Those applications were refused on  3  April  2012.  Their  appeals
against those refusals were dismissed on 8 April 2013.

18.   On 3 April 2014 the appellants submitted  a  further  application  for
leave to remain in the UK. Those applications were refused without  a  right
of appeal on 21st May 2014. On 5th June 2014 the appellants submitted a pre-
action protocol to challenge the decision of 21st May 2014. On 10 July  2014
the respondent served a one-stop warning & statement of  additional  grounds
(in terms of section 120 of the 2002 Act) on each of the  appellants.  On  1
September 2014 the respondent refused each of the  appellants'  applications
for leave to remain in the UK and served decisions to remove the  appellants
on 3 September 2014. It is  against  those  decisions  that  the  appellants
appeal.

19.   After arriving in the UK the first appellant worked as a cleaner.  The
first and second appellants have both worked in the UK even though  they  do
not have the right to do so. Neither of them have consistently  paid  either
tax or national insurance.

20.   The third appellant has completed his secondary education in  the  UK.
She has been offered a place to study  for  a  nursing  degree  at  college.
Because she does not have settled status in the UK she would  have  to  meet
the costs of tuition fees. She has deferred entry to  college  in  the  hope
that she will be granted leave to remain in the UK  so  that  she  can  then
pursue the course of study and embark on a career  as  a  nurse.  The  third
appellant has a boyfriend. Their relationship  started  when  the  appellant
was only 13  years  old  and  has  now  endured  for  almost  6  years.  The
appellant's boyfriend is a British citizen.

21.   The fourth appellant is at secondary school. He is a  gifted  football
player. Both the third and fourth appellants have been in the  UK  for  more
than seven years.  The  third  appellant  is  a  qualifying  child  for  the
purposes of section 117D of the 2002 Act.

22.   None of the appellants  can  meet  the  requirements  of  appendix  FM
because all four appellants are Brazilian nationals, & the first and  second
appellants do not have sole responsibility  for  either  the  third  or  the
fourth appellant. None of the first second and  third  appellants  can  meet
the requirements of paragraph 276 ADE of the rules  because  they  have  all
lived in the UK for less than 20 years.

23.   The third appellant is under the age of 18 and has lived  continuously
in the UK for at  least  seven  years.  Paragraph  276  ADE(1)(iv)  requires
consideration. The question that must be  answered  is  whether  or  not  it
would be reasonable to expect the third appellant to leave the UK.

Paragraph 276ADE

24.   The first second and third appellants are all adults  who  have  lived
in the UK for less than 20 years. They can only succeed under paragraph  276
ADE if they can establish that paragraph 276 ADE 1(vi) is engaged. To do  so
they would have to lead evidence that there are very  significant  obstacles
to their re-integration into Brazil. It has never been their case that  such
obstacles exist. When the appellants were served with a one-stop warning  on
10 July 2014 they did not take the  opportunity  to  produce  evidence  that
such obstacles exist. The first and second appellants speak  Portuguese  and
have lived in Brazil for longer than they have lived in the  UK.  The  third
appellant's time in  each  country  is  more  evenly  divided,  no  reliable
evidence of obstacles to reintegration are  placed  before  me.  The  first,
second and third  appellants  therefore  do  not  discharge  the  burden  of
proving that they fulfil the requirements of paragraph 276 ADE(1)(vi)

25.   It is the respondent's intention to  return  all  four  appellants  to
Brazil as one family unit. The fourth appellant has  lived  in  the  UK  for
eight years. He is now 14 years old. He's at secondary school  and  will  by
now have started a course leading to GCSE. He enjoys education  in  the  UK.
The respondent's decision would bring that education to  an  end  and  would
separate the fourth appellant from his  school  friends.  Return  to  Brazil
would force the fourth appellant to  confront  an  educational  system  with
which he is not familiar. Return to Brazil would force the fourth  appellant
to establish new friendships. It would clearly be a challenge to the  fourth
appellant, but there is no evidence before me  to  indicate  that  it  is  a
challenge that he could not meet.

26.   The question of reasonableness  requires  consideration  of  the  best
interests of the third appellant, a child. I am mindful  of  Section  55  of
the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009,  and  the  case  of  ZH
(Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4.

27.   I remind myself of the cases of  Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions
affecting  children;  onward  appeals),  [2013]  UKUT 00197.   It  is  the
intention of the SoS to ensure that the Appellants  all  stay  together.  It
has long been established that it is in the interests of a child  to  remain
with his parents. The Respondent's decision  maintains  the  unity  of  this
family and does not separate the fourth appellant from his parents (and  his
sister). The interests of the child are served because the integrity of  the
family unit is not challenged.

28.   The appellants cannot  fulfil  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
Rules

Article  8 ECHR

29.   In R (on the application of Esther Ebun Oludoyi & Ors) v Secretary  of
State for the Home Department (Article 8  -  MM  (Lebanon)  and  Nagre)  IJR
[2014] UKUT 00539 (IAC) it was held that there is nothing  in  R  (Nagre)  v
SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin), Gulshan (Article  8  -  new  Rules  -  correct
approach) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC) or Shahzad (Art 8: legitimate  aim)
[2014] UKUT 00085 (IAC) that  suggests  that  a  threshold  test  was  being
suggested as opposed to making it clear that there was a  need  to  look  at
the evidence to see if  there  was  anything  which  has  not  already  been
adequately considered in the context of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  which
could lead to a successful Article 8 claim. These authorities  must  not  be
read as seeking to qualify or fetter the assessment of Article  8.  This  is
consistent with para 128 of R (MM & Others) v  SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  985,
that there is no utility in  imposing  a  further  intermediate  test  as  a
preliminary to a consideration of an Article 8  claim  beyond  the  relevant
criterion-based Rule. As is held in R (Ganesabalan) v SSHD [2014] EWHC  2712
(Admin), there is no prior threshold which dictates whether the exercise  of
discretion should be considered; rather the nature  of  the  assessment  and
the  reasoning  which   are   called   for   are   informed   by   threshold
considerations.

30.   Section 117 is a factor  to  be  taken  into  account  in  determining
proportionality. I appreciate that as the  public  interest  provisions  are
now contained in  primary  legislation  they  override  existing  case  law,
Section 117A(2) requires me to have regard to the considerations  listed  in
Sections 117B and 117C.  I am conscious of my statutory duty to  take  these
factors into account when coming to my conclusions.  I am  also  aware  that
Section 117A(3) imposes upon  me  the  duty  of  carrying  out  a  balancing
exercise. In so doing I remind  myself  of  the  guidance  contained  within
Razgar.

31.    Section  117B(1)  provides  that   the   maintenance   of   effective
immigration control is in the public interest. I  consider  Section  117B(6)
because the fourth appellant is a  qualifying  child,  but  I  have  already
found that it would not be unreasonable to expect each of the appellants  to
leave the UK. I therefore have to find that the fourth  appellant  does  not
benefit from the operation of Section 117B(6).

32.   By virtue of section 117D a "qualifying child" means a person  who  is
under the age of 18 and who- (a) is a British citizen, or (b) has  lived  in
the United Kingdom for a continuous period of seven years  or  more.   If  a
child is a qualifying child for the purposes of section  117B  of  the  2002
Act as amended, the issue will generally be whether  it  is  not  reasonable
for that child to return to the country of origin under  scrutiny.  Although
R(on the application  of  Osanwemwenze)  v  SSHD  2014  EWHC  1563  was  not
specifically concerned with section 117B it has some relevance in  terms  of
the reasonableness of a child leaving the UK. In that case,  the  Claimant's
14-year-old stepson from Nigeria had been in the  United  Kingdom  for  more
than 7 years and had leave to remain in his own  right.  It  was  held  that
this was an important  but  not  an  overriding  consideration  and  it  was
reasonable  to  expect  the  Claimant's  family  including  the  stepson  to
relocate to Nigeria. The parents had experienced life there  into  adulthood
and would be able to provide for the children and help them to reintegrate.

33.   The appellants all speak English and so the public interests  set  out
in Section 117B(2) are met.  None  of  the  appellants  have  claimed  state
benefits, so they might be financially independent.  The  third  and  fourth
appellants have benefitted from state education.  It  may  be  that  Section
117B(3) is neutral. In any event In AM  (S  117B)  Malawi  [2015]  UKUT  260
(IAC) the Tribunal held that an appellant can obtain no positive right to  a
grant of leave to remain from either s117B (2) or (3), whatever  the  degree
of his fluency in English, or the strength of his  financial  resources.  In
Forman (ss 117A-C considerations) [2015] UKUT 00412 (IAC) it was  held  that
the public interest in firm  immigration  control  is  not  diluted  by  the
consideration that a person pursuing a claim under Article 8 ECHR has at  no
time been a financial burden on  the  state  or  is  self-sufficient  or  is
likely to remain so indefinitely.  The  significance  of  these  factors  is
that where they are not present the public interest is fortified.

34.   The appellants are all in the UK unlawfully. Section 117B(4)  operates
against them. Section 117B(5) weighs against all of the appellants.

35.   There are therefore more factors  in  Section  117B  weighing  against
each of the appellants than in their favour.

36.   The effect of the respondent's decision  would  be  that  the  private
life that the appellants have established in the UK would come  to  an  end.
They would have to move from their home, they would be separated from  their
friends, the third appellant would be removed from the UK  education  system
and would have to start afresh in Brazil. However,  that  private  life  has
been established almost by stealth whilst the appellants have  been  in  the
UK illegally. The first and  second  appellants  have  already  demonstrated
that they are resourceful.  The  third  and  fourth  appellants  are  young,
intelligent and able. They face a big change in  their  life  but  there  is
nothing before me to indicate that it is  a  change  to  which  they  cannot
adapt.

37.   In Zoumbas v SSHD 2013  UKSC  74  it  was  held   that  there  was  no
"substance in the criticism that  the  assessment  of  the  children's  best
interests was flawed because it assumed that their parents would be  removed
to the Republic of Congo. ....It was legitimate for  the  decision-maker  to
ask herself first whether it would have been  proportionate  to  remove  the
parents if they had no children and then, in considering the best  interests
of the children in the proportionality exercise,  ask  whether  their  well-
being altered that provisional balance. When one has regard to  the  age  of
the children, the  nature  and  extent  of  their  integration  into  United
Kingdom society, the close  family  unit  in  which  they  lived  and  their
Congolese citizenship, the matters  on  which  Mr  Lindsay  relied  did  not
create such a strong case for the children that their interest in  remaining
in the United Kingdom could have outweighed the considerations on which  the
decision-maker  relied  in  striking  the  balance  in  the  proportionality
exercise (paras 17 and 18 above). The  assessment  of  the  children's  best
interests must be read in the context of the decision letter  as  a  whole."
that there was no "irrationality in  the  conclusion  that  it  was  in  the
children's best interests to go  with  their  parents  to  the  Republic  of
Congo. No doubt it would have been  possible  to  have  stated  that,  other
things being equal, it was in the best interests of the children  that  they
and their parents stayed in the United Kingdom so  that  they  could  obtain
such  benefits  as  health  care  and  education  which  the  decision-maker
recognised might be of a higher standard than  would  be  available  in  the
Congo. But other things were not equal.  They  were  not  British  citizens.
They had no right to future education and health care in this country.  They
were part of a close-knit family with highly educated parents  and  were  of
an age when their emotional  needs  could  only  be  fully  met  within  the
immediate family unit. Such integration as had occurred into United  Kingdom
society would have been predominantly in the context of  that  family  unit.
Most significantly, the decision-maker concluded that they could be  removed
to the Republic of Congo in  the  care  of  their  parents  without  serious
detriment to their well-being".

38.   In the case of EV (Philippines) and Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ  874
Lord Justice Lewison, stated that the best interests of  the  children  must
be made on the basis that the facts are as they are in the  real  world  and
if neither parent has the right to  remain,  then  that  is  the  background
against which the  assessment  is  conducted.   Thus  Lord  Justice  Lewison
thought that the ultimate question was whether it was reasonable  to  expect
the child to follow the parent who had no right to remain to the country  of
origin.`

39.    I  therefore  find  that  the  respondent's   decision   is   not   a
disproportionate breach of any of the appellants' article 8 ECHR rights.

Conclusion

40.   I therefore have to find that  the  respondent's  decision  is  not  a
disproportionate breach of any rights that  the  appellants  might  have  in
terms of Article 8 ECHR.



Decision

41    The decision promulgated on  24  November  2014  contains  a  material
error of law. I therefore set it aside.

42    I remake the decision.

43     The  appeals  of  all  four  appellants  are  dismissed   under   the
Immigration Rules.

44    The appeals of all four appellants are dismissed  on  Article  8  ECHR
grounds.

45    There is no need for an anonymity direction.


      Signed     25 October 2015
                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
