
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43380/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 June 2016                               |On 28 July 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                               Mr H J E LATTER
                         DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE

                                   Between

                            Rocio Gonzalez Lopez
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Thoree, Solicitor, Thoree & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against a  decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    made on 5 October 2013 to remove her as an illegal entrant.  The appeal
    has been remitted to the Upper Tribunal for  further  determination  by
    order of the Court of Appeal dated 11 May 2016.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Colombia born on 4  September  1960.   On
    her account she entered the UK in 2001 travelling overland  from  Spain
    by lorry, making a clandestine entry into the UK.  She came to  the  UK
    to be with her daughter, who had arrived some months previously.

3.   Her daughter is now naturalised and is a  British  citizen  as  is  her
    husband, who also came to this country from Colombia.   They  have  two
    children, a son born on [ ] 2001 and a daughter born on [ ] 2005,  both
    British citizens.   According  to  the  statement  of  the  appellant's
    daughter, she came to the UK in March 2000 and started  a  relationship
    with her partner.  She became pregnant with  their  first  child.   The
    appellant came to the UK in May 2001 and moved  in  with  her  and  her
    partner.  She and her husband work regularly and the appellant has been
    like a full-time parent to the children, who have a special  bond  with
    and are very close to her.

4.   The appellant made no attempt to regularise her status in the UK  until
    14 August 2009 when she submitted an application for leave to remain as
    a dependent relative under para 317 of the Rules.  This application was
    refused in a decision dated 24 February 2010 but there was no right  of
    appeal as  no  removal  decision  was  made.   On  11  March  2010  her
    representatives  wrote  to  the   respondent   requesting   "a   proper
    immigration decision" which would attract a right of appeal.  This  was
    not forthcoming and the appellant's solicitors issued  judicial  review
    proceedings.  Permission to apply was granted on  12  August  2010  and
    following a long delay the proceedings were settled by  consent  on  17
    July 2013, when the respondent  agreed  to  issue  a  removal  decision
    within three months of the order.

5.   Accordingly, a decision was made dated  5  October  2013  refusing  the
    appellant leave to remain and making a decision  to  remove  her.   The
    appeal against this decision was heard by the First-tier Tribunal on 15
    May 2014.  The judge attached considerable  weight  to  the  fact  that
    there was a discrepancy in  the  evidence  of  the  appellant  and  her
    daughter as to whether the daughter had made an illegal entry into  the
    UK.  Whilst the appellant was clear in her evidence that  her  daughter
    had entered illegally overland via  a  lorry,  it  was  her  daughter's
    account that she had come to the UK on a tourist visa.

6.   In the light of this discrepancy the judge took the view that she  must
    give little weight to other features of the account such as  the  claim
    that the appellant had no other relatives in  Colombia,  a  fact  which
    underpinned the entire basis of the appeal.  Accordingly, she dismissed
    the appeal.  Permission was granted to appeal to the Upper Tribunal but
    it was found that the judge had not erred in law.  There was a  further
    appeal to the Court of Appeal which was settled by consent, the parties
    agreeing that the Upper Tribunal erred in law by endorsing  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's approach in using the discrepancy in  relation  to  the
    daughter's mode of travel  and  entry  into  the  UK  as  a  basis  for
    rejecting the appellant's other evidence.  In these circumstances,  the
    appeal was remitted to the Upper Tribunal for a  further  determination
    in accordance with the law.

7.   At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the  judge  had  followed
    the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Edgehill v  Secretary  of  State
    [2014] EWCA Civ 402 and considered whether the appellant  was  able  to
    meet the requirements of para 317 of the rules before the amendments of
    July 2012.  She found that the appellant could not  do  so.   She  then
    went on to consider article 8 but found, assuming  article  8  applied,
    that removal would be proportionate to a legitimate aim.

8.   Subsequent  to  the  hearings  before  the  First-tier  and  the  Upper
    Tribunal, the Court of Appeal in Singh and Khalid v Secretary of  State
    [2015] EWCA Civ 74 has resolved the position of whether and when  there
    were transitional provisions requiring the  Tribunal  to  consider  the
    positions under the rules in force prior to the July  2012  amendments.
    In short there was a limited time window between  9  July  2012  and  6
    September 2012 when transitional provisions were in force.  In  respect
    of decisions made by the respondent on  any  other  date,  applications
    were to be assessed by reference to the Rules in force at the  date  of
    decision.  It follows that when the First-tier Tribunal considered this
    appeal the rules to be considered were the amended Rules as set out  in
    the respondent's decision letter.

Submissions

9.   At the hearing before me the appeal proceeded  by  way  of  submissions
    only.  Mr Thoree did not seek to argue that the  appellant  could  meet
    the requirements of the amended Rules but  relied  on  article  8.   He
    submitted that the appellant had established that she had  family  life
    with  her  daughter,  son-in-law  and  in  particular  her  two   minor
    grandchildren.  The appellant now had no family living in Colombia  and
    if she had to return she would have nowhere to live and no-one to  look
    after her.  Taking into account her medical condition,  the  fact  that
    she had been so involved in looking after  her  grandchildren  and  the
    nature and  extent  of  the  relationship  between  them  it  would  be
    disproportionate for her to be removed.

10.  Mr Walker submitted that the respondent had  been  clearly  correct  to
    refuse the application on private life grounds for the reasons set  out
    in the decision letter of 5 October 2013.  He accepted that  there  was
    evidence of long residence in the UK, although in the  decision  letter
    of 24 February 2010 the respondent had only found  residence  evidenced
    since 2004.  He accepted that there was evidence of strong family  ties
    and  that  the  substantial  issue  was  whether   removal   would   be
    disproportionate.

Assessment of the Issues

11.  It is accepted that the appellant cannot meet the requirements  of  the
    Rules.  I must take into account the fact that the Rules as amended  in
    July 2012 and subsequently amended are  intended  to  reflect  how  the
    balance should be struck under article 8 between the right  to  respect
    for private and family life and the legitimate aims set out in  article
    8(2), in particular, protecting the economic well-being of the  UK.   I
    must therefore assess the appeal on the basis that the  Rules  maintain
    in general terms a reasonable relationship  with  the  requirements  of
    article 8 in the ordinary run of cases but there will  be  cases  which
    disclose compelling circumstances such that there is a good claim under
    article 8 outside the Rules: see para 40 of Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department v SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387.

12.  I must consider firstly whether there is  family  life  within  article
    8(1).  I remind myself that an assessment of  family  life  requires  a
    fact-sensitive approach: see paras 23 - 26 of R (Gurung) v Secretary of
    State [2013] EWCA Civ 8.  I accept that the appellant  has  lived  with
    her daughter and family since her arrival in the UK.  She has taken  on
    much of the day-to-day care of her grandchildren as  her  daughter  and
    her son-in-law have both worked regularly.  I accept the evidence  that
    the children have a special bond  with  their  grandmother  noting  the
    evidence of her grandson before the First-tier Tribunal at [53] - [54],
    evidence accepted by the judge at [82].  There is a further  letter  at
    45 of the supplementary bundle and also a letter from  the  appellant's
    granddaughter at 44.  The appellant, her daughter, her  son-in-law  and
    their children have to all intents and purposes  lived  together  as  a
    family unit in the same household since  the  appellant  came  to  this
    country and for that reason I am satisfied that there  is  family  life
    within article 8(1).

13.   I  am  also  satisfied  that  removing  the  appellant  would  be   an
    interference with that family life, that the  removal  decision  is  in
    accordance with the law and is for  a  legitimate  aim  within  article
    8(2).  The issue in contention between the parties is  whether  removal
    would be disproportionate to that  legitimate  aim  in  the  particular
    circumstances of this family.

14.  The appellant has taken a large part in  the  day-to-day  care  of  her
    grandchildren.  This has involved  providing  practical  and  emotional
    support to the family when her granddaughter was diagnosed with  cancer
    in 2007.  As the judge noted at [80], no evidence had been put in about
    her condition and she concluded that there was no continuing  treatment
    and that it was more likely than not that she had been  given  the  all
    clear but, nonetheless, she accepted that at the  time  it  would  have
    been a very difficult situation to deal with and that  the  appellant's
    absence from the family would have made a real difference to  how  they
    coped at that time.

15.  I also take into account and give weight to the  evidence  and  letters
    from the appellant's grandchildren about the current situation and  how
    they still have a very close relationship with her.  In this context  I
    must take into account the best interests of the children in accordance
    with the guidance from the House of  Lords  in  both  ZH  (Tanzania)  v
    Secretary of State [2011] UKSC 4  and  Zoumbas  v  Secretary  of  State
    [2013] UKSC 74.  I accept that it  would  be  in  the  children's  best
    interests for the appellant to remain as part of their family unit  but
    remind myself that their  best  interests  can  be  outweighed  by  the
    cumulative effect of other relevant factors.

16.  I must also take into account the length  of  time  the  appellant  has
    been in the UK.  I accept that she arrived in 2001, a fact supported by
    the photographs showing her with her grandson, when he is clearly  very
    young.  She  did  not  seek  to  regularise  her  position  until  2009
    receiving an adverse decision on 24 February 2010.  However,  that  was
    not a decision against which there was a right of appeal as  there  was
    no decision to remove her.  Her representatives sought such a  decision
    so that there could be an appeal at that stage but  it  was  not  until
    after judicial review proceedings were instituted and the consent order
    of 17 July 2013 that the respondent agreed to reconsider the matter and
    if adverse to make a removal decision.  Whilst it must be a matter  for
    the respondent to decide whether and when to  make  a  decision  giving
    rise to the right of appeal, the fact remains that no such decision was
    made in 2010 with the result that an appeal was only heard by the First-
    tier Tribunal in May 2014. There have now been further  delays  arising
    from the successful appeal to the Court of Appeal with the result  that
    the appellant has now been in the UK for about fifteen years.

17.  I see no reason not  to  accept  the  appellant's  evidence  about  her
    family background and circumstances in Colombia.  I accept that she was
    a single parent of her daughter, her  only  child.   In  oral  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal she said that she  had  no  brothers  or
    sisters and her parents, aunts and uncles had  all  died.   There  were
    nephews and nieces but they were living either in Spain or  the  United
    States.  She said that there was no one in Colombia left  to  whom  she
    could turn for help.  I note that the appellant has not produced  death
    certificates for any of these relatives but by itself does not lead  me
    to the view that her evidence is unreliable on this issue.

18.  I also note that in the decision letter the  respondent  was  concerned
    by the fact that there were two addresses for the  appellant  disclosed
    in the evidence.  In the letter dated 11  March  2010  the  appellant's
    representatives explained that her son-in-law remained the owner of the
    property at [ ] Court, London when the family moved to their  new  home
    at [ ] House in about 2004 and some correspondence continued to  go  to
    the old address.  I must also take  into  account  that  the  appellant
    suffers from epilepsy.  According to the evidence before the First-tier
    Tribunal she was around 25 years old when she had her  first  epileptic
    fit but she was able to continue to work and support her daughter until
    she left Colombia in 2000.  The evidence before the judge suggests that
    the  appellant's  condition  is  stable  and  generally  being  managed
    successfully  with  drugs.   It  is  also  not  disputed  that  medical
    treatment would be available in  Colombia  even  if  not  to  the  same
    standard as in the UK.   Her  medical  condition  is  therefore  not  a
    significant factor in the assessment of proportionality.

19.  I must take into account the provisions of s.117B of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended.   The  appellant's  primary
    language is still Spanish but she clearly has some ability in  English.
    She is not financially independent but is dependent on her daughter and
    son-in-law.  The appellant's claim is based on family life rather  than
    private life and the fact that any private life  has  been  established
    when her immigration status is precarious is of limited application  in
    the present case.  She  is  not  able  to  benefit  directly  from  the
    provisions of s.117B(6) because that  relates  to  someone  who  has  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  a  qualifying  child
    where it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave  the  UK.
    Her relationship, whilst not parental but grandparental, is nonetheless
    an important factor and must be taken into account accordingly.

20.   I  must  balance  these  factors  with  the  public  interest  in  the
    maintenance  of  effective  immigration  control  and  protecting   the
    economic well-being of the UK.  These factors would  normally  outweigh
    the interference with the interference with the private and family life
    of the appellant and the other family members.  As Lord Bingham said in
    Razgar, article 8 claims are only likely to be  successful  in  a  very
    small minority of cases.  However, there are a number of factors, which
    lead me to the view that this case falls within that minority.

21.  The  appellant  delayed  in  applying  for  leave  to  remain  but  the
    respondent did not make a decision to  remove  her  in  2010  and  then
    resisted an application on her behalf for such decision  so  preventing
    her from having a right of appeal at that stage.  She had to resort  to
    of judicial review proceedings and they  were  finally  compromised  in
    2013 when the respondent agreed to make  a  decision  to  grant  an  in
    country right of appeal.  There was a further delay when  the  decision
    in that appeal was challenged in the Court of  Appeal.  The  upshot  is
    that the appellant has now been in the UK for  fifteen  years  and  any
    delay subsequent to her application in 2009 cannot be attributed to any
    action or lack of it on her part.

22.  If the claim simply related to the appellant's private  life,  I  would
    not find that removal would  be  disproportionate  even  after  fifteen
    years.  However, it relates to family life where the evidence  is  that
    there has been and continues to  be  a  close  family  unit,  not  only
    between the appellant and her daughter but also with her  grandchildren
    such that it is in their best interests for her to remain  in  the  UK.
    When these factors are taken with the circumstances  which  would  face
    the appellant on return to Colombia where she has no home, no remaining
    close family and would remain financially dependent on  her  family  in
    the  UK,  I  am  satisfied  that  there  are  compelling  circumstances
    justifying further consideration outside the Rules under article 8  and
    that the decision to remove her would now be  disproportionate  to  the
    legitimate aims relied on by the respondent.  Accordingly,  the  appeal
    should be allowed under article 8.

Decision

23.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law for the reasons  set  out  in  the
    statement of reasons attached to the consent order made by the Court of
    Appeal.  I re-make the decision by dismissing the appeal on immigration
    grounds but allowing it under article 8 outside the Rules. No anonymity
    direction has been made.

Signed   H J E Latter                            Date: 28 July 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
