
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43276/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Nottingham Magistrates Court|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19th January 2016                 |On 22nd January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                          mr mohamed zakaria lezzom
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Not Represented
For the Respondent:    Mr M Dwnycz (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Appellant,  with
    permission, against a Decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Porter
    promulgated on 30th January  2015.   The  Appellant  is  a  citizen  of
    Algeria born on 24th January 1985. On 26th October 2014 he applied  for
    a Residence card as the extended family member of his partner, a French
    national exercising Treaty rights in the United Kingdom. The couple are
    accepted to be in a durable relationship.

 2. In her decision of 5th November 2014 the Secretary  of  State  accepted
    the couple were in  a  durable  relationship  and  therefore  that  the
    Appellant is an extended family member. However, she chose not to issue
    a residence card when considering the exercise  of  her  discretion  in
    that regard. She did so  on  the  basis  of  the  Appellant's  criminal
    convictions  and  poor  immigration  history.   She   also   found   no
    exceptional circumstances justifying a grant.

 3. At the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal the judge  heard  evidence
    from the Appellant and his partner and concluded that the Secretary  of
    State had correctly applied the provisions of  Regulation  17(4)(b)  of
    the EEA Regulations in refusing  to  issue  a  residence  card  to  the
    appellant.

 4. The Appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal. At that time he was represented by solicitors.

 5. The grounds asserted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had  erred  at
    paragraph 25 of the decision when assessing the case in  terms  of  the
    EEA Regulations by:-

    (i)  Failing to take into account or assesses a relevant  consideration
         the  fact  that  the  refusal  will  deter  the  post-partner  from
         exercising their free movement rights

    (ii) Missapplying the law in  finding  that  the  Appellant's  previous
         conviction represented a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious
         threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society

    (iii)    By taking into account an irrelevant consideration, namely the
         Appellant's poor immigration history and status

    (iv) By taking into account an irrelevant consideration, namely the EEA
         partners attitude and behaviour  with  regard  to  his  immigration
         status

    (v)  By failing to consider other material factors such as  the  length
         of residence in the UK, his relationship with the EEA national, the
         fact that she is working and his integration to the UK.

 6. It is further asserted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in  his
    assessment of Article 8.

 7. Permission to appeal was refused by a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  but
    then granted by a deputy judge of the Upper Tribunal saying  only  that
    the grounds of appeal particularly grounds (i) and (ii) raised arguable
    errors of law.

 8. Reference was made to the  Home  Office  guidance  to  its  caseworkers
    dealing with such applications entitled "Extended Family Members of EEA
    Nationals" which is stated to apply and interpret the  EEA  Regulations
    which make sure that the UK complies with its  duties  under  the  Free
    Movement of Persons Directive 2004/38/EEC. That guidance must be  taken
    into account by decision-makers. However, it is of course  not  binding
    on the Tribunal.

 9. Having seen that guidance I am concerned that  it  is  itself  in  part
    wrong in law. In particular at page 26 of the guidance the  caseworkers
    are instructed to consider criminality under the Immigration Rules  and
    not the regulations. It is said:-"This is because  the  regulations  do
    not apply to a person seeking rights as an extended family member of an
    EEA national, until that  person  has  been  issued  with  a  residence
    document." That is wrong. In a case such as the current one where it is
    accepted by the Secretary of State that the Appellant is in  a  durable
    relationship with an EEA national it is accepted that the appellant  is
    in fact an extended family member. He therefore has to be dealt with in
    accordance with the EEA regulations  and  not  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Whether or not he has a residence card or any other  kind  of  document
    issued in relation to  that  relationship  with  the  EEA  national  is
    irrelevant. It is his status as an extended family member  that  brings
    him within the regulations.

10. Regulation 8 (5) confirms  the  Appellant  to  be  an  extended  family
    member.

11. Regulation 17 (4) provides that the Secretary  of  State  may  issue  a
    residence card to an extended family member if-

         '(a) the relevant EEA national in relation to the  extended  family
             members is a qualified  person  or  an  EEA  national  with  a
             permanent right of residence under regulation 15; and

         (b)  in all the circumstances appears to  the  Secretary  of  State
             appropriate to issue the residence card.'

12. That provision confirms that there is a discretion to be  exercised  by
    the Secretary of State and  the  issue  of  a  residence  card  is  not
    automatic for extended family members as it is for family members.

13.  Regulation 17  (5  )  provides  that  where  the  Secretary  of  State
    receives an application for a residence card from  an  extended  family
    member he shall undertake an  extensive  examination  of  the  personal
    circumstances of the applicant and if he refuses the application  shall
    give reasons justifying the refusal unless  this  is  contrary  to  the
    interests of national security.

14. Regulation 20 covers matters to be taken into account  when  exercising
    discretion  to  refuse,  revoke  or  refuse  to  renew  a  registration
    certificate,  a  residence  card,  a  document   certifying   permanent
    residence or a permanent residence card if the refusal of revocation is
    justified on grounds  of  public  policy,  public  security  or  public
    health. That would appear to confirm therefore that it is only  on  the
    grounds of public policy, public security or public health that justify
    the Secretary of State  refusing  to  issue  a  residence  card  to  an
    extended family member.

15. Regulation 21 (1) defines a "relevant decision" as a decision taken  on
    grounds of public policy, public security or  public  health  and  then
    provides, so far as is relevant in this case that:-

         '(2) A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.

         ...

         (5)  Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public policy
         or public security it shall, in  addition  to  complying  with  the
         preceding paragraphs of this regulation,  be  taken  in  accordance
         with the following principles-

             (a)   the  decision  must  comply  with   the   principle   of
             proportionality;

             (b)  the decision must be based exclusively  on  the  personal
             conduct of the person concerned;

             (c)   the  personal  conduct  of  the  person  concerned  must
             represent a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat
             affecting one of the fundamental interests of society;

             (d)  matters isolated from the particulars of the  case  which
             relate to considerations of general prevention do not  justify
             the decision;

             (e)  a  person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in
             themselves justify the decision.

         (6)  Before taking a relevant decision on  the  grounds  of  public
         policy or public security in relation to a person who  is  resident
         in the United Kingdom the  decision  maker  must  take  account  of
         considerations such  as  the  age,  state  of  health,  family  and
         economic situation of the person, the person's length of  residence
         in the United Kingdom, the person social and  cultural  integration
         into the United Kingdom and the extent of the person's  links  with
         his country of origin.'

16. It is important to note that  the  sole  issue  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  was  whether  the  Secretary  of  State  had  properly
    considered the exercise of discretion and whether it should  have  been
    exercised differently.

17. The Judge correctly set out in paragraph 9  that  he  had  to  consider
    whether the respondent had  correctly  applied  Regulation  17  to  the
    Appellant and secondly whether there was sufficient evidence to warrant
    an exercise of discretion in favour of the Appellant.  The  Judge  then
    indicated that he had to consider whether Article 8 was engaged despite
    the absence of an application in that regard. I will  deal  later  with
    the Article 8 question.

18. The Judge set out the personal  circumstances  of  the  Appellant  from
    paragraph 12. They are as follows.

19. The Appellant entered the UK using a false French passport  in  a  name
    other than his own on 31st March 2007. He was interviewed on 2nd  April
    2007 and removed to Italy because  he  claimed  to  have  been  working
    illegally there for three years.

20. Undeterred, the Appellant entered the UK again  in  May  2007.  He  was
    arrested in Slough in July 2007 attempting to open a bank account using
    a different false French passport in a different name. He was convicted
    of dishonestly making false representations for gain and possession  of
    a false  ID  document  in  August  2007  and  sentenced  to  15  months
    detention. That conviction was in an alias  name,  date  of  birth  and
    nationality. That was his third identity and he claimed to be a citizen
    of Lebanon born in 1988. As a result of his  giving  a  false  date  of
    birth he was detained in a Young offenders Institution rather  than   a
    prison

21. In December 2007 the Appellant was served with a notice of liability to
    deport and he then made an asylum application which  he  then  withdrew
    six months later. He was served with a deportation order in  June  2008
    and released from detention with reporting and tagging restrictions. He
    failed to comply  with  those  restrictions  and  removed  his  tagging
    device. He was thus listed as an absconder on 25th  November  2010  and
    the deportation order remains extant.

22. The Appellant was and remains detained since  September  2014  when  he
    eventually revealed his true identity as the  name  he  currently  uses
    with a date of birth of 24th January 1984 with Algerian nationality. He
    said that he has both parents, two sisters  and  a  brother  living  in
    Algeria.

23. His French partner came to the UK in  September  2012  and  has  worked
    since. The couple initially met over the Internet, meeting face-to-face
    in November 2012.  They commenced a relationship in February  2013  and
    lived together since May 2013. She has visited the Appellant  a  number
    of times in detention

24. The Appellant's partner  has  always  been  aware  of  his  immigration
    status, convictions and the deportation order and has also  been  aware
    that he has been an absconder. She did not encourage the  Appellant  to
    regularise his status.

25. The Judge at paragraph 25 of the Decision and Reasons  did  not  accept
    the submissions made  on  the  Appellant's  behalf  that  his  previous
    conviction was of historical significance only  but  rather  considered
    the nature of the conviction to be of a  kind  which  did  represent  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one  of  the
    fundamental interests of society, namely, in the honest production  and
    maintenance of accurate and true public documents  confirming  identity
    and status. The Judge also did not consider the  convictions  could  be
    viewed in isolation as they  formed  part  of  an  ongoing  pattern  of
    behaviour on the part of this Appellant from his initial illegal  entry
    into the United Kingdom with false documents until  the  point  he  was
    detained in  September  2014  when  he  eventually  revealed  his  true
    identity. The Judge also took cognizance of the fact that the Appellant
    was detained in a Young Offenders  Institution  rather  than  a  prison
    purely on the basis of his having given a false identification and age.
    He also noted the Appellant had failed to take any steps to  regularise
    his status despite  having  formed  a  serious  relationship  with  his
    partner who was herself fully  aware  of  his  status.  He  noted  that
    neither the Appellant nor his partner  had  shown  respect  for  United
    Kingdom  immigration  law.  The  judges  expressed  himself   satisfied
    therefore on the basis of the principles referred to in  regulation  21
    (5) that the Secretary of State's refusal was justified.

26. On the facts of this case that conclusion  is  inescapable.  While  the
    Judge did not set out in terms the Appellant's ties to Algeria, he  did
    refer to the number of family members there.   There  was  no  evidence
    whatsoever of any health issues and the Appellant can hardly  claim  to
    be integrated in the UK when he has  committed  offences  and  shown  a
    total disregard for immigration law.  He has  been  here  a  relatively
    short time and all of it unlawfully.

27. The Judge then moved on to considering  whether  there  was  sufficient
    evidence to warrant an exercise of discretion in his favour.  What  the
    judge did not consider specifically in that regard was the effect  that
    the decision would have on his partner's  ability  to  exercise  Treaty
    rights. However, that could have made no  material  difference  to  the
    outcome because it cannot be said that his lack  of  a  residence  card
    affected in any way her ability to live and work in United Kingdom. The
    fact that he has been detained for a considerable period  of  time  has
    not affected her ability to exercise Treaty rights.

28. So far as taking irrelevant considerations into account,  such  as  his
    poor immigration status and  his  EEA  national's  culpability  in  his
    failing to comply with UK immigration law I find that they are relevant
    considerations because they go to proportionality which is one  of  the
    considerations that must be taken into account.

29. At paragraph 27 of the Decision and Reasons the Judge found  Article  8
    not to be engaged, there having  been  no  independent  application  in
    relation to it. The Judge was right not consider Article 8 but  perhaps
    not for the right reasons. We now have  the  Upper  Tribunal   case  of
    Amirteymour  (EEA  appeals;  human  rights)  [2015]  UKUT  00466  (IAC)
    subsequently confirmed to be correct by the Court of Appeal in TY  (Sri
    Lanka) [2015] EWCA Civ 1233 which makes  clear  that  in  EEA  appeals,
    unless there is a removal decision there is to be no  consideration  of
    Article 8. In this case there is an extant deportation order.  However,
    as the extended family member of an EEA national this Appellant  cannot
    be deported pursuant to that  deportation  order  and  any  deportation
    decision will now need to be taken  under  the  EEA  regulations.  Thus
    there will be no question of the Appellant is being removed  consequent
    upon his losing this appeal and Article 8  is  thus  not  engaged.   In
    those circumstances it is  perhaps  surprising  hat  the  Appellant  is
    detained.

30. For the above reasons I find that the First-tier Tribunal Judge made no
    material error of law in his decision which stands.

31. There has been no application of anonymity in this case and  I  see  no
    justification for making an anonymity direction.

Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 21st January 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
