
 [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/43701/2013
      and IA/46681/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 21 October 2014                       |On 31 October 2014        |
|                                         |                          |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             (1) Mr RASHID WASIF
                             (2) MUHAMMAD WAQAS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Roe, QC and Mr M Iqbal, Counsel
      (instructed by Farani Javid Taylor Solicitors LLP)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS






      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant (the Secretary of State) appealed with  permission
           granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Page on  2  September  2014
           against the determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  A  R
           Williams who had allowed the Respondents' linked appeals as Tier
           1 (Entrepreneur) Migrants to the  extent  of  finding  that  the
           decisions appealed against were not in accordance with  the  law
           and remained outstanding  before  the  Secretary  of  State  for
           lawful decisions. The determination was promulgated on 12 August
           2014.


      2.    The Respondents are nationals of Pakistan, respectively born  on
           1  February  1990  and  13  October  1984.   They  are  business
           partners.  They had sought variations of their existing leave to
           remain so as to become Tier 1  (Entrepreneur)  Migrants.   Their
           applications had been refused because they had each relied on  a
           letter from the MCB Bank Limited, but (as they accepted and  was
           not in dispute) it had not been produced within the three  month
           period immediately prior to  the  date  of  their  applications.
           This meant that the Secretary of State awarded them no points in
           terms of funds held in regulated financial institutions  and  no
           points as to funds  disposable  in  the  United  Kingdom.    The
           Respondents contended that the bank  letter  had  been  provided
           long  before  the  Secretary  of  State  reached   her   adverse
           decisions.  There was also an issue about the  English  language
           requirement.  The test scores had been  withdrawn  by  the  test
           provider, so the certificates were not accepted by the Secretary
           of State.


      3.    Permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  as  sought  by  the
           Secretary  of  State  was  granted  because  it  was  considered
           arguable that the judge's application of Raju, Khatel and Others
           v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 754 when finding  that  post  application
           evidence could and should have been considered by the  Secretary
           of State  was mistaken.  It was further considered arguable that
           the judge's reasoning was inadequate.


      4.    Directions were made by the Upper Tribunal in standard form.  It
           was directed that the appeal would be reheard immediately in the
           event that a material error of law was found.






      Submissions - error of law


      5.    Mr Wilding for the Appellant relied on the grounds and the grant
           of permission to appeal.  The determination had failed  to  have
           sufficient regard to the text of the Immigration Rules  as  they
           stood in October 2013, i.e., Appendix A, "Attributes", Table  4,
           Part A.  Paragraph  41  set  out  the  requirements,  which  was
           followed  by  paragraph  41-SD,  indicating  at  paragraph   41-
           SD(c)(i)(4) that the bank  letter  had  to  have  been  produced
           within  the  three  months  immediately  before  the   date   of
           application.  That was the  rule,  with  which  the  Respondents
           admitted they had not complied.  Sending the decisions  back  to
           the Secretary of State as the judge had  ordered  would  achieve
           nothing except a re-refusal because the rule had not  been  met.
           Raju (above) covered precisely the present situation.  This  was
           a substantive requirement of the Immigration Rules, not merely a
           general evidential requirement: see Durrani  (Entrepeneurs  bank
           letters; evidential flexibility) [2014] UKUT 295 (IAC) and Ahmed
           and Another (PBS: admissible evidence) [2014] UKUT 365 (IAC).


      6.    If that were wrong, it was plain in any event from the  relevant
           bank letter that one third of  the  funds  relied  on  had  been
           deposited after the applications had been submitted.   Miah  and
           ors v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 261  showed  that  the  Points  Based
           System  requirements  were  fixed.    Paragraph   34G   of   the
           Immigration Rules prescribed when an application was treated  as
           made, and the Respondents had not complied.  They had sought  to
           make a bad application good after the event.   Nor  was  this  a
           situation where paragraph 245AA of the  Immigration  Rules  (the
           "evidential flexibility policy")  was  applicable,  because  the
           applications  would  fail  on  grounds  in   addition   to   the
           documentary issue.  The letter itself had not been  provided  in
           accordance with the Immigration Rules.


      7.    Mr Roe QC  for  the  Respondents  relied  principally  upon  his
           supplementary skeleton argument.  This was  not  a  "near  miss"
           situation nor was section 85A of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
           and Asylum Act 2002 relevant.  AQ (Pakistan) [2011] EWCA Civ 833
           indicated that the date of decision was the material date.   The
           Respondents had acquired the right to the relevant points by the
           date of the decisions.


      8.     Raju  (above)  was  concerned  with  meeting  the   substantive
           requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules.    The   rule   under
           consideration in Raju placed the possession of the qualification
           at the date of the application at the centre of the  substantive
           requirements  for  leave,  which  in  the  present  appeals  was
           occupied by the need to have access to sufficient  funds,  which
           was the criterion for leave.


      9.    The Respondents had explained their position, in that Mr Waqas's
           leave  to  remain  was  about  to  expire,  hence  his  Tier   1
           application could not be postponed or he would  have  become  an
           overstayer.  The issue was what the consequences should be where
           the Respondents failed to meet the formal requirements, but  had
           met the substantive requirements.


      10.   The recent decision in Avon Freeholds Ltd v Regent Court RTM  Co
           Ltd [2013] UKUT 231  (LC)  examined  what  the  consequences  of
           formal non compliance with a statutory requirement might be when
           there had been substantial compliance.   Ravichandran [2000] WLR
           354 was also  relevant  to  non  compliance  with  a  procedural
           requirement.  In the present appeal it could be  seen  that  the
           substantive requirement of the Immigration Rules had  been  met.
           A  requirement  as  to  proof  had  been  elevated  to  into   a
           substantive  requirement  with   an   impermissibly   inflexible
           approach to its application.  Nor could  it  be  said  that  the
           withdrawal of the English language test  certificate  scores  by
           the test provider should penalise the Respondents.


      11.   Mr Iqbal  for  the  Respondents  submitted  that  there  was  no
           mischief identifiable from  the  late  submission  of  the  bank
           letter in any event.


      12.   In reply, Mr Wilding reiterated that the Immigration Rules could
           not be circumvented.  Avon Freeholds  (above)  referred  to  the
           construction of a statute and the decision was  not  comparable.
           AQ (above) had been considered in Raju (above).  Paragraph 41-SD
           could not be overcome by what was in  substance  a  "near  miss"
           argument.  The route taken by the judge had  not  been  open  to
           him.  There was nothing inherently unfair about a process  which
           had been set out and where three months had been allowed for.


      13.   The tribunal reserved its decision.








      The error of law finding


      14.    After  due  reflection,  the  tribunal   considers   that   the
           Appellant's arguments succeed.  The tribunal recognises that  it
           has had the benefit of much  fuller  argument  and  citation  of
           authority than that made available to Judge Williams.  The  case
           on both sides has been put somewhat differently, as  may  happen
           when the issues are purely legal.


      15.   Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant appeals have often given  rise  to
           difficulty,  not  least  in  the  interpretation  of  the   main
           authorities such as Raju (above) as to  when  the  reception  of
           post-application but pre-decision  evidence  within  the  Points
           Based System regime is permissible for the First-tier  Tribunal.
           Here it seems to the tribunal that inadvertently the judge erred
           in his approach.  It is easy to see why.   In  terms  of  public
           administration, the fact that the Secretary of State reached  no
           decision(s) until many months after  the  admittedly  late  bank
           letter had been received from the applicants helped  create  the
           impression that the provisions of paragraph 41-SD were precatory
           not mandatory, or,  as  the  case  was  put  on  behalf  of  the
           Respondents, merely an evidential requirement and not a binding,
           time fixed condition.   When  remitting  the  decisions  to  the
           Secretary of State, no doubt the judge was  also  influenced  by
           the lack of any statement of proper reasons  for  rejecting  the
           English language test certificates which had been valid  at  the
           time they were submitted, but which were  later  withdrawn.   No
           doubt, too, the judge had in mind that the Respondents had  paid
           substantial  fees  when  submitting  their  applications.    The
           general impression  created  by  the  Secretary  of  State  when
           dealing with  the  applications  was  one  of  unfairness.   The
           judge's view that the applications should be looked at again  in
           all the circumstances reflects judicial tradition and indeed the
           broad principles summarised in Avon Freeholds.


      16.   The problem is that the terms  of  paragraph  41-SD(c)(i)(4)  of
           Table A are mandatory and are highly prescriptive.  There is  no
           choice  of  routes  to  compliance.   The  Respondents  had  not
           complied, as they accepted.   The fact  that  the  Secretary  of
           State had not decided the applications  at  the  time  the  bank
           letters were submitted is irrelevant, and is  merely  indicative
           of slowness of administration.   This was a narrow  but  crucial
           point.


      17.   Avon Freeholds (above) offers no assistance to the  Respondents.
           The facts, a property case far removed from the sphere of public
           law, show that a serious injustice would have resulted  from  an
           insistence on formal or technical compliance,  contrary  to  the
           purpose of the legislation in question.  Ravichandran, an asylum
           case, has a similar rationale.  No such  considerations  applied
           to the present applications for variations of leave  to  remain,
           which are governed by the Immigration Rules.   The  applications
           were voluntary acts. The applicants were on notice that they had
           to comply with all of the terms and conditions laid down in  the
           Immigration Rules if their applications were to  succeed.   They
           knew that their fees would be wasted if they failed to meet  the
           conditions.  They were also on  notice  that  the  applications,
           together with the prescribed documents in the correct form,  had
           to be lodged prior to the expiry of any existing leave to remain
           if a right of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  to  be
           available (as opposed to the rigours of Judicial Review).


      18.   Nasim and others (Raju: reasons  not  to  follow?)  [2013]  UKUT
           00610 (IAC) examined the meaning of the date of  "obtaining  the
           relevant qualification" for the purposes of Table 10 of Appendix
           A of the Immigration Rules in force immediately before  6  April
           2012.  A strict approach to the substantive requirements of  the
           Immigration Rules was taken.  The Upper Tribunal reiterated that
           the  First-tier  Tribunal  may  not  consider  evidence  as   to
           compliance with points-based rules where that evidence  was  not
           before the Secretary of State when she took her decision.


      19.   The critical difference between Nasim (above) and the  facts  of
           the present appeal is that paragraph  41-SD(c)(i)(4)  laid  down
           the specific requirements for the bank letter and the  date  for
           its  production.   The  rule  identified  the  conditions.   The
           Respondents  did  not  satisfy  those  requirements,   as   they
           admitted.  The rule was not met.  There was thus no proper basis
           for the finding that the decisions were not in  accordance  with
           the law.


      20.   The tribunal finds  that  the  determination  contains  material
           errors of law, such that it must be set aside and  remade.   The
           Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.








      The fresh decision


      21.   In this part of the determination for  convenience  and  clarity
           the tribunal will refer to the parties by their original  titles
           in the First-tier Tribunal.  There was no need for  any  further
           evidence or submissions for the original decisions to be remade.




      22.    For  the  reasons  set  out  above,  it  is  clear  that   both
           applications were doomed to fail because of the failure  of  the
           Appellants  to  comply   with   paragraph   41-SD(c)(i)(4),   an
           ineluctable immigration rule.  Indeed,  as  Mr  Wilding  pointed
           out, the substance of the requirement was  demonstrating  access
           to funds, but the full amount necessary was not available  until
           after the application(s) had been submitted.   The  applications
           had thus been made prematurely. There was no scope for resort to
           paragraph 245AA,  since  the  prescribed  time  limit  had  been
           missed.  It was not, for example, a situation where a page  from
           a sequence had  been  accidentally  omitted  from  an  otherwise
           correct application.


      23.   As the applications failed on the paragraph 41-SD(c)(i)(4) point
           alone, and so the appeals  must  fail,  the  tribunal  need  not
           embark on consideration on the other grounds of refusal.


      24.   As was made clear in their decision letters, the Appellants  may
           chose to make and rule compliant  fresh  applications,  although
           they will not enjoy a right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal
           in the event that the fresh applications are refused.


      DECISION


      The making of the previous decision involved the making  of  an  error
on a  point of law.  The appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  allowed.   The
decision    of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and remade as follows:

      The Appellants' appeals are dismissed


      Signed                                 Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell     30 October 2014




      TO THE RESPONDENT
      FEE AWARD


      The appeals were dismissed, and so no fee awards can be made


      Signed                                  Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell     30 October 2014
