
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43643/2013




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On  18th July 2014                              |On 5th  August 2014        |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      Deputy UPPER Tribunal JUDGE KELLY

                                   Between

                            the secretary of state
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                          Rushitan Kirtikumar Raval
                          (anonymity not directed)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Secretary of State appeals, with permission, against the decision  of
   the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Hodgkinson) to  allow  Mr  Raval's  appeal
   from her decision to refuse his application for leave to remain as a Tier
   4 (General) Migrant Student and to remove him from  the  United  Kingdom.
   For the sake of convenience, I shall refer to the  parties  according  to
   their status in the First-tier Tribunal. In other words, I shall refer to
   Mr Raval as "the appellant"  and  to  the  Secretary  of  State  as  "the
   respondent".

The background

2. If the respondent were to succeed in  this  appeal,  it  would  have  the
   consequence of perpetuating an injustice that arose from events that took
   place as long ago as December 2010. In order to explain how this has come
   about, it is first necessary to  summarise  the  appellant's  immigration
   history. The following summary is based upon findings that were  made  by
   the Tribunal in decisions that were respectively promulgated on the  18th
   August 2011 and (the decision subject to the  instant  appeal)  the  14th
   March 2014. Those findings have not been challenged by the respondent  in
   the current proceedings.

3. The appellant is a citizen of India who was  born  on  the  29th  October
   1989. He was granted leave to enter the United Kingdom on the  24th  June
   2009 for the purpose of studying 'Hotel Management  and  Hospitality'  at
   Halifax College. At the end of his course, the appellant was required  to
   re-sit a number of his examinations. As  his  existing  leave  to  remain
   expired  on  the  30th  September  2010,  the  appellant   submitted   an
   application for further leave to remain. That  application  was  made  in
   time. It was however invalid for other reasons. The  appellant  therefore
   re-submitted his application, on the 13th October 2010, by which time his
   leave to remain in the United Kingdom had expired.

4. On the 29th November 2010, the respondent wrote to the appellant  to  say
   that she required access to his 'Pearson Test Score'. The  appellant  was
   allowed three days for this purpose and  was  informed  that  no  further
   extension would be granted. The appellant received that letter on the 1st
   December 2010. He immediately  forwarded  the  respondent's  request,  by
   email, to the Test Centre. The Test Centre responded, on the same day, by
   saying that the information would become available within the next one to
   two working days. The respondent checked the Test Centre's website on the
   7th December 2010, by which time the appellant's test score had still not
   been made available. This was the sole basis upon  which  the  respondent
   refused the appellant's application for further leave  to  remain,  in  a
   decision that was made on the 20th June 2011. On the  18th  August  2011,
   the Tribunal allowed the appellant's appeal against that decision on  the
   ground that his removal would be  contrary  to  Article  8  of  the  1950
   European Convention for the Protection of Human  Rights  and  Fundamental
   Freedoms. The respondent responded to the Tribunal's decision by granting
   the appellant a period of discretionary leave to  remain  until  the  6th
   November 2012. At the end of that period of leave, the appellant  applied
   for further leave to remain in order to continue his studies.

5. On the 8th May 2013, and whilst his  application  for  further  leave  to
   remain was still pending, the respondent wrote to the appellant to inform
   him that the sponsorship licence of the  college  which  had  issued  his
   Confirmation of Acceptance  for  Studies  (CAS)  had  been  revoked.  The
   respondent therefore gave him the  opportunity  to  find  an  alternative
   college within a period of 60 days, which the appellant did in fact do.

6. The decision which was the subject of appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal,
   in the current proceedings, was made on  the  13th  September  2013.  The
   respondent refused the application on two grounds. The first  ground  was
   that the appellant had failed to submit specified documents  as  evidence
   of the funds that were available to him. The First-tier Tribunal found as
   a fact that the appellant had in fact submitted those documents with  his
   application,  and  this  finding  has  not  been  challenged   in   these
   proceedings. The second  ground  on  which  the  respondent  refused  the
   appellant's  application  was  that  the  appellant  fell  foul  of   the
   requirement that he had last been granted leave to remain  as  a  Tier  4
   (General)  Student  Migrant.  The  appellant  was  unable  to  meet  that
   requirement because his last grant of leave to remain had of course  been
   granted on a discretionary basis.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

7. The Tribunal noted that none of the appellant's  evidence  had  been  the
   subject of  factual  challenge.  It  also  noted  that  the  Home  Office
   Presenting Officer had acknowledged "that the appellant was the victim of
   several unfortunate circumstances" [paragraph 23].  The Tribunal  finally
   noted, more than once, that the appellant was only in a situation whereby
   he was unable to meet the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  -  and
   thus to complete the course for which  he  had  originally  been  granted
   leave to enter the United  Kingdom  -  "through  no  fault  of  his  own"
   [paragraphs 27 and 28]. The Tribunal then  set  out  its  conclusion,  at
   paragraph 29 -

    I find the appellant's circumstances to  be  sufficiently  unusual  and
    exceptional, not only to be such that Article 8 is engaged in  relation
    to his private life, with reference to his attempts to study  here  and
    the consequences of him being disabled from  doing  so,  but  also  the
    respondent's decision represents a disproportionate  interference  with
    that private life. I entirely appreciate that it  is  difficult  indeed
    for a points-based appellant  to  establish,  both  the  engagement  of
    Article 8, and a disproportionate breach thereof, but the circumstances
    found by me are, I find, such that his particular appellant, based upon
    the facts of his particular case, succeeds.

Error of law

8. The difficulty with this decision, as indeed the Tribunal itself  appears
   to have recognised, is that the circumstances which it  identified  could
   not easily be characterised as "private life". The  Tribunal  would  thus
   have been well-advised to recall the words of  the  Supreme  Court  (Lord
   Carnwath) in Patel and Others v The  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
   Department [2013] UKSC 72 -

    It is important to remember that article 8 is not a general  dispensing
    power. It  is  to  be  distinguished  from  the  Secretary  of  State's
    discretion to allow leave to remain outside the  rules,  which  may  be
    unrelated to any protected human right. The merits of a decision not to
    depart from the rules are not reviewable on appeal: section 86(6).  One
    may sympathise with Sedley LJ's call in Pankina for "common  sense"  in
    the application of the rules to graduates who have been studying in the
    UK for some years. However, such considerations do  not  by  themselves
    provide grounds of appeal under article  8,  which  is  concerned  with
    private or family life, not education as such. The  opportunity  for  a
    promising student to complete  his  course  in  this  country,  however
    desirable in general terms, is not in itself a  right  protected  under
    article 8.

9. I am therefore satisfied that it was an error of law to allow the  appeal
   on the ground that the appellant's removal would be incompatible with his
   rights under Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention for the Protection
   of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.

Re-determination of the appeal

10. I will re-determine the appeal on  the  basis  of  the  facts  that  are
   summarised at paragraphs 3 to 6  (above)  which,  as  I  have  previously
   observed, have never been in issue.

11. As with the decision that I have just set aside,  the  Tribunal  allowed
   the appellant's previous appeal (in August 2011) on the ground  that  the
   appellant's removal in consequence of the refusal  of  further  leave  to
   remain would be incompatible with his rights under Article 8 of the  1950
   European Convention for the Protection of Human  Rights  and  Fundamental
   Freedoms. It is  nevertheless  clear  from  the  determination  that  the
   underlying basis of the earlier decision  was  that  the  respondent  had
   acted unfairly. Thus, at paragraph 16, the Tribunal said this -

    In the present circumstances, I find that the  approach  taken  by  the
    respondent when seeking further information from the  appellant  to  be
    rather less than fair. To allow three working days to comply  with  the
    requirement to allow access is, in my  judgement,  unreasonable.  Given
    that the letter was  dated  29  November  2010,  it  cannot  have  been
    expected to have been delivered prior to 1 December 2010.  That  was  a
    Wednesday. By the  time  the  respondent  checked  the  website,  three
    working days had only just passed. In this instance the  appellant  was
    entirely in the hands of others and it is difficult to see what else he
    could have done; indeed he believes he had complied. He  contacted  the
    examiners who, in turn promised  him  that  the  information  would  be
    available within the timescale necessary. Clearly  it  wasn't.  Whoever
    may be at fault, I find it certainly was not the appellant.

12. I think that it is significant that  the  respondent  did  not  seek  to
   appeal that decision. She instead chose to accept the Tribunal's  finding
   that the appellant had  suffered  an  injustice,  and  to  remedy  it  by
   granting discretionary leave to remain. It therefore seems to me that for
   the respondent now to rely upon the requirement that  the  appellant  had
   been granted leave to remain under the Immigration Rules is to  resurrect
   and  perpetuate  a  situation  that  she  had  previously  accepted   was
   unconscionable. The result of her decision, if  allowed  to  stand,  will
   thus be to prevent the appellant from completing the course for which  he
   was originally granted leave to come to the United Kingdom,  for  reasons
   that have been consistently found not to be his fault.

13. I accept that the Tribunal  does  not  have  jurisdiction  to  allow  an
   appeal on the ground that the  respondent's  discretion  to  depart  from
   immigration rules ought to have been exercised differently [see  Sections
   84(1)(f) and 86(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002].
   Nevertheless, as the discussion of the authorities at paragraph 19.09  of
   'Macdonald's Immigration  Law  and  Practice'  (eighth  edition)  clearly
   demonstrates, the respondent has a public law duty to act fairly, and  an
   Immigration Decision that is made in breach of that duty can and will  be
   held to be "otherwise not  in  accordance  with  the  law"  [see  Section
   84(1)(e) of the Act]. I  am  therefore  satisfied  that  the  appellant's
   appeal should be allowed upon this ground.

Decision

14. The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed.

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow Mr  Raval's  appeal  on
   the ground that the Secretary of State's refusal  to  grant  him  further
   leave to remain would lead to consequences that  were  incompatible  with
   his rights under Article 8  of  the  1950  European  Convention  for  the
   Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms is set aside.  It  is
   substituted by a decision to allow his appeal  on  the  ground  that  the
   decision to refuse his  application  for  further  leave  to  remain  was
   otherwise not in accordance with the law

Anonymity not directed.





Signed                                  Date


Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


