
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43479/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9th December 2015                 |On 5th January 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between
                                     Y C
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     The Appellant appeared in person
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction

    1. This is an appeal by the appellant against a decision of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal  dismissing  her  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the
       Secretary of State for the Home Department (the 'Secretary of State')
       taken on 24 October 2014 to refuse her application for  a  Derivative
       Residence Card.

  Background Facts

    2. The claimant is a citizen of China who was born on 13  October  1989.
       She applied for a Derivative Residence Card as the primary  carer  of
       her daughter, [XM], a dependent British Citizen who was  born  on  14
       June 2014. The basis of the application was that [XM] would be unable
       to remain in the UK if the appellant was required to leave the UK.

    3. That application was refused because the respondent was not satisfied
       that [XM] would be unable to remain in the UK. Insufficient evidence,
       in the view of the respondent, had been provided  as  to  why  [XM]'s
       father, [CM] ('Mr CM'), could not care for her if the appellant  left
       the UK.

  The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

    4.  The  appellant  appealed  to  the   First-tier   Tribunal.    In   a
       determination promulgated on 11 May 2015, First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Gibbs dismissed the  appellant's  appeal.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
       considered  Regulation  15A(4A)(c)  of  the   Immigration   (European
       Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (the 'EEA Regulations')  holding that
       it must be satisfied that the appellant's daughter would be unable to
       reside in the UK or another European Economic Area  Member  State  if
       the appellant were required to leave.  The Tribunal found that Mr  CM
       is willing to provide a level of support for [XM] in that he attended
       to register  her  birth,  assisted  her  application  for  a  British
       passport and also provided documents in support of the  appellant  in
       her appeal. The First-tier Tribunal was not satisfied that [XM] would
       be forced to leave the UK if the appellant was removed.

  The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

    5. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   On
       9th July 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Pooler refused permission  to
       appeal. On 28 August  2015  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McGeachy  granted
       permission to appeal. Thus, the appeal came before me.

  Summary of the Submissions

    6. The grounds of appeal assert that the First-tier Tribunal's  decision
       is perverse and is not a decision that was properly open to the judge
       to make. Further, the  grounds  assert  that  the  judge  misdirected
       himself (sic) in failing to appreciate  the  practical  consequences.
       They are; that Mr CM, by refusing  to  take  care  [of]  [XM],  would
       result in her being forced to leave the UK thereby being  denied  her
       rights as a European citizen. There is no authority  or  organisation
       that could compel Mr CM to care for [XM].

    7. It  is  submitted  that  neither  the  respondent  nor  the  Tribunal
       considered s55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009
       ('s55') or otherwise took into account  the  best  interests  of  the
       child. It was also submitted that there is no category of immigration
       decision to which Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
       Rights ('ECHR'), s55 or the duty under s6 Human Rights Act 1998  does
       not apply. The failure to consider Article 8 or to consider and apply
       any of the mandatory provisions  of  s117B  of  the  Nationality  and
       Immigration Act 2002 (the '2002 Act') renders the decision flawed and
       unsustainable.

    8. The appellant provided a further witness statement dated 30  November
       2015. This statement concentrated on the failure  of  the  respondent
       and the First-tier Tribunal judge to take s55 into  consideration  or
       to consider at all what the best interests  of  her  daughter,  [XM],
       were. Further reasons were put forward as to why Mr CM agreed to help
       with  the  registration  of  [XM]'s  birth,   passport   application,
       provision of documents and a witness statement.

    9. The  appellant  also  made  oral  submissions  at  the  hearing.  She
       submitted that the best interests of [XM] are to be with her not with
       Mr CM. Mr CM takes no  responsibility,  he  wanted  her  to  have  an
       abortion and never wanted [XM] to be born. If [XM] goes to China  she
       will have no nationality and cannot go to school. China does not have
       freedom and is not like the UK.

   10. Mr Norton submitted that the case is about a European  Economic  Area
       right, the findings  of  fact  in  paragraph  10  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal decision are the crucial issue. All the evidence was  argued
       before the First-tier Tribunal. The judge came to a finding  that  Mr
       CM would be able to care for the child. The judge took  into  account
       his unwillingness to do so and the reasons for  that  but  the  judge
       made the finding that there was no evidence that he  could  not  care
       for the child. The important factor is  that  to  succeed  the  child
       would  have  to  be  forced  to  leave  the  UK.  Unless  the   judge
       misunderstood the evidence before her she  had  to  make  a  decision
       which was did she believe on the balance pf  probabilities  that  the
       child would be forced to leave the UK?  Another  judge  may  come  to
       another decision but to succeed on appeal the test for perversity  is
       that no other judge could have come to the decision.

   11. In relation to the Article  8  issue  Mr  Norton  submitted  that  in
       accordance with the case of  Amirteymour  and  others  (EEA  appeals;
       human rights) [2015] UKUT 00466 (IAC) ('Amirteymour'), as set out  in
       the headnote, where there is no decision to remove and no s120 notice
       has been given, the appellant cannot mount a Human Rights  challenge.
       It is clear from the reasons for refusal letter that  no  application
       had been made under the  Immigration  Rules  nor  had  an  Article  8
       application been received.

   12. In relation to the s55 argument Mr Norton submitted that s55 does not
       have any relevance in a refusal of  a  derivate  right  of  residence
       card. The European Economic Area Regulations have to be met.  Section
       55 cannot trump the Regulations. The duties incumbent under  s55  are
       protected  under  Human  Rights.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  had   no
       jurisdiction to consider s55.





Discussion

   13. In considering whether there was a material error of law in the First-
       tier Tribunal's  decision  there  are  four  discrete  issues  to  be
       determined. These are i) is the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  that
       the child would not be forced to leave the UK if her mother  were  to
       be removed perverse, ii) did the Tribunal judge misdirect herself  by
       failing to appreciate the practical consequences  of  her  reasoning,
       iii) was it a material error of law  for  the  Tribunal  to  fail  to
       consider Article 8 of the ECHR and iv) was there a material error  of
       law in the Tribunal's failure to consider s55.

  Perverse Decision

   14. As I explained to the appellant at  the  hearing  to  succeed  on  an
       argument that the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  was  perverse  the
       appellant must overcome a high hurdle. In  Edwards  -  v  -  Bairstow
       [1956] AC 14 at page 29, Viscount Simonds stated that  a  finding  of
       fact should be set aside  if  it  appeared  that  it  had  been  made
       "without any evidence or upon a view of the  facts  which  could  not
       reasonably be entertained". Lord Radcliffe, at page 36, said  that  a
       finding of fact would be an error of law where the facts  found  were
       "such that no person acting judicially and properly instructed as  to
       the relevant law could have come to the determination  under  appeal"
       or, in a formulation which he said he preferred, "the true  and  only
       reasonable conclusion contradicts the determination".

   15. In R (Iran) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005]  EWCA
       Civ 982 the court set out:

           "11.   ... It is well known that "perversity" represents a  very
           high hurdle. In Miftari v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ  481,  the  whole
           court agreed that  the  word  meant  what  it  said:  it  was  a
           demanding concept. The majority of the court (Keene and  Maurice
           Kay LJJ) said that it embraced decisions that were irrational or
           unreasonable in the Wednesbury  sense  (even  if  there  was  no
           wilful or conscious departure from the rational),  but  it  also
           included a finding of fact that was wholly  unsupported  by  the
           evidence, provided always that  this  was  a  finding  as  to  a
           material matter."

   16. The First-tier Tribunal judge set out at paragraph 7 of the  decision
       the evidence that was taken into account. There  is  nothing  in  the
       grounds of appeal to suggest  that  the  judge  failed  to  take  any
       relevant evidence  into  account  or  took  irrelevant  matters  into
       account. The grounds concentrate on  the  practical  consequences  of
       [XM]'s father's unwillingness to care for her.

   17. The Tribunal records at paragraph 7:

           "The appellant's evidence is that ... Mr CM did not and does not
           want the baby and that the  only  time  that  he  has  seen  his
           daughter is  when  he  went  to  register  the  birth  with  the
           appellant. Although he assisted the appellant in obtaining their
           daughter's British passport and provide evidence for the  appeal
           hearing he does  not  provide  any  financial  support  for  his
           daughter. His evidence is that his  wife  will  not  accept  the
           child and therefore he cannot care for her as this would destroy
           his marriage."

   18. The judge found, at paragraph 8, that:

           "... the evidence before me indicates that Mr CM is  willing  to
           provide a level of support for his child in that he attended  to
           register the birth,  assisted  her  application  for  a  British
           passport and also provided personal documents (in  the  form  of
           his marriage certificate and  bank  statements)  to  assist  the
           appellant in her appeal"

   19. It is clear from the record of proceedings  that  the  appellant  was
       cross examined with regard to the level and willingness of Mr  CM  to
       assist  her  and  her  daughter.  I  note  that  the  appellant   was
       specifically asked why he was willing to provide such assistance. The
       appellant did not suggest, as she now does in her  witness  statement
       of 30 November 2015, that Mr CM was compelled to assist  her  because
       she threatened to take [XM] to his home.

   20. The First-tier Tribunal judge had the benefit  of  hearing  at  first
       hand the evidence of the appellant and the  answers  given  in  cross
       examination. Having considered all the evidence both written and oral
       the judge found that Mr CM is willing to provide a level  of  support
       for his daughter. At paragraph 10 the judge,  having  considered  the
       relevant case-law, recorded and  found that:

           "... I understand why the child's father would not want to  have
           to ask his wife to care for a child that he has fathered  during
           an extra-marital affair, there was no evidence before me that Mr
           CM could not care for his child. What I find I am faced with  is
           Mr CM's unwillingness , or his  choice,  not  to  care  for  his
           daughter...This is not in my  view  however  evidence  that  the
           child would be forced  to  leave  the  UK  if  her  mother  were
           removed."

   21. As I set out above perversity represents a very high hurdle  for  the
       appellant to overcome. As  is  often  cited,  an  appellate  Tribunal
       should not readily interfere with findings of fact made by First-tier
       Tribunals. Such an appeal ought only to succeed where an overwhelming
       case is made out that  the  tribunal  reached  a  decision  which  no
       reasonable tribunal, on a proper appreciation of the evidence and the
       law, would have reached.   I  am  satisfied  that  the  findings  and
       conclusions of the judge were comfortably open to her, having  regard
       to the documentary evidence and the oral evidence.  The  findings  of
       fact were not unsupported by the evidence. The decision  reached  lay
       within the bounds of the standard of rationality.

  Misdirection

   22. The grounds assert  that  the  judge  misdirected  himself  (sic)  in
       failing  to  appreciate  the  practical  consequences  of  his  (sic)
       reasoning. The practical consequences are said to be that the refusal
       of Mr CM to take care of his  daughter  would  result  in  the  child
       remaining with the appellant and the child would be forced  to  leave
       the UK should the appellant leave. Alternatively, the child will  end
       up in the care of the Local Authority.

   23. Regulation 15A(4A) of the EEA Regulations, which  was  inserted  with
       effect from 8th November 2012 by the Immigration  (European  Economic
       Area)  (Amendment)  (No.2)  Regulations  2012/2560,  provides  for  a
       derivative right of residence for primary carers of British  citizens
       as follows:-

           '(1)   A person ('P') who  is  not  an  exempt  person  and  who
           satisfies the criteria in paragraph (2), (3), (4) (4A) or (5) of
           this regulation is entitled to a derivative right to  reside  in
           the United Kingdom for as  long  as  P  satisfies  the  relevant
           criteria. ...

           (4A)   P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-

                (a)    P is the primary carer of  a  British  citizen  ('the
                relevant British citizen');

                (b)    the relevant  British  citizen  is  residing  in  the
                United Kingdom; and

                (c)    the relevant  British  citizen  would  be  unable  to
                reside in the UK or in another EEA State if P were  required
                to leave.'

   24. Regulation 15A(4A) was inserted to comply with the interpretation  of
       the Court of Justice of the European Union ("CJEU") of Article 20  of
       the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ("TFEU")  in  the
       case C-34/09 Ruiz Zambrano v Office National de l'emploi [2011] ECR I-
       1177 ("Zambrano") where the Grand  Chamber  of  the  CJEU  held  that
       Article 20 of the TFEU "precludes national measures  which  have  the
       effect of depriving citizens of the European  Union  of  the  genuine
       enjoyment of the substance of the rights conferred by virtue of their
       status as citizens of the European Union" (paragraph 42).

   25. In Hines v Lambeth London Borough Council  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  660  at
       paragraph 23 the court held:

           "I have no doubt  that  the  test  applicable  under  regulation
           15A(4A)(c) is clear and can be given effect without contravening
           EU law. The reviewer has to consider the welfare of the  British
           citizen child and the extent to which the quality or standard of
           his life will be impaired if the non-EU citizen is  required  to
           leave. This is all for the purpose  of  answering  the  question
           whether the child would, as a matter of practicality, be  unable
           to remain in the UK.  This  requires  a  consideration,  amongst
           other things, of the impact which the  removal  of  the  primary
           carer  would  have  on  the  child,  and  the  alternative  care
           available for the child."

   26. At paragraph 19 the court, referring  to  the  case  of  Harrison  v.
       Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  1736
       ("Harrison") set out:

           "... Elias LJ's  starting  point  in  that  case  was  that  the
           Zambrano principle did not extend to cover anything short of the
           situation where the EU citizen is forced to leave the  territory
           of the EU (paragraph 63). Elias LJ  then  dismissed  the  notion
           that the CJEU in Zambrano was leaving open the possibility  that
           the doctrine might apply "more widely  and  loosely"  (paragraph
           Judgment Approved by  the  court  for  handing  down.  Hines  v.
           Lambeth 64). In paragraph 66, Elias LJ makes clear  that  Dereci
           v. Bundesministerium f?r Inneres (Case C-256/11) [2012]  1  CMLR
           45 (paragraphs 67-72) demonstrated that  the  reduction  of  the
           enjoyment of family life by the family members who  remain  when
           non-EU citizens leave was not sufficient to engage  EU  law.  At
           paragraph 67, Elias LJ explained the matter as follows:-

                "... I accept that it is a general principle of EU law  that
                conduct which materially impedes the exercise of an EU right
                is in general forbidden by EU law in precisely the same  way
                as deprivation of the  right.  But  in  my  judgment  it  is
                necessary to focus on the nature of the right in  issue  and
                to decide what  constitutes  an  impediment.  The  right  of
                residence is a right to reside in the territory of  the  EU.
                It is not a right to any particular quality or  life  or  to
                any particular standard of living. Accordingly, there is  no
                impediment to exercising the right to  reside  if  residence
                remains possible as a matter of substance, albeit  that  the
                quality of life is diminished ..." "

   27. At paragraph 8 the court effectively summarised  that  the  court  in
       Harrison:

           "... held at paragraph 63 that the Zambrano  principle  did  not
           cover anything short of a situation  where  the  EU  citizen  is
           forced to leave the territory of the EU."

   28. In the case of  Jamil Sanneh v (1) Secretary of State  for  work  and
       pensions and (2) The Commissioners  for  Her  Majesty's  Revenue  and
       Customs  [2013]  EWHC  793  (Admin)  ('Sanneh')  the   court   having
       considered the Zambrano case and  subsequent  authorities  derived  a
       number of propositions from those cases at paragraph 19:

           "...

           iii)   It is for the national courts to determine, as a question
           of fact on the evidence before it, whether an EU  citizen  would
           be compelled to leave the EU to follow a  non-EU  national  upon
           whom he is dependent.

           iv)    Nothing less than such compulsion will engage articles 20
           and 21 of the TFEU. In particular, EU law will  not  be  engaged
           where the EU citizen is not compelled to leave the EU,  even  if
           the quality or standard of life of the EU citizen is  diminished
           as a result of the non-EU national upon whom he is dependent  is
           (for example) removed or prevented from working; ..."

   29. In MA and SM (Zambrano: EU children  outside  EU)  Iran  [2013]  UKUT
       00380 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal when applying the EU law principles as
       summarised in Sanneh held at paragraph 56:

           "The right of residence is a right to reside in the territory of
           the EU. It is not a right to any particular quality of  life  or
           to any particular standard of living (see  Dereci  at  paragraph
           68, and Harrison at paragraph 67)."

   30. The above cases repeat and amplify  that  there  is  no  right  to  a
       particular quality of life or standard of living and nothing short of
       actual compulsion or being forced to leave the UK as a result of  the
       removal or refusal of entry of the carer  will  engage  the  Zambrano
       principles as enacted in the EEA Regulations.

   31. The judge correctly set out the relevant test referring to  the  case
       of Hines v London Borough of Lambeth [2014] EWCA Civ 660 where it was
       stated (relying on the case of  Harrison  (Jamaica)  v  Secretary  of
       State [2012] EWCA Civ 18736) that the relevant test  is  whether  the
       exercise of an EU right of residence remains possible as a matter  of
       substance. It is not a right to any particular  quality  of  life  or
       particular standard of living, the test in all cases is  whether  the
       adverse decision would require the child to leave  the  territory  of
       the Union. If in practice the extent of the quality  or  standard  of
       life will be seriously impaired by excluding the  appellant  that  is
       likely in practice to infringe the right of residence because it will
       effectively compel the EU citizen to give  up  residence  and  travel
       with the appellant.

   32. The test as set out in the case-law is one of compulsion - would [XM]
       be compelled to leave the UK?  The appellant assets that  no-one  can
       force Mr CM to care for [XM]. That he refuses to  care  for  her  and
       that his circumstances are so compelling that  he  feels  unable  and
       unwilling to care for her as it would destroy  his  own  family.  The
       result would be that [XM] would be  forced  to  leave  the  UK  as  a
       practical consequence. The judge had that evidence available  to  her
       in the form of a witness statement provided by Mr CM  and  heard  the
       oral evidence  of  the  appellant  and  heard  submissions  on  these
       matters. The judge found that Mr CM was unwilling, or  was  choosing,
       not to care for his child (paragraph 10) but also found that  he  was
       willing to provide a level of support for her (at  paragraph  7)  and
       found (paragraph 10) that there was no evidence  that  he  could  not
       care for her.

   33.  I consider that this case is  very  much  at  the  borderlines.  The
       judge, on the basis of her finding of fact that there was no evidence
       that Mr CM could not care for [XM] (rather he  was  unwilling  to  do
       so), concluded that [XM] would not be forced to leave the UK.  Whilst
       I may have reached a different conclusion  based  on  the  facts  the
       decision reached by the judge discloses no material misdirection. She
       clearly had in mind the correct legal test.

  Article 8 and the mandatory provisions of s117B of the 2002 Act

   34. The appellant has appealed against a decision to refuse  to  issue  a
       Derivate Residence Card under the EEA Regulations. In TY (Sri  Lanka)
       v The Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 1233
       the court of appeal held, at paragraph 35:

           "35.   It is impossible to say that  the  Secretary  of  State's
           decision to withhold a  residence  card  (a  decision  which  is
           correct under the EEA Regulations) will or could cause the UK to
           be in breach of the Refugee Convention or ECHR. The UK will only
           be in breach of those Conventions if in the future the appellant
           makes an asylum or human rights claim, which  the  Secretary  of
           State and/or the tribunals incorrectly reject.

           36.    In the result therefore I reach a similar decision on the
           issues before us to the decision reached by the  Upper  Tribunal
           in Amirteymour v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
           [2015] UKUT 00466 (IAC) ..."

   35. In the case of Amirteymour the Upper Tribunal held at paragraph 75:

           "For these reasons, we conclude  that,  where  no  notice  under
           section 120 of the 2002 Act has been served  and  where  no  EEA
           decision to remove has been made,  an  appellant  cannot  in  an
           appeal under the EEA Regulations bring a Human Rights  challenge
           to removal."

   36. As set out in paragraph 26  of  the  decision  in  Amirteymour  those
       having a right to enter or reside under European Community Law do not
       require leave to enter or remain in the UK. A decision  to  refuse  a
       confirmatory document is conceptually  different  to  a  decision  to
       refuse or grant leave under the Immigration Rules. At paragraph 31 in
       Amirteymour the Upper Tribunal held:

           "Rights granted under EU law and leave granted under  the  Rules
           or Immigration Acts are conceptually and legally  distinct.  Any
           assertion of a right to leave  to  remain  or  under  the  Human
           Rights Act is thus made on a different judicial basis ..."

   37. Mr Norton referred to a number  of  paragraphs  in  the  reasons  for
       refusal letter. It was made abundantly clear in that letter that  the
       appellant had not made an application for Article 8 consideration and
       that if she wished the Secretary of State to consider any  Article  8
       claims she would have to make a separate  application.  It  was  also
       made clear that no removal decision had been made. No s120 Notice has
       been served in this case.

   38. The appellant therefore cannot bring a Human Rights challenge in  the
       circumstances of this case. There was, therefore, no error of law  in
       the First-tier Tribunal decision.

   39. It follows that there was no requirement for the First-tier  Tribunal
       to consider s117B of the 2002 Act.

  Section 55

   40. It was submitted in the grounds of appeal that there is  no  category
       of immigration decision to which s55  does  not  apply.  However,  by
       analogy the reasoning in TY and Amirteymour must apply  to  the  duty
       under s55. What the appellant applied for was confirmation of  an  EU
       law right. The EEA Regulations make specific provisions and  set  out
       requirements that must be met in order for an applicant to  obtain  a
       confirmatory document. The applicant either has an EU  law  right  or
       does not. The best interests of the appellant's  daughter,  howsoever
       they might be determined, could not entitle the appellant to  receive
       a residency card under the European Economic Area Regulations  -  see
       by analogy paragraph 27 of TY.

   41. In Amirteymour the Upper Tribunal held:

           "30.   A right of residence  under  EU  law  (which  includes  a
           derivative right) is thus of a different legal  species  from  a
           grant of leave. The exercise of the former does not  require  an
           act to  be  taken  by  the  Secretary  of  State.  There  is  no
           requirement to obtain a residence document and there are,  under
           law, no penalties for not doing so ..."

   42. The only issue before the First-tier Tribunal was whether or not  the
       appellant met the requirements  of  the  EEA  Regulations.  The  best
       interests  of  the   appellant's   daughter   is   not   a   relevant
       consideration. There was, therefore, no error of law  in  the  First-
       tier Tribunal decision.

  Other Issues

   43. The appellant asserted that if [XM] goes to China she  will  have  no
       nationality and cannot go to school. China does not have freedom  and
       is not like the UK.  These are not relevant issues  in  this  appeal.
       They would potentially be relevant  to  an  asylum  or  Human  Rights
       claim.

   44. I have considered whether any parties require the  protection  of  an
       anonymity direction. No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously.
       Having considered  all  the  circumstances  and  evidence  I  do  not
       consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

Decision

   45. There was no material error of law in the decision of the  First-tier
       Tribunal. The decision of the Secretary of State stands.


Signed   P M Ramshaw   Date 28 December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw
