
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/43496/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 January 2015                            |On 6 February 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                            AYOBAMI DAVID SOETAN
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Anifowoshe of Counsel instructed by K & S @ Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Raymond promulgated on 23 April 2014 dismissing the Appellant's  appeal
    against a decision of the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    made on 7 August 2013 refusing his application for indefinite leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom made on the basis of having completed  ten
    years'  continuous  lawful  residence,  and  to  remove  the  Appellant
    pursuant to section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality  Act
    2006.

Background

2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria  born  on  26  April  1983.   His
    immigration history and something of his personal history is set out in
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  I  do  not  propose  to
    rehearse all of that information in detail, but the following  features
    are particularly salient given the context of his application  and  the
    particular issues that fall for decision in the current proceedings.

3.   The Appellant first entered the United Kingdom on 21 August 2001  as  a
    student and was granted subsequent variations of leave to remain,  most
    recently on 29 October 2004 until 30 November  2007.   On  29  November
    2007 the Appellant purported to submit an application for further leave
    to remain as part of the International Graduate Scheme  ('IGS').   This
    application, however, was rejected by the Respondent by letter dated 12
    December 2007.  That letter is on file and it indicates both that there
    were issues in respect of the documents submitted with the  application
    and, more pertinently for present purposes, that the  cheque  submitted
    had 'bounced' - there were insufficient funds in the  account  and  the
    cheque was returned unpaid.

4.   On 16 January 2008 the  Appellant  submitted  a  corrected  application
    with the appropriate fee.  This application however was refused with no
    right of appeal on 6 February 2008.

5.   In the meantime the Appellant was contemplating a trip back to  Nigeria
    and in due course departed the UK  on  26  February  2008.   Whilst  in
    Nigeria he made an application for entry clearance which was successful
    and returned on 23 March 2008 with leave under the IGS valid  until  14
    March 2009.  Thereafter the Appellant made successful applications  for
    variation of leave to remain until he made an application under the so-
    called '10-year Rule' on 5 February 2013,  which  was  rejected  on  23
    February 2013.  A further application on the same basis  was  submitted
    on 8 March 2013.

6.   The Appellant's application was  refused  for  reasons  set  out  in  a
    'reasons  for  refusal'  letter  ('RFRL')  dated  7  August  2013  with
    reference to paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules.   The  Respondent
    also considered the Appellant's application under paragraph  276ADE  of
    the Rules.  A Notice of Immigration Decision was issued pursuant to the
    RFRL, being a refusal to vary  leave  and  a  decision  to  remove  the
    Appellant.  It is this immigration decision that is the subject of  the
    appeal in these proceedings.

7.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC.  The appeal  was  dismissed  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal for reasons set out in the determination  of  Judge
    Raymond.

8.   The Appellant made an application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal which was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Shimmin
    on 21 May 2014.

Consideration

9.   The Appellant's primary case before the First-tier Tribunal  was  based
    on his claim to have been continuously resident in the  United  Kingdom
    for ten years.  The Respondent considered that the  continuity  of  the
    Appellant's residence had been interrupted because of the circumstances
    surrounding the application said to have been invalidly made just prior
    to the expiry of his leave in November 2007.  The RFRL puts the  matter
    in this way:

          "It is noted that although you had  lawful  leave  following  your
         arrival in the United Kingdom on 21 August 2001 until  30  November
         2007 on 26 February 2008 you left the United Kingdom at a time when
         you did not have lawful leave.  You were informed at that time that
         if you left the United Kingdom  your  request  for  reconsideration
         would be void. Therefore your continuous leave is  deemed  to  have
         ceased on 30 November 2007.

         Paragraph 276D does not allow the Secretary of  State  the  use  of
         discretion where you are satisfied that  276B  has  not  been  met.
         Paragraph 276D states that ILR 'is to be refused'  rather  than  it
         'may  be  refused'  or  any  other  use  of  flexible  terminology.
         Therefore the  Secretary  of  State  has  no  power  to  take  into
         consideration  in  the  application  of  paragraph  276C   of   the
         Immigration Rules.  276D precludes flexible fulfilment of 276B when
         considering a grant pursuant to 276C.

         As detailed above you are considered to have broken your continuous
         residence in the United Kingdom and  have  not  been  here  legally
         throughout the 10 years.  As a result you are unable to demonstrate
         10 years continuous lawful residence in the United Kingdom and  you
         are not able to satisfy the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules
         with reference to paragraph 276B(i)(a)."

10.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge also found against the Appellant on  this
    point.  In doing so the Judge had particular  reference  to  paragraphs
    34A, G and J of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The  following  appears  at
    paragraph 17 of the Judge's determination:

          "The burden of proof is upon the appellant to the  civil  standard
         of the balance of probabilities.  I have  taken  into  account  the
         oral and documentary evidence of the appellant, as outlined  in  my
         record of proceedings and this Determination, with the  submissions
         and relevant rules.   I  do  not  accept  that  the  appellant  can
         consider that he had somehow continued his leave when he  left  the
         UK between 26 February 2008 and his re-entry on 23 March 2008 as  a
         result of his separate application made  whilst  in  Nigeria.   The
         effect of paragraphs  34A  with  34G  and  34J  is  that  when  the
         appellant failed in his 29th  November  2007  [application]  on  12
         December 2007 because he had not paid a fee  he  did  not  have  an
         application date, his previous leave having expired on 30  November
         2007, and the 12 February 2008 application  for  a  reconsideration
         was when he did not have leave, and was in any case to  be  treated
         as withdrawn when he left the country.  There could  have  been  no
         extension of leave under 3C in such circumstances."

11.  That is a somewhat inelegant passage, but the essential  thrust  of  it
    is that with reference to paragraphs 34A-34J of the  Immigration  Rules
    the Judge took the view that the Appellant did  not  have  valid  leave
    when he left the United Kingdom for his short trip to Nigeria, and that
    his leave was not in any way resurrected by dint of the  fact  that  he
    subsequently returned to the United Kingdom with valid leave.

12.  The grounds of appeal as drafted in  support  of  the  application  for
    permission to appeal are no longer relied upon in respect of what  they
    have to say as to the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  approach  on  this
    issue.

13.  Instead the Appellant now seeks to advance his  case  by  reference  to
    the two Skeleton Arguments prepared on his behalf, the first  of  which
    is dated 23 July 2014 and the second of  which  is  dated  10  November
    2014; both have been settled by Ms Anifowoshe.

14.  The argument now advanced identifies that the  paragraphs  referred  to
    by the First-tier Tribunal Judge under the Immigration Rules  were  not
    actually 'in force' at the date of the Appellant's  supposedly  invalid
    application and his departure for Nigeria.  The relevant Rules cited by
    the Judge - paragraphs 34A-34J -  actually  came  into  force  from  29
    February 2008, and therefore post-dated the relevant period.

15.  To this extent the Judge was plainly in error in  placing  reliance  on
    those  Rules.   That  is  not  necessarily  sufficient  to  demonstrate
    material error.   The  question  still  remained  whether  or  not  the
    Appellant could show that his period of residence was uninterrupted. To
    this  extent  reliance  is  now  placed  upon  the  provisions  of  the
    Immigration  (Leave  to  Remain)  (Prescribed  Forms  and   Procedures)
    Regulations 2007.

16.  The Appellant's essential submission now is that although he  submitted
    a defective application for variation of leave to remain accompanied by
    a  cheque  that  'bounced',  his  subsequent  submission  of  a   valid
    application with the correct fee  had  the  effect  of  validating  the
    earlier application such that the date of his application for variation
    of leave was to be taken as  the  date  upon  which  he  submitted  the
    initial defective returned application - that is to say the application
    made whilst he still had current leave.  In those circumstances  it  is
    argued that his leave was continued statutorily by operation of section
    3C of the Immigration Act 1971 right up until the time that he left the
    United Kingdom.  In those circumstances, bearing in mind that  he  then
    subsequently returned to the United Kingdom with valid leave  within  a
    permitted period of time, there was  no  break  to  the  continuity  of
    residence.  If the Appellant is correct in this  regard  then  he  will
    establish that he meets the requirements of paragraph 276B.

17.  Reference is made in  particular  to  regulations  16  and  17  of  the
    Prescribed Forms and Procedures Regulations.  Those  provisions  are  a
    matter of record and I do not propose to set them out in  detail  here.
    However, what is germane is as follows.

18.  Regulations 16(1) indicates that certain procedures are  prescribed  in
    relation  to  an  application  for  which  a  form  is  prescribed   by
    regulations 3 to 14.  The prescribed procedures relate to  the  signing
    and  dating  of  the  application  form,  the  requirement   that   the
    application be accompanied by  certain  documents  and  photographs  as
    specified in the form, and  that  each  part  of  the  form  should  be
    completed.

19.   Regulation  17  provides  for  circumstances  in  which  a   defective
    application may be corrected.  It starts in these terms:

          "17(1)  A failure to comply with any of the requirements of
              regulation 16(1) to any extent will only invalidate an
              application if:

               (a)     the applicant does not provide, when making the
                  application, an explanation for the failure which the
                  Secretary of State considers to be satisfactory;

               (b)     the Secretary of State notifies the applicant, or
                  the person who appears to the Secretary of State to
                  represent the applicant, of the failure within 28 days of
                  the date on which the application is made, and

               (c)     the applicant does not comply with the requirements
                  within a reasonable time, and in any event within 28
                  days, of being notified by the Secretary of State of the
                  failure."

20.  Ms Anifowoshe has argued that the effect of those provisions  was  such
    that the Appellant had rectified the defects in his initial application
    of  29  November  2007  through  the  submission  of   the   subsequent
    application, and accordingly the initial  application  was  not  to  be
    considered invalid.

21.  The Secretary of State responds to this submission by making  reference
    to the Immigration and Nationality (Costs  Recovery  Fees)  Regulations
    2007, and also in this context pleads in aid the reported  decision  in
    BE (application fee: effect  of  non-payment)  Mauritius  [2008]  UKAIT
    00089.  The provisions of those Regulations make a distinction  between
    applications made prior to 21 May 2007 and those made on or thereafter.
     There is no dispute that the Appellant's application was made after 21
    May 2007, and therefore at a time when, as identified in BE, a stricter
    regime applied.

22.  Regulation 16(1) of the Costs  Recovery  Fees  Regulations  is  in  the
    following terms:

           "Subject  to  paragraph  (2),  where  an  application  to   which
         regulation 3, 4, 11,  12,  13,  14,  15  or  16  refers  is  to  be
         accompanied by  a  specified  fee,  the  application  will  not  be
         considered to have been validly made unless it has been accompanied
         by that fee."

    Sub-paragraph (2) is in these terms:

          "An application referred to in regulation 3 or  4  which  is  made
         prior to 21st May 2007 will be treated as having being validly made
         regardless  of  whether  the  fee  specified  in  respect  of  that
         application has been paid."

    But, sub-paragraph (3) which then follows, states:

         "The Secretary of State may treat an  application  referred  to  in
         paragraph (2) as withdrawn if, having written to inform the  person
         who made the application the specified fee has not  been  provided,
         that fee is not provided within 28 days of the letter  having  been
         posted."

23.  Because of the date of the Appellant's application it is  now  accepted
    that sub-paragraph 16(2) does not apply to him.   It  follows  that  he
    does not have the benefit of subparagraph 16(3).  In the  circumstances
    the  defectiveness  arising  by  reason  of  a  failure  to  submit  an
    application accompanied by a specified fee cannot  be  corrected  after
    the event in a  way  that  would  effectively  validate  the  defective
    application.  This is a different approach  from  a  situation  covered
    under the Prescribed Forms Regulations  where  the  defect  relates  to
    something relevant to the  forms  and/or  accompanying  documents.   In
    short, an application defective for a failure to send in the  specified
    fee with the application is not to be 'resurrected' through  subsequent
    correction, whereas other defects at  that  time  might  have  been  so
    resurrected.

24.  The issue therefore becomes one of whether or not it can be  said  that
    the Appellant's application was accompanied by  a  specified  fee.   In
    this regard the Appellant seeks to place reliance upon the observations
    in the case of Basnet (validity of  application  -  respondent)  [2012]
    UKUT 00113 and in particular what is said therein at paragraph 20 which
    is in these terms:

          "Accordingly we conclude that the Judge erred at paragraph  32  in
         considering that non-payment, for  whatever  reason,  even  if  the
         fault  of  the  respondent,  was  fatal  to  the  validity  of  the
         application  and  of  the  subsequent  appeal.  Validity   of   the
         application is determined  not  by  whether  the  fee  is  actually
         received but by whether the application is accompanied by  a  valid
         authorisation to obtain the entire fee that  is  available  in  the
         relevant bank account."

25.  It is also emphasised on behalf of the Appellant that the  decision  in
    Basnet indicated that where the Secretary of  State  asserted  that  an
    application was not accompanied by a fee the onus of proof was  on  the
    Secretary of State.

26.  Ms Anifowoshe accepts that if a cheque is  submitted  at  a  time  when
    there are insufficient funds to allow that cheque to be  honoured  then
    that would not constitute the submission of a  valid  authorisation  to
    obtain the entire fee that is available in the relevant bank account.

27.  It is apparent from the documents prepared at or about the time of  the
    rejection  of  the  Appellant's  application  that   he   appeared   to
    acknowledge that the defects in this regard were  of  his  own  making.
    There is on file a letter dated 16 January 2008 in which the  following
    is stated:

          "I received my documents back from you  on  Thursday,  10  January
         2007 only to find out that my application was returned due to  lack
         of cleared funds in the account that I issued the  cheque  for  the
         payment from and also documents to evidently show my  finances  and
         my search for employment in the UK.  I sincerely apologise for this
         oversight on my part and taken steps to ensure that this  will  not
         happen with this application."

28.  There is also a letter from the Appellant's then representatives  dated
    12 February 2008 which states in part:

          "On 10 January 2008 he received a letter from your office dated 12
         December 2007 instructing him to make the correct payment  for  the
         application as there was not sufficient money in  his  accounts  to
         cover the cheque he had issued." (My emphasis.)

29.  In  my  judgement  those  communications  are,  taken  at  face  value,
    sufficient for the Secretary of State now to rely upon  as  discharging
    the burden  of  proof  in  establishing  that  the  Appellant  had  not
    submitted valid authorisation with his application on 29 November  2007
    in as much as both letters indicate the Appellant acknowledged both the
    fact of, and the responsibility for, there being insufficient funds  in
    his account when he made his application.

30.  That really would be the end of the argument that the  Appellant  seeks
    to now run - notwithstanding this matter not having been raised  before
    the First-tier Tribunal or even in the grounds submitted in support  of
    the application for permission to appeal.  However, on instructions, Ms
    Anifowoshe identifies that there were certain documents  placed  before
    the First-tier Tribunal by way of bank statements for an account in the
    name of  CCG  House  of  Praise  showing  significant  credit  balances
    throughout the period surrounding the Appellant's application  and  its
    rejection by the Secretary of State in late 2007.  The position is,  it
    is now said on  instructions,  that  the  Appellant's  application  was
    supported by a cheque drawn on this account.

31.  There is necessarily a factual tension between the assertion  now  made
    and the contents of the more contemporaneous documents to which I  have
    just referred.  This is not the forum for the hearing  of  evidence  on
    what is essentially a new point.  In all of  the  circumstances  in  my
    judgement it is too late in the day to  be  raising  the  argument  now
    advanced given that it is ultimately premised on factual  matters  that
    run contrary to the available documentary evidence - evidence  that  is
    contemporaneous with the events of late 2007 / early  2008  -   and  is
    raising issues that were not advanced before the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    or even clearly formulated  until  the  latter  stages  of  submissions
    today.

32.  It seems to me in any event the point has very little  merit.   If,  as
    is now contended the cheque was drawn on an account that had sufficient
    funds and it is to be inferred that there had been  a  mistake  on  the
    part of the bank in not honouring the cheque, or on  the  part  of  the
    Secretary of State is processing it, one would have expected to see the
    Appellant raising that in his correspondence at the  time,  instead  of
    which he acknowledged the error to be his own.

33.  Be that as it may, this is a matter that should have  been  dealt  with
    in 2007 and it does not behove the Appellant to raise it in the context
    of the arguments today which, if I may say  so,  seem  to  me  to  have
    developed as a matter of expedience because even these matters are  not
    adequately flagged up in the written arguments. Such expedience  arises
    because of the Secretary of State's reliance upon the Fees  Regulations
    in circumstances where the thrust of the Prescribed  Forms  Regulations
    do not bear the interpretation originally sought to be put upon them by
    the Appellant's representatives.

34.  In all such circumstances I find that  it  would  be  inappropriate  to
    permit this ground of appeal to  be  advanced,  partly  because  it  is
    premised on factual matters that had not previously been aired and  are
    inconsistent with the documentary evidence, and partly because it seems
    to me ultimately to be of no substantial merit.

35.  That only leaves then the argument in respect of Article  8  raised  in
    the grounds in support of the application  for  permission  to  appeal.
    The First-tier Tribunal Judge, having rejected the arguments in respect
    of ten years' continuous leave, dealt with the issue of the Appellant's
    private life and/or family life in a relatively brief manner at the end
    of paragraph 17 of the determination in the following terms,:  "As  the
    appellant has not been in the UK 20 years he does not come  within  the
    private life route at 276ADE and neither is there any evidence that  he
    has any family life which is engaged under Appendix FM."

36.  It is confirmed before me that the Appellant does not seek  to  advance
    any submissions in respect of family life, but it is  argued  that  his
    private life has not  been  adequately  considered  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.

37.  The context of  this  must  be  considered.   The  Appellant's  witness
    statement before the First-tier Tribunal makes little or nothing of his
    private  life,  focused,  as  it  is,  mainly  on   the   circumstances
    surrounding  the  application  in  late  2007  and  his  assertion   of
    continuous residence.  The supporting documents are broadly general  in
    nature and there is nothing in any of  those,  it  seems  to  me,  that
    points to any particular circumstances that might warrant an  exception
    being made for a person who otherwise does not meet the requirements of
    the Rules.  Indeed,  in  my  judgement,  when  invited  to  do  so,  Ms
    Anifowoshe struggled to identify anything beyond the length of time the
    Appellant had been in the United Kingdom and the lawfulness of the time
    that he has spent here.

38.  The length of time the Appellant has spent in  the  United  Kingdom  is
    essentially an aspect that is fully covered by the  Immigration  Rules.
    So far as the lawfulness of the time he has spent here  in  the  United
    Kingdom, it seems to me that that is essentially a neutral factor.  Had
    he been here for periods that were unlawful then that might  have  some
    adverse consequence, but the mere observance of the  relevant  laws  of
    the land is not something that should sound favourably  in  an  overall
    balancing exercise.

39.  In the circumstances, whilst the Judge's  approach  to  the  Article  8
    issue is indeed brief, it nonetheless seems to me to be adequate  where
    nothing very particular was being advanced on behalf of the  Appellant.
    In those circumstances I find no material error of law.

Notice of Decision

40.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  no  material  errors
    of law and stands.

41.  The appeal is dismissed.

The above represents a corrected transcript of an ex tempore decision  given
at the hearing on 27 January 2015.



Signed   Date: 6 February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
