
IAC-TH-CP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43336/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 April 2015                     |On 22 April 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVID TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     MB
                    (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE/CONTINUED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For MB the Appellant:  Mr R Akther
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Although this is strictly an appeal by the Secretary of State  I  have,
    for the sake of consistency, continued to refer to the parties by their
    original designations in the First-tier  Tribunal.   The  Secretary  of
    State thus continues to be called "the respondent".

2.   The Secretary of State  has  appealed,  with  permission,  against  the
    decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Davey  who,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 3 November 2014, allowed the appellant's appeal  against
    the respondent's refusal on 9 October 2013 to refuse  him  a  residence
    card as an extended family member under Regulation 8 of the Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations  2006.   The  issue  had  been  whether  or  not  the
    appellant and the EEA national Miss C,  a  French  national,  had  been
    living together in a durable and subsisting relationship.  There was  a
    further issue as to whether Miss C was a qualified person as  she  was,
    at the time of the appeal, not working due to a medical condition.  The
    judge found that the relationship was durable and subsisting  and  that
    the medical condition was temporary.  He allowed  the  appeal  on  that
    basis.

3.   In seeking permission to appeal, the Secretary of State  submitted,  in
    essence, that the judge had not given any or adequate reasons  for  his
    decision nor did he set out the documentary evidence on  which  he  was
    relying.  Permission to appeal on that basis was granted on 22 December
    2014.  The matter thus came before me.

4.   In making his submissions on the question of error of  law,  Mr  Tarlow
    submitted, briefly, that he relied on the grounds and that  there  were
    no adequate reasons given in the decision to show why  the  appeal  had
    been allowed.

5.   In reply Mr Akther referred me  to  the  appellant's  response  to  the
    notice of appeal which had been submitted  on  26  January  2015.   The
    response requested the production of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    Record of Proceedings as evidence as to what had  taken  place  at  the
    hearing.  A copy of the Record was  indeed  produced  to  both  parties
    prior to the hearing before me.  It was clear from  the  judge's  notes
    that not only had extensive evidence been presented to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that the couple were in a durable  relationship  but  he  also
    noted that the respondent had chosen not to cross-examine the appellant
    or his sponsor following the oral evidence given by both of  them.   Mr
    Akther submitted that, in the absence  of  any  cross-examination,  the
    Secretary of State must be deemed to have accepted the factual evidence
    that was before the judge.  There was similarly further evidence before
    the judge that the sponsor's employer had provided a letter  confirming
    that work was still available to her.

6.   Mr Akther submitted that not only was there evidence of  the  sponsor's
    willingness and ability to go back to work but the fact  was  that  she
    did indeed go back to work  almost  immediately  after  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing and she is still in employment.  The couple have  been
    together since November 2012, there is a  tenancy  agreement  in  joint
    names and bank statements in joint names.   All  that  information  had
    been before the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   The  sponsor  has  been
    working in the UK since at least 2012 and was only temporarily off work
    because of needed surgery at or around the time of the hearing.

7.   Having reviewed all the evidence  including  the  documentary  evidence
    that had been before the First-tier Tribunal Judge it is  clear  to  me
    that this is an appeal by the appellant which must be  allowed  on  its
    facts.  It is regrettable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed  to
    set out his detailed reasons for  allowing  the  appeal  and  that,  of
    itself, is an error.  But the error is of minor consequence.  The Judge
    was entitled to treat the respondent's decision  not  to  cross-examine
    the appellant or the sponsor as an indication that their  evidence  was
    accepted. It is the duty of counsel to test any parts of  the  evidence
    which are  in  dispute  and  the  total  failure  of  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer at the First-tier Tribunal to ask any  questions  at
    all is a clear indication of the acceptance of that evidence.

8.   In any event, on the evidence, the appellant is  bound  to  succeed  in
    his appeal and I therefore find that the error (if any) was  such  that
    it is not necessary to set aside the original decision.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

An anonymity direction was made in the First-tier Tribunal  decision.   That
direction shall continue.



Designated Judge David Taylor
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
21 April 2015
