
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43560/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 17 March 2014                                |On 26th March 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON


                                   Between

                           YVONNE ELSKE SIGGEMANN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     The appellant, in person
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of South Africa who  applied  for  permanent
    residence in the United Kingdom.  She  made  that  application  on  the
    basis of being a family member of an EEA national who  has  resided  in
    the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 for a continuous period of five  years.



 2. The application was refused because the  respondent  decided  that  the
    appellant had not provided evidence that her EEA national  husband  had
    resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with  the   relevant
    Regulations during that five year period.

 3. The appellant appealed that decision.  In a decision promulgated on  28
    January 2014 the First-tier Tribunal Judge who dealt  with  the  appeal
    "on the papers" dismissed the appeal.

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal the decision  and  leave  was
    granted.  The judge granting permission stated that in  dismissing  the
    appeal the judge found that the appellant's husband, her  sponsor,  had
    not shown that he was working during the relevant period of  2008-2009.
    A letter from Objective  Corporation  confirming  his  employment  from
    February 2008 to March 2009 was found to  be  reliable.   However,  the
    judge dealing with the appeal found that it was reasonable  to  suppose
    that the sponsor would have been able to produce his  P45  relating  to
    employment with that Corporation or other contemporaneous  evidence  of
    his employment.  It was found arguable that the  sponsor  had  provided
    sufficient   documentation   confirming   employment   with   Objective
    Corporation full-time between the relevant  dates.   The  judge  having
    accepted that the letter produced was reliable it was arguable that  to
    have required further evidence was in the circumstances unwarranted  as
    the burden of proof is only on the balance of probabilities.

 5. The Secretary of State's response to the grounds of appeal  under  Rule
    24 indicated that she opposed the appellant's application to appeal the
    First-tier judge's decision and argued that the judge was  entitled  to
    find that Sayl Consulting Limited (a company set up by the sponsor) was
    not  showing  activity  and  therefore  the  respondent  could  not  be
    satisfied that the EEA sponsor was exercising  treaty  rights  for  the
    period 2008 - 2009.  In relation to  Objective  Corporation  the  judge
    found that the  letter  stated  that  the  sponsor  was  employed  from
    February 2008 to March 2009 but there was  no  evidence  of  salary  or
    other evidence of employment.  The judge  was  entitled  to  make  that
    finding in the absence  of  evidence  to  show  that  the  sponsor  was
    employed.  Also the judge expressed concern that there was  nothing  to
    indicate that Objective Corporation and Global IT Professional Services
    UK were linked.  The appellant could not seek to rely on evidence  that
    was not before the judge.

 6. Before me Mr Jarvis on  behalf  of  the  respondent  did  not  seek  to
    maintain the argument on behalf of the Secretary of State and  conceded
    that there is an error  of  law  in  the  determination  and  that  the
    appellant has in fact provided the necessary evidence to show that  she
    complies with the requirements of the Regulations.

 7. The Reasons for Refusal Letter shows, in  essence,  that  although  the
    respondent had checked that the appellant's sponsor  (and  husband)  is
    currently a Director of Sayl Consulting Ltd he has  only  been  so  for
    four years and he had not shown the five years continuous exercising of
    treaty  rights  necessary   to   qualify   for   permanent   residence.
    Furthermore, there was a lack of evidence to demonstrate  the  economic
    activity of this company since  2009  until  the  date  of  refusal  in
    September 2013.

 8. In addition  the  respondent  noted  that  the  appellant  provided  no
    evidence of how her husband sponsor was exercising treaty rights in the
    UK as an employed person from 31 March 2008 to 31 March 2009, the  date
    he became a Director of Sayl Consulting.

 9. So it can be seen that the respondent accepted  that  the  sponsor  has
    been a Director of Sayl Consulting for four years.  A  Corporation  tax
    return was  produced  as  well  as  a  business  reserve  bank  account
    statement and further bank statements in  the  company's  name  showing
    transactions to accountants in account transfers.  The  appellant  also
    provided bank statements showing various transactions  such  as  salary
    being paid and also dividends, proving that the account was active.

10. Paragraphs 7 through to 11 of the determination appear to set  out  why
    the judge does not consider that evidence shows  on  balance  that  the
    appellant has established that her husband sponsor was working for Sayl
    Consulting. On the face of the documents  produced  the  sponsor  is  a
    director of that company. Whereas many of the points made by the  judge
    are good and valid ones it is difficult to conclude  that  the  correct
    standard of proof has been applied.

11. In relation to the sponsor's employment with Objective Corporation from
    February 2008 to March 2009 the judge accepts the letter  as  reliable.
    No doubt the judge would have preferred more evidence in the form of  a
    P45 from that employment giving precise dates and the person's specific
    details, such as salary or, for example, employee number as referred to
    in paragraph 12 of the determination.

12. The appellant produced P60s for the tax years 2007-2008  and  2008-2009
    and although not understanding perhaps unsurprisingly, the link between
    Global IT Professional Services UK  and  Objective  Corporation  it  is
    difficult to conclude also that the judge was entitled to state as  she
    does in paragraph 13 that she cannot be satisfied that the sponsor  was
    working during the relevant period 2008-2009.

13. There might have been a hint of a suggestion that there was  some  kind
    of fraud involved because the sponsor was apparently  working  for  two
    different companies  at  the  same  time  but  that  is  not  expressed
    anywhere.

14. The evidence provided should have led to a finding that the sponsor was
    employed during the relevant period.  As  it  happens  the  explanation
    given by the appellant in the grounds seeking permission to  appeal  is
    that the sponsor was sub-contracted to one company  by  the  other  for
    part of the period.  That is not, however, a matter that  I  take  into
    account in finding the relevant error.

Conclusions

15. For the reasons given above I find that the judge erred in  applying  a
    too high standard of proof and the  determination  is  set  aside.  The
    appellant is entitled to succeed on the evidence that was  provided  in
    relation to her application as a family member of an EEA  national  who
    has resided in the UK in accordance with  the  European  Economic  Area
    (EEA) Regulations 2006.  Therefore the appellant has acquired the right
    to reside in the United Kingdom permanently.

Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is set aside and for  the
    decision that the appeal fails is substituted a decision allowing  this
    appeal.

17. Anonymity has not been sought in this appeal and in  the  circumstances
    do not appear to warrant an anonymity direction being made.

18. Appeal allowed.





Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton

