
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43435/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 17th October 2016                 |On 7th November 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                           MRS ANA DE ABREU AFONSO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Z Ahmed (HOPO)
For the Respondent:    No legal representation


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a female, a citizen of Angola, who  was  born  on  9th
    February 1985.  She appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the
    decision of the Respondent, taken on 10th October  2014,  refusing  her
    application for a residence card,  as  confirmation  of  her  right  to
    reside  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Her  application  was  made   under
    Regulation  10(5)  of  the   Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regulations") on the basis that she retained
    rights of residence following her divorce from her husband,  Ireniu  Da
    Silva, who was an EEA national.

 2. The Respondent Secretary of State did not accept that  the  Appellant's
    former spouse was  exercising  treaty  rights  at  the  date  of  their
    divorce.  She did not accept that the Appellant had submitted  evidence
    to show that she was a person  who  satisfied  Regulation  10(6).   The
    application had previously been the subject of a determination by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Kelsey on 16th March 2011, when the application was
    apparently made under Regulation 15, and Judge Kelsey  had  upheld  the
    rejection of the Appellant's application on that occasion.

 3. At paragraph 21 of the determination, the judge concluded as follows:

         "... it appears to me that Regulation 10(6) is a requirement to  be
         judged at the date of the application, not a requirement to be  met
         once and for all at the time of the divorce.  The Appellant has  no
         evidence of work after the tax  year  2010/11,  nor  is  there  any
         evidence that  would  show  that  she  was  self-sufficient,  or  a
         student.  Her application (and this appeal) must fail as Regulation
         10(6) is not satisfied" (paragraph 21).

 4. The appeal was dismissed.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  17th
    August 2016 and on 26th September 2016, the Upper Tribunal convened  to
    hear the appeal, but adjourned it on the  basis  that  the  Appellant's
    representative, Mr F. Junior of Lawland Solicitors  had  not  attended.
    DUTJ Taylor observed also that the representatives had also  failed  to
    attend on one previous occasion.  Attempts by the Appellant to  contact
    the representatives on the  telephone  failed  and  the  court  clerk's
    attempt to contact them on the landline also produced no response.   It
    is concluded, that given the complexity of the issues, the appeal could
    not proceed and an adjournment was granted.  This was after the  Senior
    Home Office Presenting Officer had handed up a copy of NA [2016]  EUECJ
    C-105 (15) [13th June 2016] which  it  was  said  provided  a  complete
    answer to the points being made on the Appellant's behalf.

 6. At the hearing before me on 17th  October  2016,  there  was  again  no
    attendance by Mr F. Junior of Lawland Solicitors, but on this  occasion
    the Appellant, appearing in person, explained that she did  not  expect
    them to attend, and all efforts made by her to contact them had  proved
    fruitless.  She had actually physically gone to their offices  but  the
    door was closed and she could not enter.  She  said  that  she  had  no
    money to instruct any other representative.  She did, however,  produce
    a detailed letter of advice  sent  to  her  by  an  official  from  the
    Citizens' Advice Bureau, indicating the salient Grounds of Appeal  that
    she should be raising before this Tribunal.  She relied upon these.

 7. Essentially, her claim was  that  she  satisfied  the  requirements  of
    Article 13(2) in that before her divorce she was married to  Irineu  Da
    Silva for more than three years (from 2004 to 2009) and for more than a
    year had spent this period of marriage in the UK.  She therefore had  a
    retained right of residence after her divorce subject to the  condition
    that Mr Irineu Da Silva continued to exercise a right to  reside  as  a
    worker, self-employed person, or self-sufficient EEA national.  If  the
    Appellant's former partner had worked from 2006 to 2010, then  provided
    that this was on a large enough scale to be "genuine and effective" she
    would have been exercising a right to reside up  until  at  least  23rd
    November 2009, when she would have acquired a right of residence.

 8. Second, if the Appellant had retained a right to reside in the UK  when
    she divorced her husband, then she now acquired a  right  of  permanent
    residence in the UK under Article 16 of Directive 2004/38 because  this
    governs the right of EEA nationals and their family members to move and
    reside in the UK.

 9. Third, as soon as the  Appellant  married  her  Portuguese  husband  in
    November 2004, she became a family member  of  an  EEA  national.   She
    remained his family member until she acquired a decree absolute and was
    divorced from him.  She would have been exercising a right to reside as
    his family member at any time during their marriage  during  which  her
    husband was exercising a right to reside in this country as a worker or
    self-employed person and so on.

10. For her part, Ms Ahmed submitted that the Appellant's claim  to  be  in
    the UK on the basis of retained  rights  was  unsustainable.   This  is
    because, even before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  namely,  Judge
    Anstis, at a hearing at Hatton Cross  on  15th  March  2016  which  was
    promulgated on 22nd March  2016,  the  Appellant's  representative,  Mr
    Francis Junior of Lawland Solicitors, "also agreed that  there  was  no
    evidence to show that Mr Da Silva was exercising treaty rights  at  the
    date of  the  divorce"  (paragraph  12).   Ms  Ahmed  relied  upon  two
    important decisions.

11. These were the cases of Amos [2011] EWCA Civ 552 and  of  Ahmed  [2013]
    UKUT 00089, and both of those affirmed the argument made by Ms Ahmed on
    the present occasion.  The plain fact was that the Appellant could  not
    satisfy the  requirements  of  Article  13(2),  because  although  that
    Article was to do with "retention of the right of residence  by  family
    members in the event of divorce, annulment of marriage  or  termination
    of registered partnership," the fact was that  Article  13(2)  made  it
    clear that,

         "Before acquiring the right of permanent  residence  the  right  of
         residence of the person  concerned  shall  remain  subject  to  the
         requirement that they are able to show that  they  are  workers  or
         self-employed persons or that they have  sufficient  resources  for
         themselves and their family members not to become a burden  on  the
         social system of the host  member  state  during  their  period  of
         residence and have comprehensive sickness insurance  cover  in  the
         host member state ..."

    Ms Ahmed submitted that this requirement could not be satisfied by  the
Appellant.

12. In reply, the Appellant explained that she was a family  member  of  Mr
    Irineu Da Silva, whom she had married, and in consequence of which  she
    had acquired a retained right of residence.

No Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the making of  the  decision  by  Judge  Anstis  at
    Hatton Cross in a determination promulgated on 22nd March 2016, did not
    amount to an error of law under Section 12(1) of TCEA  [2007]  for  the
    following reasons.  First, paragraph 5 of the Grounds of Appeal  raised
    the question as to whether,

         "By virtue of her marriage to an EEA national  with  the  right  to
         reside in the UK permanently and by virtue of  their  residence  to
         live in the UK for a continuous period of five years, the applicant
         would not have herself acquired the right  to  reside  permanently,
         irrespective  of  whether  or  not  she  exercised  treaty   rights
         throughout that period."

14. This ground, however, overlooks the fact that the Appellant had made an
    application for a retained right of residence, and not a retained right
    of "permanent" residence.  The fact was (see paragraph 6) that the only
    evidence before the judge  was  that  the  Appellant's  ex-husband  had
    worked in the taxis from 2005 to 2009.   Quite  simply  the  suggestion
    that the Appellant had a permanent right of residence was not an  issue
    before Judge Anstis.  It matters not whether the Appellant  lived  with
    the Sponsor for five years in accordance with the Regulations.

15. Second, and no less importantly, the judge  dismissed  the  appeal  (at
    paragraph 23) on the basis that the Appellant could not show  that  her
    ex-spouse was exercising treaty rights at the date of the divorce,  and
    this was consistent with the Appellant's own representative arguing (at
    paragraph 12) that he had no evidence to show  that  Mr  Da  Silva  was
    exercising treaty rights as at the date of  the  divorce.   If  it  was
    conceded that the Sponsor was not a qualified person within the meaning
    of Regulation 6 at the date of the divorce  then  the  Appellant  could
    have no parasitic rights to retain contingent on the EEA  nationals  at
    the date of the divorce.

16. Third,  as  was  set  out  above,  the  Appellant  cannot  satisfy  the
    requirements of Article  13(2)  which  makes  it  clear  that,  "before
    acquiring the right of permanent residence, the right of  residence  of
    the person concerned shall remain subject to the requirement that  they
    are able to show that they are workers or self-employed  persons  ...."
    In Amos [2011] EWCA Civ 552 the Court of Appeal confirmed the  position
    (at paragraphs 26 to 27) when it went on  to  conclude  that,  "at  all
    times while residing in this country until their  divorce,  the  spouse
    must have been a worker or self-employed (or  otherwise  satisfied  the
    requirements of Article 7.1)" (see paragraph 29 of the judgment).   The
    Appellant has not been able to  demonstrate  her  Sponsor's  compliance
    with Article 7 so as to show that he was exercising treaty rights.  She
    therefore cannot bring herself within the meaning of Article 13(2).



Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in  the  determination  of  Judge  Anstis,
which is clear and comprehensive and to the point.  The determination  shall
stand.

No anonymity order is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    5th November 2016

