

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/43106/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |              Sent to parties on |
|On 17 November 2015                       |              On 22 December 2015|
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L MURRAY

                                   Between

                                FAUSTINA OSEI
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE OF THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hawkin, Counsel instructed by Arlington Crown
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-Tier Tribunal. I find that no
particular issues arise on the facts of this case that give rise to the
need for a direction. For this reason no anonymity direction is made.

                            DECISION AND REASONS
Background

1. The Appellant is a Ghanaian  national  born  on  24  November  1964.  She
   applied on 12 August 2014 for a residence card as confirmation of a right
   of residence in the UK as the family  member  of  an  EEA  national.  The
   Respondent refused her application in a letter dated 14 October 2014. The
   Appellant had entered into a proxy marriage with an EEA national and  the
   Respondent  concluded  that  it  had  not  been  properly  executed   and
   consequently was not  valid.  The  Respondent  also  concluded  that  the
   Appellant was not in a durable relationship with an  EEA  national  under
   Regulation 8 (5) of the EEA Regulations 2006 as insufficient evidence had
   been submitted.


2. The  Appellant  appealed  against  that  decision  and  that  appeal  was
   dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Geraint Jones  QC  in  a  decision
   promulgated on 15 May  2015.  He  found  that  there  was  no  admissible
   evidence to demonstrate that the alleged Ghanaian proxy marriage would be
   recognised in Belgian, the EEA  sponsor's  country  of  nationality,  and
   hence the marriage was not valid. He further found that Appellant and her
   sponsor were not in  a  durable  relationship  for  the  purpose  of  the
   Regulations.


3.  The  Appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  against  that  decision.
   Permission was granted on renewal to the Upper Tribunal by Upper Tribunal
   Judge Kopieczek on 8 September 2015. The Appellant had sought  to  adduce
   evidence after the hearing and without having made any application to  do
   so in relation to the validity of  the  proxy  marriage.  The  First-tier
   Tribunal did not take that evidence into account and Upper Tribunal Judge
   Kopieczek  commented  that  service  on  the  Respondent  prior  to   the
   promulgation of the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  would  have  to  be
   established. He concluded that there was arguable merit  in  the  general
   proposition in the grounds that the findings as to a durable relationship
   were insufficiently reasoned, although it could be said that at the  very
   least the judge was entitled to take into account the Appellant's illegal
   status in the UK as an indication of her desire  to  use  some  means  to
   secure residence. It was also arguable that the  sponsor  ought  to  have
   been given the opportunity to comment on the suggestion that he would not
   leave the UK to be with her if she was removed.

The Grounds

   4. The grounds for  permission  to  appeal  assert  that  the  First-tier
      Tribunal should have taken account of  the  evidence  from  a  Belgian
      lawyer that the marriage was valid under Belgian  law  notwithstanding
      the fact that it was submitted post-hearing.  The  evidence  had  been
      served on the Respondent prior to promulgation.  Further,  the  First-
      tier Tribunal erred in finding that the Appellant was not in a durable
      relationship with her EEA  sponsor  because  the  Appellant  had  been
      cohabiting with her partner for a period 3 weeks short of  two  years;
      the two year period referred to by the Judge at paragraph 26 (vi)  was
      a guide, not a requirement of the Regulations; the Judge's comments in
      relation to the illegality of the Appellant's status were  of  concern
      as the fact that she was an overstayer  should  have  been  a  neutral
      factor and the reliance on it was  contrary  to  the  Regulations  and
      Citizen's Directive (2004/38/EC) neither  of  which  mentioned  it  as
      being of relevance. The fact that the Appellant had overstayed was not
      in itself relevant  to  the  quality,  depth  and  commitment  of  the
      relationship and the  Judge's  view  that  the  spouse  "inferentially
      asserted" that if the Appellant were required to leave the UK he would
      not accompany her was highly problematic as it was not raised  in  the
      Respondent's decision; it was not put to him during cross-examination;
      he never said it in terms and it was not relevant to the issues in any
      event. The First-tier Tribunal had made no proper findings on  whether
      the relationship should be regarded as durable.




The Rule 24 Response

   5. The Respondent asserts that the First-tier Tribunal correctly  refused
      to admit post-hearing evidence. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  rely
      solely on the length of cohabitation but  on  his  assessment  of  the
      witnesses and their oral evidence in finding that they were not  in  a
      durable relationship.


Submissions

   6. Mr Jarvis conceded that there was an error of law in relation findings
      regarding the durable relationship  under  Regulation  8  (5).     The
      parties agreed that in the light of the  fact  finding  required,  the
      matter should be re-heard de-novo in the First-tier Tribunal.


Decision and reasons

   7. Mr Jarvis conceded that the First-tier Tribunal made a material  error
      of law in relation to the findings regarding  the  durability  of  the
      relationship. The First-tier Tribunal in paragraph 26 of the  decision
      found that the Appellant and  her  EEA  national  sponsor  started  to
      reside together in the summer of 2013 and that  the  relationship  was
      sufficient to allow them to describe each other as "partner" from that
      point. He further found, that at the date of the hearing on 6 May 2015
      they continued to reside together. However, he found  that  they  were
      not in a durable relationship because the period of residence was less
      than two years; the "fact that the Appellant is an illegal  overstayer
      is ample evidence of the fact that she will manipulate the immigration
      system to suit her own intentions and to gain advantage  for  herself"
      and her sponsor "inferentially  asserts"  that  if  the  Appellant  is
      required to leave the United Kingdom, he will choose not to  accompany
      her.


   8. Article 3.2 of the Directive provides that a host Member State  shall,
      in  accordance  with  accordance  with   its   national   legislation,
      facilitate entry and residence of,  the partner with  whom  the  Union
      citizen has a durable relationship, duly attested.  Regulation 8(5) of
      the EEA Regulations correspondingly states that a person  will  be  an
      extended family member of an  EEA  national   if  the  person  is  the
      partner of an EEA national (other than a civil partner) and can  prove
      to the decision maker that he is in a durable  relationship  with  the
      EEA  national.  A  "durable  relationship"  is  not  defined  by   the
      Regulations.  In YB (EEA reg 17(4)  -  proper  approach)  Ivory  Coast
      [2008] UKAIT 00062 the Tribunal held that in determining  whether  the
      appellant is "in a durable  relationship"  the  Tribunal  should  have
      regard, as rules of thumb only, to the criteria set out in  comparable
      provisions of the Immigration  Rules  in  order  to  ensure  the  like
      treatment of extended family members of EEA and British nationals  and
      to ensure compliance with  the  general  principle  of  Community  law
      prohibiting discrimination on the grounds  of  nationality.  The  fact
      that a person meets or does not meet the requirements of the  relevant
      immigration rules cannot be treated as determinative of  the  question
      of whether a residence card  should  or  should  not  be  issued.  The
      comparable Immigration Rules  are  set  out  in  Appendix  FM  of  the
      Immigration Rules.     Appendix FM paragraph GEN  1.2  states  that  a
      partner includes a person  who  has  been  living  together  with  the
      applicant in a relationship akin to a marriage  or  civil  partnership
      for at least two years prior to the date  of  application  unless  the
      contents otherwise requires.  Appendix  FM  paragraphs  E-ECP.2.6  and
      2.10 require that the relationship of an applicant and a partner  must
      also be genuine and subsisting and  that  they  must  intend  to  live
      together permanently in the United Kingdom.


   9. On the First-tier Tribunal's findings, the Appellant had cohabited for
      a period a month or so short of two years.  The  First-tier  Tribunal,
      correctly, did not  treat  this  as  determinative,  although  it  was
      clearly  a  factor  in  his  assessment  of  the  durability  of   the
      relationship. However, notwithstanding the fact that he found that the
      Appellant and her EEA national partner had cohabitated for nearly  two
      years, he found on the basis of the  Appellant's  immigration  history
      and status as an overstayer since 2012 that she was not in  a  durable
      relationship. Whilst this may be a  relevant  factor,  the  First-tier
      Tribunal gave insufficient reasons for finding  that  this  meant  the
      relationship was not durable in the light of the previous findings  as
      to cohabitation. It also appears that the EEA sponsor did not state in
      evidence that he would not return to Ghana with her but that the First-
      tier Tribunal inferred this (paragraphs 8 and  26  of  the  decision).
      This was not put to the sponsor in cross-examination in order to  give
      him the opportunity to comment. In the circumstances, the finding that
      there was no durable relationship was insufficiently reasoned and  the
      reasons given did not rationally lead to the adverse findings made.

Conclusions:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

The Practice Directions of the Upper Tribunal indicate that the remaking  of
the decision should be undertaken in the First-tier Tribunal  in  the  light
of the judicial fact-finding required.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                                             Date



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray


