
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43123/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 August 2015                    |On 20 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MOHAMED OMAR MAHMOOD
                         (ANONYMITY Order NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr T. Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:     Ms Agata Patyna, Counsel instructed by Oracle
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I see no need for, and do not make, an order restricting  reporting  of
    this case.

The Respondent

 2. The respondent (hereinafter referred to as "the claimant") is a citizen
    of Somalia born on 6 June 1983 who arrived in the UK in February  1990,
    aged six, with his mother and two brothers. On 26  September  2000  the
    claimant was granted indefinite leave to remain in the UK.

 3. On 2 October 2014 the  Secretary  of  State  revoked  the  respondent's
    indefinite leave to remain pursuant to Section 76(1) of the Nationality
    and Immigration Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act"). Section 76(1)  of  the  2002
    Act provides that:

         'The Secretary of State may revoke a person's indefinite leave to
         enter or remain in the United Kingdom if the person-

         (a) is liable to deportation, but

         (b) cannot be deported for legal reasons'

 4. The claimant has twice successfully appealed attempts to deport him  on
    the basis that to do so would place the UK in breach of  Article  8  of
    the European Convention of Human Rights (ECHR). In  November  2005  the
    claimant was  convicted  on  eight  counts  of  possessing  a  Class  A
    controlled drug with intent to supply  and  sentenced  to  three  years
    imprisonment. He was served with  a  notice  of  intention  to  make  a
    deportation order but successfully appealed  under  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR. On 3 November 2011 he was convicted of  burglary  and  theft  and
    sentenced to 12 months imprisonment. He was notified  of  liability  to
    deportation but successfully appealed on the basis of family  life  and
    length of residence in the UK.

 5. The Secretary of State's decision of  2  October  2014  to  revoke  the
    claimant's indefinite leave to remain refers to the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge B A Morris promulgated on 29 November 2013 allowing
    the second appeal against deportation, where Judge B A Morris states at
    paragraph 33:

         "Despite our findings concerning  the  Appellant's  credibility  we
         find that we must allow the appeal although we  do  so  with  great
         reluctance. We have no doubt that the Appellant is not  of  benefit
         to the United Kingdom, that he has let down his family and that  he
         did not take advantage of the second chance which was given to  him
         in 2007 when his previous appeal against deportation  was  allowed.
         He is not a reformed character."

 6. The Secretary of State's decision states that because the claimant  had
    previously succeeded in an appeal against deportation he would  not  be
    removed from the UK. Rather, his indefinite leave to  remain  would  be
    replaced with limited leave and in considering further applications for
    leave to remain his conduct would be taken into consideration.

The First-tier Tribunal Decision

 7. The claimant appealed and his appeal was heard  by  Judge  Majid  ("the
    judge") on 22 April 2015 who, in a decision  promulgated  on  28  April
    2015, allowed the appeal.

 8. The judge's decision does not make any reference to  Section  76(1)  of
    the 2002 Act or identify  that  the  issue  before  him  was  that  the
    claimant's indefinite leave was to be revoked.  Instead,  the  decision
    reads as if the judge has assumed the Secretary of State had decided to
    remove the claimant, which was clearly not the case.

 9. At paragraph 10(a) of his decision the judge stated that:

         "... the Immigration Judge ... is not willing to allow the claimant
         to be deported. Logically, that should have been respected but  the
         Home Office is not  willing  to  take  the  same  attitude  to  the
         Appellant; accordingly, this Appeal before me [sic]  bringing  more
         suffering to the Appellant who is keen to move on and work for  the
         welfare of his family."

10. Having noted that the appellant's youngest child is only three and  his
    best interests should be kept in mind, the judge then set out in detail
    case  law  concerning  Section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009 before concluding that "the Appellant can  benefit
    from the relevant Immigration Rules as amended and the  protections  of
    the ECHR, particularly concerning the "best interest" of the child".

Submissions

11. Mr Melvin, for the Secretary of State, submitted  that  the  judge  had
    failed to identify the relevant law, or to apply it.   Ms  Patyna,  for
    the claimant, conceded that the judge had not  addressed  the  relevant
    statute but argued that an Article 8 proportionality assessment was  in
    any event required, which is what the judge had in effect  carried  out
    and as such the judge was entitled to reach the conclusion he had.  She
    also argued that the  Secretary  of  State's  revocation  decision  was
    defective.

Consideration

12. The judge's decision contains a clear error of law. He  has  failed  to
    address the subject matter of the appeal and instead discussed areas of
    law that  are  either  irrelevant  or  whose  relevance  has  not  been
    explained. The judge has approached  the  appeal  is  if  it  concerned
    removal of the claimant when  in  fact  it  was  an  appeal  against  a
    decision under Section 76(1) of the 2002 Act to revoke  the  claimant's
    indefinite leave to remain and replace it with limited leave to remain.

13. I have considered whether it would be appropriate for me to remake  the
    decision, and note that were I to do  so  I  would  have  in  mind  the
    Supreme Court's judgment  in R (George) [2014] UKSC 28  where  guidance
    is given on applying Section 76(1). However, it is  my  view  that  the
    effect of the error has been to deprive the claimant of a fair  hearing
    and as such, in accordance with the  section  7.2(a)  of  the  Practice
    Statement of the Immigration and  Asylum  Chambers,  I  find  that  the
    appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for re-making.

NOTICE OF DECISION

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained errors  of  law  such
    that it is set aside in its entirety and the  appeal  is  to  be  heard
    afresh.

15. No anonymity direction is made.

16. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  hearing  afresh
    before a judge other than Judge Majid.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan | Dated                               |

