
[pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43502/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 October 2015                   |16 November 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                    mrs Cheryl Orinthia Wollcock Stewart
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E. Savage, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms K. Reid, instructed by Obadiah Rose Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant in the appeal before the Upper Tribunal is the  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department.  We  refer  to  Mrs  Stewart  as  the
    claimant herein.

 2. The claimant is a Jamaican national born on 4 April 1974.  She appealed
    to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision made by the Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department on 14 October 2014 to remove her from the
    United Kingdom pursuant to s.10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.
     On the same date the Secretary of State refused an application made by
    the claimant for leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Haria heard the claimant's appeal on 21 April
    2015 and in a decision promulgated on 17 June allowed it on  the  basis
    that the respondent's decision to remove the claimant would lead  to  a
    breach of Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.

 4. The following facts are uncontroversial:
      i) The claimant entered the United Kingdom  on  28  August  2008  with
         leave to remain as a work permit holder conferred until  13  August
         2012.  The claimant's spouse and two children - N, who was 13 years
         old at that time and C, who was 5�  years  old  -  entered  as  her
         dependants on 5 March 2010. According to  the  Home  Office  bundle
         they were each given leave to enter in line with the  claimant.   A
         third child of the relationship was born in the United Kingdom on 4
         March 2012 (A). N and C are at school in the  United  Kingdom,  and
         both are doing well in their studies;
     ii) The appellant worked as a  teacher  in  Jamaica  for  approximately
         twelve  years  and  has  a  Bachelor's  Degree  in   Guidance   and
         Counselling.  She taught in the United Kingdom for a year after her
         arrival.  In 2010 she was offered further employment as a  teacher,
         but that offer was terminated because she failed to obtain  a  work
         permit in time.  She currently works on  a  part-time  basis  as  a
         tutor in Maths, English and Science;
    iii) On his arrival in United Kingdom the  claimant's  husband  obtained
         employment as a sanitising cleaner in  a  hospital  in  Essex,  and
         undertook such employment until the expiry  of  his  permission  to
         work.

First-tier Tribunal's determination

 5. In paragraph 21 of her determination judge Haria observes that  it  was
    no part of the claimant's case that she met  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules. She described the main issue between the parties  as
    being the "consideration of the appellant's Article  8  rights  outside
    the Immigration Rules".

 6. Thereafter the judge sets out  the  material  factual  matrix  in  some
    detail and directs herself  to pertinent decisions  of  this  Tribunal,
    and of the higher courts, in relation to the consideration of the  best
    interests of a child [35-41 and 46]. In relation to this aspect of  the
    appeal the judge concluded as follows:
         "42. Applying the principles  and  bearing  in  mind  the  guidance
             offered in the above cases in my view in this  case  the  best
             interest of  the  two  youngest  children  certainly  lies  in
             remaining with their parents.  In relation to [N], he  is  now
             18 years old and he could if he wishes remain  in  the  UK  to
             pursue his studies subject to obtaining a LTR to do so in  his
             own right.
         43.  ... If both [A's] parents are to be removed then it is in  her
             best interests to be removed with  them.   Since  A  is  still
             quite young it is reasonable to expect that  she  will  easily
             adapt to life in Jamaica with the support of her parents.
         44.  C is 10 years old and attends [a Primary  Academy].   She  has
             been at the school  since  January  2009  ...   Following  the
             principles detailed in the case of Azimi-Moayed  it  is  clear
             that the need to maintain both  stability  and  continuity  of
             social and educational provision is an important factor, which
             should be considered amongst other factors.  [C] has now lived
             in  the  UK  from  the  age  of  4  years,  for  a  relatively
             significant period of her life of over 6  and  a  half  years.
             She has  only  ever  been  educated  in  the  UK  and  has  no
             experience of the Jamaican education system.  Removing [C]  to
             Jamaica would disrupt the stability and continuity.  [C] is at
             a critical stage in her education and uprooting her to Jamaica
             could be devastating.  It is understandable that it  would  be
             difficult  to  adapt  from  a  British  school  system  to   a
             completely new system  in  Jamaica  without  her  friends  and
             peers.  It is undoubtedly difficult enough for  any  child  to
             move from primary school to secondary school in a  country  in
             which the child has lived for the majority of his or her life,
             but a move to a country where  the  child  lived  only  as  an
             infant up to the age of 4 in addition to moving  school  would
             have added challenges and be very disruptive as well difficult
             for any child.  It is clear that  [C]  has  developed  social,
             cultural and educational ties in the UK and  removing  her  to
             Jamaica will be detrimental.  It is  in  [C's]  best  interest
             that the appellant is granted leave to remain in the UK.
         45.  [N] is 18 years old he is currently studying for his A  levels
             having completed his GCSE's exams...  [N] is now an  adult  so
             he is of an age where if he wished to continue to study in the
             UK he could apply to do so..."

 7. Having cited from paragraph 24  of  the  Supreme  Court's  decision  in
    Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74 the judge stated:
         "[47] ... I accept that  the  appellant  and  her  family  are  not
         British citizens, and they have no rights to  future  education  or
         healthcare in this country.  They are  a  close-knit  family.   The
         appellant is highly educated.  But this case differs from the  case
         of Zoumbas in that in [C's] case her  best  interests  require  the
         maintenance of stability and continuity of social  and  educational
         provision as well as remaining in the family unit with her parents.
          In [N's] case he is of an age where he is establishing  a  private
         life of his own outside the family unit."

 8. Thereafter the judge set out the familiar five stage test  from  Razgar
    [2004] UKHL 27 [48] and cited from the equally  well-known  authorities
    of EB (Kosovo) [2009] 1 AC 1159 and Beoku-Betts [2008] UKHL 39 [50-51].
     At paragraph 52 of her decision the judge concluded that:  "I  do  not
    add much weight to the effect of the decision on  the  members  of  the
    extended family and friends".

 9. Immediately preceding paragraph 54 of judge Haria's decision is the sub-
    heading "Proportionality".  Thereafter the judge directs herself, inter
    alia, that she is required to take account of the "the factors set  out
    in s.117A and 117B" of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
    and she subsequently set out the terms of section  117B  in  full.  The
    following conclusions are then articulated:
         "57. For the reasons given above and having regard to  the  age  of
             the children, the nature and extent of their integration  into
             UK society, the length of time they have been in the UK  being
             just under seven years (in the case of C and N during the most
             formative years of their lives) and the close-knit family unit
             in which they live is in my view a strong case which outweighs
             the need  to  maintain  effective  immigration  control.   The
             appellant, her spouse and children all  speak  English.   They
             have shown they are  able  to  integrate  into  society.   The
             appellant is a qualified  teacher  and  would  not  have  much
             difficulty in finding a  job.   The  appellant's  husband  has
             shown he is able to find employment.  There will obviously  be
             some burden on the taxpayer in that children will be  entitled
             to education and the family will be entitled to access to  the
             National Health Service.
         58.  On balance, for the reasons stated above,  in  particular  the
             best interests of the children, I find that removal  would  be
             disproportionate."

Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

10. The respondent brings challenge to the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
    on three grounds, which can be summarised in the following terms:
      i) The First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  failing  to  give  any  or  any
         adequate reasons for allowing the appeal outside the Rules:
     ii) Insofar as the First-tier Tribunal identified the circumstances  of
         the claimant's case which led to it allowing the appeal outside the
         Rules - and in particular those relating  to  her  children  -  the
         conclusion drawn therefrom was irrational. The features of the case
         relied upon by the First-tier Tribunal to allow the appeal are  all
         covered by the Rules.
    iii) Although  the  First-tier  Tribunal  properly  directed  itself  in
         relation to s.117  of  the  2002  Act,  it  failed  to  apply  such
         direction to its consideration of the appeal.   In  particular  the
         First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  attach  little  weight   to   the
         claimant's  private  life  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  erred  in
         attaching "some weight" to the fact that  the  claimant  can  speak
         English.

Discussion and conclusions

11. The correct approach to the consideration of Article  8  of  the  Human
    Rights  Convention  has  been  deliberated  upon  in  extenso  by  this
    Tribunal, the High Court and the  Court  of  Appeal.  We  are  assisted
    greatly by decision of the Court (Richards LJ, Underhill LJ  and  Sales
    LJ) in SS (Congo) and Others [2015] EWCA  Civ  387  in  bringing  these
    various considerations together In delivering the judgment of the Court
    Richards LJ said as follows:
         "40.  ...  we  consider  that  the  state  has  a  wide  margin  of
             appreciation in determining the  conditions  to  be  satisfied
             before LTE is  granted,  by  contrast  with  the  position  in
             relation to the decisions regarding LTR  for  persons  with  a
             (non-precarious) family life already established in the United
             Kingdom.  The Secretary of State has already, in effect,  made
             some use of this wider margin  of  appreciation  by  excluding
             s.EX.1 as a basis for grant of LTE, although it  is  available
             as the basis for a grant of  LTR.   The  LTE  Rules  therefore
             maintain, in general terms, a reasonable relationship with the
             requirements of Article  8  in  the  ordinary  run  of  cases.
             However, it  remains  possible  to  imagine  cases  where  the
             individual interests at stake are  of  a  particular  pressing
             nature so that a good claim for LTE can be established outside
             the Rules.  In our view the  appropriate  general  formulation
             for this category is that  such  cases  will  arise  where  an
             applicant for LTE can show that compelling circumstances exist
             (which are not sufficiently recognised under the new Rules) to
             require the grant of such leave.
         41.  This formulation is aligned to that proposed in Nagre at  [29]
             in relation to the general position  in  respect  of  the  new
             Rules for LTR, which was adopted in this court in  Haleemudeen
             at [44].  It  is  a  fairly  demanding  test,  reflecting  the
             reasonable relationship between the Rules themselves  and  the
             proper outcome of application of Article 8 in the usual run of
             cases.  But, contrary to the submission of Mr Payne, it is not
             as  demanding  as  the  exceptionality  or   very   compelling
             circumstances test applicable in the special context explained
             in MF (Nigeria) (precariousness  of  family  relationship  and
             deportation of foreigners convicted of serious crimes) ...
         44.  The proper approach should always be to identify,  first,  the
             substantive content of the relevant Immigration Rules, both to
             see if an applicant for LTR or LTE  satisfies  the  conditions
             laid down in those Rules (so as to be entitled to LTR  or  LTE
             within the Rules) and  to  assess  the  force  of  the  public
             interest given  expression  in  those  Rules  (which  will  be
             relevant  to  the  balancing  exercise  under  Article  8,  in
             deciding whether LTR or LTE  should  be  granted  outside  the
             substantive provision set out in the Rules).  Secondly, if  an
             applicant does not satisfy the requirements in the substantive
             part of the Rules, they may seek to maintain a claim for grant
             of LTR or LTE outside the substantive provisions of the Rules,
             pursuant to Article 8.  If there is a reasonably arguable case
             under Article 8 which has not already been sufficiently  dealt
             with by consideration of the application under the substantive
             provisions of the Rules (cf Nagre, paragraph  [30]),  then  in
             considering  the  case  the  individual   interests   of   the
             applicants and others whose Article  8  rights  are  an  issue
             should be balanced against the public interest,  including  as
             expressed in the Rules, in order to make an assessment whether
             refusal  to  grant  LTR  or  LTE,  as  the  case  may  be,  is
             disproportionate and hence unlawful by virtue of s.6(1) of the
             HRA read with Article 8."

12.  Before leaving the decision in SS Congo we also draw attention  to  the
    following passages therein; which bear on a consideration of  the  best
    interests of a child.
         "39  (iv)     ... The fact that the interest  of  a  child  are  in
             issue will be a countervailing factor which tends to reduce to
             some degree the width of the margin of appreciation which  the
             state authorities would otherwise enjoy.  Article 8 has to  be
             interpreted and applied in light of the UN Convention  on  the
             Rights of the Child  (1989)...  however,  the  fact  that  the
             interest of a child are in issue does  not  simply  provide  a
             trump card so that a child applicant for positive action to be
             taken by the state in the field of Article  8(1)  must  always
             have their  application  acceded  to;  ...   It  is  a  factor
             relevant to the fair balance between the  individual  and  the
             general community which goes someway towards the tempering the
             otherwise wide margin of appreciation available to  the  state
             authorities in deciding what to do.  The age of the child, the
             closeness of their relationship with the other  family  member
             in the United  Kingdom  and  whether  the  family  could  live
             together elsewhere are likely to be  important  factors  which
             should be borne in mind ..."

13. In submissions on behalf of the  claimant  Ms  Reid  commended  to  the
    Tribunal that the First-tier judge had  properly  directed  herself  in
    law, taken full account of all material  matters  and  had  come  to  a
    conclusion which was adequately reasoned and rational.  For this reason
    she submitted there was no basis upon which the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision could lawfully be interfered with.

14. In relation to the application of s.117B  (5)  Ms  Reid  asserted  that
    although the judge made no explicit reference to the  weight  that  she
    had attached to the claimant's private life in the United Kingdom  when
    carrying out the balancing exercise required under Article 8,  she  had
    nevertheless properly directed herself to the terms of  this  provision
    and presumption must be, absent anything in the decision to indicate to
    the contrary, that she lawfully applied it.

15. Ms Savage maintained the Secretary of State's position as  set  out  in
    the grounds of appeal, drawing  attention  to  those  passages  in  the
    decision said to support such grounds.

16. It is readily apparent from the Court of Appeal's decision in SS  Congo
    that neither the weight to  be  attached  to  the  public  interest  as
    expressed through the Immigration Rules, nor the weight to be  attached
    to the private and/or family life of an applicant  whose  circumstances
    are under consideration, are to be treated as a fixity.  As  a  general
    rule significant weight must be attached  to  the  public  interest  as
    expressed  in  the  Immigration  Rules.  There  must  exist  compelling
    circumstances not sufficiently recognised under the Rules in any  given
    applicant's case if such applicant does not meet  the  requirements  of
    the Rules, but  is  nevertheless  to  successfully  resist  removal  on
    Article 8 grounds. A consideration of Article 8 outwith the Immigration
    Rules is not, therefore, a freewheeling exercise  of  discretion  by  a
    judge, but one which requires a careful and nuanced approach.

17. It is uncontentious that when undertaking such a  consideration  judges
    are required by statute to take account of the considerations  detailed
    in  s.117A  and  117B  of  the  2002  Act.  Section  117B  (5)  thereof
    specifically directs a judge that: "little weight should be given to  a
    private life established by a  person  at  a  time  when  the  person's
    immigration status is precarious." The  importance  of  this  has  been
    emphasised  in  a  number  of  recent  decisions  from  this   Tribunal
    including: Dube (ss.117A-117D) [2015] UKUT  00090,  AM  (s117B)  Malawi
    [2015] UKUT 00260 and Deelah and others (section 117B -  ambit)  [2015]
    UKUT 00515 (IAC).

18. Although in paragraphs 54 to 56 of  her  decision  the  judge  directed
    herself to section 117B of the 2002 Act, it cannot be discerned, either
    from the substance of her conclusions or the reasoning leading thereto,
    that she gave lawful application to such direction.  In  particular  in
    our view it cannot be discerned from a fair reading of the decision  as
    a whole that the judge attached little weight to  the  claimant's,  and
    the claimant's family members, private lives  as  required  by  section
    117B(5).

19. There is no explicit  reference  in  the  decision  to  the  claimant's
    immigration status being precarious, or as to consequences  which  flow
    therefrom - either generally or on the facts of the  instant  case.  Of
    the reasons provided in paragraph 57 of the  decision  as  to  why  the
    judge found the claimant to have a "strong  case  which  outweighs  the
    need to maintain effective immigration control", the majority  directly
    relate to aspects of the claimant's, or  her  family  members,  private
    lives in the UK i.e. aspects of the claim to which little weight  ought
    to have been attached. If judge Haria did indeed attach  little  weight
    to these aspects of the claimant's, and  her  family  members,  private
    lives, it is difficult to understand from the  decision  the  reasoning
    which underpinned the allowing of the appeal.

20. When the First-tier Tribunal's decision is considered as a whole it  is
    readily apparent to us that it lacks the sort of rigorous analysis  and
    reasoning that was required to  be  undertaken  on  the  facts  of  the
    instant case when the Article 8 ECHR ground was being considered.

21. This conclusion is further supported by the  judge's  consideration  of
    the best interests of the children, and in  particular  C.  Whilst  the
    judge cited from the decisions in EV Philippines [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874
    and Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74 she both failed to engage in any  meaningful
    way with the principles set out there, and failed to grapple  with  the
    potential relevance of the introduction of section 117 of the 2002  Act
    since those decisions were handed down. Furthermore,  although  it  was
    found that C's best interests required the  "maintenance  of  stability
    and  continuity  of  social  and  education  provision",  as  well   as
    "remaining in the family unit", there was no detailed analysis  of  the
    position C would find herself in if she were move to Jamaica  with  her
    family members and, in particular, no identification of the  particular
    detriment to her wellbeing that would be occasioned thereby.

22. For these reasons we set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.
    Having announced our conclusion at the hearing, both parties  commended
    to us that the case should be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for
    the decision on appeal to be remade. We agreed that this should be  so,
    given the need for further evidence - in particular in relation to  the
    youngest two children.

23. There has been no contention that any of the evidence that has thus far
    been presented to the Tribunal by the claimant or  her  family  members
    lacks in credibility. Consequently, we direct that the primary findings
    of fact made by the First-tier Tribunal are to remain standing.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error on a point of law
capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal and is accordingly set
aside.

The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be reconsidered in light
of our conclusions above.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 12 November 2015

