
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43899/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 October 2015                    |On 4 December 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mr. Mehboob Ahmed
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. T. Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. L. Doyle of Messrs Maliks and Khan Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the  decision  of
       Tribunal Judge Metzer promulgated on 8 May 2015 in which  he  allowed
       Mr. Ahmed's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision  not  to
       grant him a residence card as confirmation of his right to reside  in
       the United Kingdom.

    2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to the Secretary  of  State
       as the Respondent and Mr. Ahmed as the  Appellant,  reflecting  their
       positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

    3. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that  it  was  arguable
       that the judge made a material misdirection  in  law  in  determining
       that the burden of proof to establish that the marriage  was  one  of
       convenience rested on the Respondent.    It  was  arguable  that  the
       judge  failed  to  assess  whether  the  evidential  burden  on   the
       Respondent had been met.

  Rule 24 response

    4. In the Rule 24 response the Appellant accepted  that  the  judge  had
       made an error in stating that the burden lay  on  the  Respondent  to
       establish that the marriage was one of  convenience.   The  Appellant
       accepted that the Respondent carried the  initial  evidential  burden
       and that, when that had been met, the burden of proof shifted to  the
       Appellant to show that the marriage was not one of convenience.

    5. The Appellant also accepted that  the  judge  had  failed  to  assess
       whether the evidential burden on the Respondent had been met  or  not
       in the first instance (paragraph 7 of the Rule 24 response).  It  was
       submitted that at its highest there may  well  have  been  reasonable
       grounds or suspicion that this was a marriage  of  convenience  given
       the innocent mistakes and confusion that took place in the interviews
       (paragraph 8).  However, having accepted that it  was  arguable  that
       the Respondent could say that the initial evidential burden of  proof
       had been met, the Appellant submitted  that  there  was  no  material
       error of law in the  decision.   In  paragraph  12  of  the  Rule  24
       response it states:

           "In any event, it is submitted that both the appellant  and  his
           wife went on to fully and comprehensively discharge  the  burden
           of proof on them that their marriage was not one of  convenience
           in light  of  their  comprehensive  and  detailed  supplementary
           witness statements dated 17 April 2015."

    6. The Appellant submitted that there had been no  meaningful  challenge
       in cross-examination or during submissions to the Appellant  and  his
       wife's account that they were in a loving marriage, as any  purported
       inconsistencies, adverse credibility and  alleged  discrepancies  had
       been  accounted  for.   It  was  also  noted  that  the  Respondent's
       representative had not cross-examined  the  two  witnesses  who  came
       forward (paragraphs 15 and 16 of the Rule 24 response).

    7. It was submitted by the  Appellant  that,  given  such  evidence  and
       findings which went favourably towards showing that the Appellant and
       his wife were in a genuine marriage,  and  that  they  gave  credible
       evidence, there was no basis in the Respondent's  grounds  of  appeal
       for them to argue that such unchallenged credible evidence should  be
       ignored.   The  Appellant  and  his  wife  had   responded   to   the
       Respondent's reasonable suspicion by providing volumes of  evidential
       material for their appeal  to  show  that  they  were  in  a  genuine
       marriage and to dispel such suspicion.

  Submissions

    8. At the hearing Mr. Wilding  accepted  that  the  Respondent  had  not
       challenged the explicit findings in paragraph [15] of  the  decision.
       He submitted only that  paragraph  [15]  was  topped  and  tailed  by
       paragraphs [14] and [16] where the judge asserted that the burden  of
       proof lay on the Respondent, and that  therefore  the  assessment  of
       evidence had not been done properly.  He could not make any  stronger
       submissions than that.

    9. Mr. Doyle submitted that I should preserve the decision by virtue  of
       the findings at  paragraph  [15],  which  contained  a  comprehensive
       assessment.  There had been no challenge to the Appellant's  evidence
       or that of his wife in cross-examination or in submissions,  and  the
       findings as to the relationship were safe and intact.

  Error of Law Decision

   10. In paragraph [14] of the decision, the judge states:

           "The burden of proof was on the Respondent to establish that the
           marriage is one of convenience".

   11. The case of Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage of convenience)  Greece
       [2012] UKUT 38 (IAC) reaffirmed the  principle  that  the  Respondent
       carries the initial evidential burden  of  proof  to  establish  that
       there are reasonable grounds for suspicion that a marriage is one  of
       convenience.  Once that burden  has  been  met,  the  Appellant  must
       discharge the burden of  proof  that  the  marriage  is  not  one  of
       convenience.

   12. I find, as accepted by Mr. Doyle, that the judge  incorrectly  stated
       that the burden of proof to establish that the marriage  was  one  of
       convenience lay on the Respondent [14].  I also find that  he  failed
       to address whether this legal burden was met by  the  Respondent.   I
       therefore find,  as  accepted  by  the  parties,  that  the  decision
       involved the making of an error of law.  There remains  the  question
       of whether this error was material.

   13. I find that it is clear  from  the  evidence  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal, referred to by the judge, that the Appellant addressed  the
       Respondent's reasonable  suspicion  that  his  marriage  was  one  of
       convenience.  At paragraph [2] the judge refers  to  the  Appellant's
       witness  statement,  before  setting  out  his  oral  evidence.    At
       paragraph [8] he refers to his wife's witness statement, before again
       setting out her oral evidence.

   14. Paragraph [15] of the determination states:

           "Having heard the evidence from the Appellant and his  wife  who
           addressed all the inconsistencies, and they were quite numerous,
           in their witness statement I found the Appellant and his wife to
           be credible witnesses in relation  to  the  genuineness  by  the
           marriage and they are supported in  respect  of  the  extent  of
           their relationship by the  documentation  and  the  two  further
           witness  statements  of  witnesses  present  at   the   hearing.
           Although the Appellant does not have an  attractive  immigration
           history,  I  do  not  find  that  that  adversely  affects   the
           Appellant's  credibility  in  respect  of  the  extent  of   his
           relationship with his wife.  There is no challenge to  the  fact
           that there was a civil marriage and the evidence is clear, in my
           view,  that  they  had  an  Islamic  marriage  too.   Where  the
           Appellant was able to produce documentary  evidence  to  explain
           the discrepancies, for example in relation to answers concerning
           the extent of the Appellant's medical treatment, he has produced
           such documentary evidence."

   15. In paragraph [15] the judge finds the Appellant and his  wife  to  be
       credible  witnesses.   He  finds  that  they  addressed  all  of  the
       inconsistencies in their witness statements.  He  found  them  to  be
       credible witnesses in relation to the genuineness of their  marriage.
       He  specifically  notes  that  the  Appellant  produced   documentary
       evidence to explain the discrepancies where possible, listed at [13].
        The Respondent did not challenge the findings in paragraph [15].

   16. Irrespective of the error made by the judge in relation to the burden
       of proof, and his failure to appreciate that the Respondent had  only
       to  show  a  reasonable  suspicion  that  the  marriage  was  one  of
       convenience, I find that this was not  a  material  error  given  his
       thorough consideration of the evidence of the Appellant and his wife.
         He  made  clear  findings  that  they  had   addressed   "all   the
       inconsistencies".  He found that they were in a genuine relationship.
        He found that they were supported by two further witness  statements
       of witnesses who  attended  the  hearing,  but  who  were  not  cross
       examined, [12].  He found, having considered  all  of  the  evidence,
       that the marriage was not one of convenience.

   17. I do not find  that  the  judge's  findings  in  paragraph  [15]  are
       affected by the fact that he  placed  the  burden  of  proof  on  the
       Respondent, given his clear findings in this paragraph.  He  did  not
       allow the appeal only because the Respondent had not met  the  burden
       of proof, but he allowed the appeal having found that  the  Appellant
       and his wife were credible, had addressed  the  inconsistencies,  and
       were in a genuine relationship.

Notice of Decision

  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of  an  error
  of law but this was not material to the outcome of the appeal.

  I do not set aside the decision.

  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
