
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
IA/43014/2014;

                                     IA/43015/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House, London                        Decision and Reason
Promulgated
On 20 May 2015                                                  On 9 June
2015


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                         JAYABEN HEMANTKUMAR FATKAR
                       HEMANTKUMAR MANOHARBHAI FATKAR
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                               Respondent
Representation:

For the appellant: Mr Z Malik instructed by Mayfair Solicitors
For the respondent: Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellants are married and are nationals of India.  They  appealed
   to the First-tier Tribunal against the decision of  the  Secretary  of
   State  dated  13  October  2014  to  refuse  the   first   appellant's
   application for leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student and  the
   second appellant's application for leave to remain as  her  dependant.
   Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hussain dismissed  the  appeals.  The
   appellants now appeal with permission to this Tribunal.

Background

2. The appellants are nationals of India and arrived  in  the  UK  on  25
   September 2009, the first appellant as a Tier 4 (General) Student  and
   the second appellant as her dependant with  leave  to  enter  until  9
   September  2010.  Their  leave  to  remain  was  extended  on  several
   occasions; the latest leave was due to  expire  on  27  January  2016.
   However on 4 July 2014 the appellants'  leave  was  curtailed  by  the
   respondent because Khalsa College, where the first  appellant  was  by
   then studying a Diploma in Hospitality and Tourism Management, had its
   licence revoked. The appellants applied  for  leave  to  remain  on  5
   September 2014 for the first appellant to study a Chartered Management
   Accountant course (CIMA) at the International School of  Sikh  Studies
   and the respondent refused that application on 13 October 2014.

3. The respondent refused the application on the  basis  that  the  first
   appellant had failed to meet the requirements of paragraph 245ZX  (ha)
   of the Immigration Rules because she had previously been granted leave
   to study course at degree level or above for 3 years and 5 months. The
   respondent decided that, as the current  application  is  to  study  a
   CIMA, an NQF level 7 course, until 18 September 2017, a grant of leave
   to study this course would result in her  having  spent  more  that  5
   years in the UK as a Tier 4 (General)  Student  studying  course  that
   consist of degree level study or above.

4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal on the  ground  that
   she did not begin to study courses at degree level or above until 2012
   and that the sponsoring college made a mistake on the CAS  as  to  the
   end date of the new course which meant that it appeared that she  will
   go over the five year limit. She argued that the  course  ends  on  20
   April 2016 not 18 September 2017 which she said  was  a  typographical
   error on the CAS. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that the CAS had
   given the correct end date of the course as that was also the date  on
   the conditional offer and that in any  event  he  was  prevented  from
   considering taking new evidence into account by  section  85A  of  the
   Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. In  these  circumstances
   the First-tier Tribunal Judge found that the new course was to end  on
   18 September 2017.

5. As the appellant had confirmed  in  oral  evidence  that  the  various
   components of the Associate Degree in  Business  Management  were  all
   studies as part of the degree she completed  at  Khalsa  College,  the
   Judge found that the appellant had been studying at degree  level  for
   the Associate  Degree  in  Business  Management  and  the  Diploma  in
   Hospitality and Tourism Management which were  level  6  courses.  The
   Judge  found  that  the  appellant's  credibility,  and  that  of  the
   representative from the International  School  of  Sikh  Studies,  was
   damaged. The Judge accepted what  the  first  appellant  said  in  her
   letter dated 24 October 2014 (sent with her  appeal  notice)where  she
   said that she had completed 41 months of level 6 courses prior to  the
   commencement of the CIMA course. Given that the course has an end date
   of 18 September 2017 that would take her  over  the  60  month/5  year
   threshold.

6. The appellants put forward  three  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  Upper
   Tribunal. The first ground  contends  that  the  Judge  erred  in  his
   interpretation of 'degree level'  studies  as  required  by  paragraph
   245ZX (ha) and defined in paragraph 6 of the Immigration Rules. It  is
   contended that the appellant studied at level 4 and 5 before going  on
   to study at level 6 in the third  year  of  her  Associate  Degree  in
   Business Management. It is therefore contended that the appellant  has
   studied at degree level for 12 months and the proposed studies for  36
   months will not exceed 5 years. The second ground  contends  that  the
   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred  in  failing  to  appreciate   that
   paragraph 245ZA (ha) does not provide for time previously spent  as  a
   'student'  (under  paragraph  57  of  the  Immigration  Rules   )   in
   calculating the five year period. The final ground is that the  First-
   tier Tribunal Judge erred  in  failing  to  consider  the  appellants'
   appeal under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

7. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge of the First-tier
   Tribunal Garratt who decided that the first two grounds of appeal were
   not arguable as  the  Judge's  decisions  were  open  to  him  on  the
   evidence. However he decided that the  Judge  had  arguably  erred  in
   failing to given any consideration to the  human  rights  issues  even
   though they had been raised in the grounds of appeal to the First-tier
   Tribunal.

The Law

8. The relevant provisions of the Immigration Rules for the  purposes  of
   this appeal are as follows;

 "6. In these Rules the following interpretations apply:

 "degree level study" means a course which leads to a  recognised  United
 Kingdom  degree  at  bachelor's  level  or  above,  or   an   equivalent
 qualification at level 6 or above of the revised National Qualifications
 Framework,  or  levels  9  or  above  of   the   Scottish   Credit   and
 Qualifications Framework.

 Under Part 8 of these Rules, "post-graduate level study" means a  course
 at level 7 or above of the revised National Qualifications Framework  or
 Qualifications and Credit  Framework,  or  level  11  or  above  of  the
 Scottish  Credit  and  Qualifications  Framework,  which  leads   to   a
 recognised United Kingdom  postgraduate  degree  at  Master's  level  or
 above, or an equivalent qualification at the same level.

 "foundation degree"  means  a  programme  of  study  which  leads  to  a
 qualification awarded by an English higher  education  institution  with
 degree awarding powers which is at a minimum of level 5 on  the  revised
 National Qualifications Framework, or awarded on a  directly  equivalent
 basis in the devolved administrations.

 "primary degree" means a qualification obtained from a course of  degree
 level study, which did not feature as an entry  requirement  a  previous
 qualification obtained from  degree  level  4  study.  An  undergraduate
 degree is a primary degree. A Masters degree that has a Bachelor  degree
 as an entry requirement is not a primary degree.

 A "UK recognised body" is an institution that has  been  granted  degree
 awarding powers by either a Royal Charter, an Act of Parliament  or  the
 Privy Council. For the purposes of these  Rules  we  will  consider  the
 Foundation Programme Office, South London Local Education  and  Training
 Board and  the  Yorkshire  and  Humber  Strategic  Health  Authority  as
 equivalent to UK Recognised Bodies.

 ...

 "a UK Bachelors degree" means
      (a) A programme of study or research which leads to the  award,  by
      or on behalf of a  university,  college  or  other  body  which  is
      authorised by Royal Charter or by or under an Act of Parliament  to
      grant degrees,  of  a  qualification  designated  by  the  awarding
      institution to be of Bachelors degree level; or
      (b) A programme of study or research, which leads to  a  recognised
      award for the purposes of section 214(2)(c) of the Education Reform
      Act 1988, of a qualification designated by the awarding institution
      to be of Bachelors degree level."

  "245ZX. To qualify for leave to remain as a Tier  4  (General)  Student
 under this rule, an applicant must meet the requirements  listed  below.
 If the applicant meets these  requirements,  leave  to  remain  will  be
 granted.  If  the  applicant  does  not  meet  these  requirements,  the
 applicant will be refused.

    ...

 (ha) If the course is at degree level or above, the grant  of  leave  to
 remain the applicant is seeking must not lead to  the  applicant  having
 spent more than 5 years in the UK as a Tier 4 (General) Migrant, or as a
 Student, studying courses at degree level or above unless:

       i) the applicant has successfully completed  a  course  at  degree
          level in the UK of a minimum duration of 4 academic years,  and
          will follow a course of study at Masters degree level sponsored
          by a Recognised Body or a body in receipt of public funding  as
          a  higher  education  institution  from   the   Department   of
          Employment  and  Learning  in  Northern  Ireland,  the   Higher
          Education Funding Council for  England,  the  Higher  Education
          Funding Council for Wales or the Scottish Funding Council,  and
          the grant of leave to remain must not  lead  to  the  applicant
          having spent more than 6 years in the UK as a Tier 4  (General)
          Migrant, or as a Student, studying courses at degree  level  or
          above; or

      ii) the grant of leave to remain is to follow a course  leading  to
          the award of  a  PhD  and  the  applicant  is  sponsored  by  a
          Recognised Body or a body in receipt of  public  funding  as  a
          higher education institution from the Department of  Employment
          and Learning in Northern Ireland, the Higher Education  Funding
          Council for England, the Higher Education Funding  Council  for
          Wales or the Scottish Funding Council; or

     iii) the applicant is following a course of study in;

       (1) Architecture;

       (2) Medicine;

       (3) Dentistry;

       (4) Law, where the applicant has  completed  a  course  at  degree
       level in the UK and is progressing to:

             a. a law conversion course validated by the  Joint  Academic
             Stage Board in England and Wales, a Masters in Legal Science
             (MLegSc) in Northern Ireland, or an accelerated graduate LLB
             in Scotland; or

             b. the Legal Practice  Course  in  England  and  Wales,  the
             Solicitors Course in  Northern  Ireland,  or  a  Diploma  in
             Professional Legal Practice in Scotland; or

             c. the Bar  Professional  Training  Course  in  England  and
             Wales, or the Bar Course in Northern Ireland.

                  (1) Veterinary Medicine & Science; or

                  (2) Music at a  music  college  that  is  a  member  of
                  Conservatoires UK (CUK)"

Submissions

9. At the outset of  the  hearing  before  me  Mr  Malik  submitted  that
   permission to appeal had not been refused on grounds of appeal one and
   two. He relied on the decision  in  Ferrer  (limited  appeal  grounds;
   Alvi) [2012] UKUT 00304 (IAC) where the Upper Tribunal  said  at  head
   note 2;

 "Where the First-tier  Tribunal  judge  nevertheless  intends  to  grant
 permission only in respect of certain of the  applicant's  grounds,  the
 judge should make this abundantly plain, both in  his  or  her  decision
 under rule 25(5) of the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)
 Rules 2005 and by ensuring that the Tribunal's administrative staff send
 out the proper notice, informing the applicant of the right to apply  to
 the Upper Tribunal for permission to appeal  on  grounds  on  which  the
 applicant has been unsuccessful in the  application  to  the  First-tier
 Tribunal."

10. Mr Kandola accepted that the relevant notices had not been  sent  out
   and that the appellants were not therefore barred from  raising  those
   grounds of appeal before me. I accept that in this case there  was  no
   notice sent out informing the appellants that permission to appeal was
   refused in respect of grounds one and two and that I cannot  therefore
   treat permission as having been refused on those grounds.

11. Mr Malik accepted that there was no evidence  before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal or before me on which the Article 8 appeal could  be  allowed
   and he said that he would not pursue that ground of  appeal.  He  also
   accepted that ground two was a bad point and he would not pursue  that
   either. The only ground still before me therefore is the first ground.



12. Mr Malik submitted that the first ground relates to the  construction
   of paragraph 245ZX (ha). He relied on the authorities of Syed &  Anor,
   R (on the application of) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
   [2014] EWCA Civ 196 and YS and SJ  ('Degree  level'  study)  Mauritius
   [2006] UKAIT 00094. He submitted that the studies being undertaken  by
   the appellant in Khalsa College from 2010-2012 were not 'degree level'
   studies as they would not have led to a qualification by a  body  that
   was empowered to award a degree. However he submitted that from  2012-
   2013 the appellant was studying at level 6 and therefore is  the  only
   year that counts as in previous years she cannot be said to have  been
   studying at level 6 or above.

13. Mr Kandola submitted that the decision in Syed should be treated with
   caution in this appeal  as  it  relates  to  ACCA  qualifications  and
   whether they come within table 10 of paragraph 245F of the Immigration
   Rules which relates to Tier 1 (Post-study work) Migrants. He  referred
   to the last part of paragraph 26 of the decision in Syed and submitted
   that the issue of the awarding body is not relevant to the issue of an
   equivalent qualification  of  level  6  or  above  and  therefore  not
   relevant in this appeal. He submitted that  the  Judge's  findings  in
   relation to credibility were open to him and  that  they  led  to  the
   finding that the appellant did not meet the requirements of  paragraph
   245ZX.

Discussion and conclusions

14. The cases relied on by Mr Malik do not deal with  the  issue  at  the
   heart of this appeal. The  decision  in  YS  and  SJ  relates  to  the
   definition of 'a  course  of  study  at  degree  level  or  above'  in
   paragraph 60 (i) (b) which is no longer in force and  paragraph  6  of
   the Immigration Rules in that context. The decision was concerned with
   degree level studies and the awarding body and, in finding that Dublin
   Metropolitan University is not a body falling within  section  214  of
   the Education Reform Act 1988, the Tribunal was  clearly  interpreting
   the phrase 'recognised UK degree' in the first part of paragraph 6  of
   the Immigration Rules. The Tribunal concluded that  a  'recognised  UK
   degree' can only be awarded by  an  institution  capable  of  awarding
   degrees recognised by the 1988 Act.

15. The Court of Appeal in Syed was concerned with the interpretation  of
   table 10 of Appendix A and  the  phrase  'UK  recognised  bachelor  or
   postgraduate degree'  which  is  defined  in  paragraph  6  above.  In
   paragraph 26 the Richards LJ said

 "... "recognised" in Table 10 fits well with the view that the  required
 qualification  is  an  actual  degree  awarded  by   a   degree-awarding
 institution.  "Recognised"  appears  in  a  number  of  places  in   the
 definitions in paragraph 6. The  definition  of  "degree  level  study",
 namely "a course which leads to a recognised United  Kingdom  degree  at
 bachelor's level or above, or an equivalent qualification at level 6  or
 above  of  the  revised  National  Qualifications  Framework",  draws  a
 distinction  between  a  recognised  degree  on  the  one  hand  and  an
 equivalent qualification on the other hand: it is the recognised degree,
 not the  equivalent  qualification,  that  features  in  Table  10.  The
 definition of "UK recognised body" refers to an institution with degree-
 awarding powers, not to institutions awarding equivalent qualifications.
 Similarly, the second limb of the definition of "a UK Bachelors  degree"
 refers to a "recognised award" for the purposes of the Education  Reform
 Act  1988  and  by  that  route  refers  to  awards  by  degree-awarding
 institutions, not to the award of equivalent qualifications. It  is  all
 of a piece."

16. The appellant in the present case claims  to  have  been  awarded  an
   'Associate Degree' by the Institute of Commercial  Management  through
   Khalsa College. It is not  clear  whether  this  is  a  degree  or  an
   equivalent qualification. Even if the qualification  obtained  by  the
   appellant in June 2013 is a degree (although she described  it  as  an
   Associate Degree) there is no evidence before me, nor was there before
   the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  that  the  Institute  of  Commercial
   Management, the awarding  body,  is  not  an  institution  capable  of
   awarding degrees recognised by the 1988 Act.

17. The first question in the instant appeal  is  therefore  whether  the
   Associate Degree in Business Management undertaken by the appellant at
   Khalsa College London between October 2010 and June 2013 is a  'course
   which leads to a recognised United Kingdom degree at bachelor's  level
   or above' or 'an equivalent qualification at level 6 or above  of  the
   revised National Qualifications Framework' within  the  definition  of
   'degree level study' in paragraph 6. The appellant herself referred to
   this course as Level 6 in her letter of 24 October  2014  and  in  her
   witness statement of 14  January  2014  the  appellant  described  the
   course  as  an  Associate  Degree  in  Business  Management.  The  CAS
   describes the appellant's previous  course  as  QCF/NQF  level  6  and
   states that the new course is at level 7.

18. There was no evidence  of  the  final  award  before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge or before me. The only evidence  is  two  certificates,
   one for a Certificate in Business Studies awarded on 20 August 2012 by
   the Institute of Commercial  Management  and  a  Diploma  in  Business
   studies awarded by the same Institute in August 2013, there is also  a
   transcript of academic results in relation to the Diploma in  Business
   Studies indicating a period of studies from June 2011 until June 2013.
   The CAS assigned for that course on 18 October 2010 stated that it was
   being issued for an Associate Degree in Business Management  (ICM)  UK
   at level 6 and that the course was to start on  25  October  2010  and
   finish on 28  June  2013.  The  appellant  herself  clarifies  in  her
   statement of 24 October 2014 that this is a level 6  Associate  Degree
   in Business Management. This evidence clarifies that the appellant was
   studying towards a level 6 qualification at  Khalsa  College  and  was
   thus in 2010-2013 studying a course or courses which lead to a  degree
   or equivalent qualification. I reject Mr Malik's  submission  that  it
   did not matter what level the appellant believed she was studying  at,
   her statement clarified and confirmed the documentary evidence.

19. Taking into account the CAS and  the  appellant's  own  evidence  the
   Judge was entitled to conclude that  the  studies  undertaken  by  the
   appellant during the period from  2010  to  2013  was  leading  to  an
   equivalent qualification at level 6 or above. That finding meant  that
   the Judge was bound to conclude that the new course - which was to run
   from October 2014 until September 2017, would take the appellant  over
   the five years permitted by paragraph 245ZX (ha)  of  the  Immigration
   Rules.

Conclusion:

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error on a point of law.

Signed
                       Date: 5 June 2015


A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



