
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43130/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th May 2015                              |On 22nd May 2015              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             Muhammad Umar Faraz
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Not Made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Diwncyz, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Ahmad, Haider Solicitors Ltd


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Fox made following a hearing at Bradford on 30th December 2014.

Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 25th February  1992.   On
    21st March 2014 he made a combined application for leave to  remain  in
    the UK as a Tier 4 (General) Student  Migrant  under  the  points-based
    system which was refused with no right of appeal.  He was  then  served
    with removal directions under Section 10 of the Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 1999.

 3. The judge said that he was  satisfied  from  the  papers  that  he  was
    empowered to determine the appeal with a hearing and he resolved to  do
    so in spite of the fact that it was  clearly  argued  before  him  that
    there was no in country right of appeal.  The judge went  on  to  allow
    the appeal and unsurprisingly the Secretary of State has challenged his
    decision.

 4. Section 82 identifies the type of immigration  decision  against  which
    there is a right of appeal to the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal.  The
    removal decision in this case is an immigration decision as defined  by
    Section 82(2)(g).

 5. Any right of appeal granted under Section 82 is subject to  Section  92
    of the 2002 Act.  That identifies which types of  immigration  decision
    may be appealed by a person whilst he is still in  the  UK.   Mr  Ahmad
    conceded that the claimant could  not,  as  he  sought  to  do  at  the
    hearing, bring an in country right of appeal on  human  rights  grounds
    because there was no reference to  any  claimed  breach  of  the  Human
    Rights Act or indeed the Race Relations Act at any stage prior  to  the
    hearing.

 6. The claimant has never made a human rights claim whilst in the  UK  and
    he therefore cannot bring himself within Section 92(4) of the 2002 Act.
    An immigration decision which falls within Section 82(2)(g) of the 2002
    Act is only capable of an out of country right of appeal.   Accordingly
    he is entitled to appeal this decision only after he has left the UK.

 7. The judge had no jurisdiction to determine the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The original judge erred in law.  The decision is set aside.  The appeal  is
dismissed for want of jurisdiction.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
