
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/43217/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 April 2016                             |On 19 May 2016                |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                SAIQA FARHAT
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Turner, Counsel, instructed by Law Lane
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. For ease of reference, I shall refer to the parties as they were before
    the First-tier Tribunal.  The  Secretary  of  State  is  therefore  the
    Respondent and Mrs Farhat is once more the Appellant.

 2. This is an appeal by the Respondent against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Wilson (the judge), promulgated on 12 October  2015,  in
    which he allowed the Appellant's appeal. That appeal  was  against  the
    Respondent's decision of 10 November  2014,  cancelling  her  leave  to
    remain and in turn refusing leave to enter the United Kingdom.

 3. The Appellant had been in possession of leave to remain  as  a  Tier  4
    student. She travelled back to Pakistan. Upon return  to  this  country
    she was stopped by Immigration Officers and questioned. In  due  course
    the Respondent concluded that her English language test certificate had
    been fraudulently obtained. Thus, paragraph 321A(2) of the  Immigration
    Rules applied.



The judge's decision

 4. The judge finds that the  test  certificate  was  in  fact  irregularly
    obtained on account of what certainly appears to have been very obvious
    evidence: the Appellant had stated that she sat the test modules on the
    same day, whilst the certificate itself stated that these had been done
    on two separate days. The judge makes it clear that his  findings  were
    made irrespective of any  voice  recognition  evidence  (paragraph  4).
    Reliance  could  no  longer  be  placed  on  the  certificate  and  the
    Respondent was justified in cancelling the Appellant's leave (paragraph
    5). The judge goes on to find that the test certificate was  improperly
    obtained by a third  party  acting  dishonestly.  He  states  that  the
    Appellant apparently only became aware of the problem with the dates on
    the certificate during cross-examination at the hearing (paragraph  7).
    Factors counting against the Appellant are highlighted in paragraph  8.
    In paragraph 10 the judge correctly states that the burden  of  proving
    dishonesty rested with the Respondent. In paragraph 11 the  finds  that
    although a third party had been dishonest in obtaining he  certificate,
    the Appellant herself had not been when she made the application to the
    Respondent. The judge then states that the Respondent  was  correct  to
    have cancelled the leave, but  that  the  Appellant's  case  should  be
    viewed in light of the fact (as he found it to be) that  the  Appellant
    was not herself dishonest.

 5. The judge then moves onto  the  Appellant's  family  circumstances.  He
    notes the Appellant's marriage to a British national. On  29  May  2015
    the Appellant had a baby. The judge took  the  view  that  because  the
    Respondent  had  failed  to  consider  section  55  of   the   Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 when making her decision  (despite
    the fact that the child was not born then), the decision  under  appeal
    was not otherwise in accordance with the law (paragraph 14). The appeal
    was therefore apparently allowed on this limited basis (paragraph 15).



The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 6. The grounds set out passages from the generic evidence submitted by the
    Respondent in all ETS cases. In addition to this, a  reasons  challenge
    is mounted. It is said that the judge failed to give  adequate  reasons
    for concluding that the Appellant had no knowledge of the deception. It
    is also asserted that the judge erred in concluding that section 55  of
    the 2009 Act applied to an unborn child.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly  on
    11 March 2016. He comments that the judge's conclusion on the deception
    issue may be perverse.



The hearing before me

 8. The Appellant did not attend the hearing.  Mr  Turner  was  content  to
    proceed in her absence, as was I.

 9. A copy of the English language test  certificate  referred  to  by  the
    judge could not be found in anyone's papers. Notwithstanding this, both
    parties were content to proceed on the basis that the  certificate  was
    in evidence before the judge (he  specifically  mentions  this  in  his
    decision).

10. I pointed out to the representatives that the judge  appeared  to  have
    misdirected himself as to the correct application of paragraph  321A(2)
    of the Rules: third party dishonesty would engage the provision even in
    the absence of the Appellant's knowledge. Mr Turner  pointed  out  that
    this was not in the grounds of appeal. Ms  Fijiwala  did  not  seek  to
    apply  to  amend  the  grounds.  Instead  she  maintained  the  reasons
    challenge as regards the deception issue. Although the recent  decision
    of the Presidential panel in SM and Qadir (now reported as SM and Qadir
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department (ETS - Evidence  -  Burden
    of Proof) [2016] UKUT 00229 (IAC)) went against  the  generic  evidence
    relied on by the Respondent in ETS cases,  here  the  judge  had  found
    there to be deception quite apart from that now  discredited  evidence.
    She submitted  that  there  were  inadequate  reasons  as  to  why  the
    Appellant would not have known about the false certificate.  There  was
    no evidence that she had used an agent to make the application  to  the
    Respondent. In addition, the judge was wrong on the section 55 point.

11. She informed me that the Appellant made an application  under  Appendix
    FM to the Rules on 19 September 2014. This  was  on  hold  pending  the
    outcome of this appeal.

12. Mr Turner noted that the allegation of the two dates had not  been  put
    to the Appellant in interview. She did not know about  the  discrepancy
    in the dates until the hearing before the judge.



Decision on error of law

13. Whilst the apparent misdirection by  the  judge  as  to  the  scope  of
    paragraph 321A(2) rather jumped out at me when  reading  his  decision,
    the Respondent has not taken the point either in the  original  grounds
    or by way of attempted amendment. That is a matter for her.

14. Reliance on the generic evidence takes the Respondent's case no further
    in light of SM and Qadir.

15. Notwithstanding this, I find that the judge did err in relation to  the
    deception issue, as asserted in paragraph 7 of the grounds. My  reasons
    for this are as follows.

16. First, the judge clearly found that the  certificate  was  fraudulently
    obtained, and did so quite separately from the  generic  evidence.  The
    basis upon which the judge  found  the  certificate  to  be  improperly
    obtained was clear on the face of the document: it related to tests sat
    over two days, not the single day asserted  by  the  Appellant  in  her
    evidence.

17. Second, we know from SM and Qadir that ETS cases remain fact-sensitive.

18. Third, the judge found that deception had been used by a third party.

19. Fourth, there was no evidence before the judge (and he  did  not  find)
    that the Appellant used some unscrupulous agent to make her application
    to the Respondent.

20. Fifth, the fraudulent certificate was used in the  application  to  the
    Respondent.

21. Sixth, the judge notes several adverse indictors in paragraph  8  which
    on the face of it pointed very  much  towards  her  complicity  in  the
    deception.

22. Seventh (leaving aside the proper scope of paragraph  321A(2)  for  the
    moment), in light of the numerous factors weighing in the  Respondent's
    favour as regards the discharging  of  the  burden  of  proof,  it  was
    incumbent on  the  judge  to  provide  clearly  expressed  reasons  for
    concluding that the Appellant was completely innocent/ignorant  of  the
    use of the certificate in her application.

23. Eighth, there is nothing, at least  nothing  adequately  expressed,  in
    paragraphs 7, 10, and 11 to indicate to the reader why  the  judge  was
    finding  that  the  Appellant  was  completely  unaware  of  what   the
    certificate itself stated. What is  said  about  the  cross-examination
    simply does not explain how the  Appellant  could  not  have  seen  the
    certificate at any stage despite making the application herself (in the
    absence of a finding by the  judge  that  an  agent  did  it).  If  the
    Appellant had seen the certificate previously, there is no reasoning as
    to why the Appellant could not have  comprehended  the  discrepancy  in
    dates. There is no reasoning as to how the language test  itself  could
    have been taken by a proxy, a certificate issued, and yet the Appellant
    have no idea of any of this.

24. The lack of adequate reasoning on this crucial issue fatally undermines
    the judge's decision. I would add that  the  apparent  finding  by  the
    judge that the Respondent was justified in making the decision she  did
    (i.e. cancelling leave)  does  not  sit  happily  with  the  concurrent
    conclusion that the Respondent should look  again  at  the  Appellant's
    case. Either the decision under appeal was lawful or it was not.

25. There is a further material error. Section 55  of  the  2009  does  not
    apply to an unborn child.  Mr  Turner  did  not  seek  to  persuade  me
    otherwise. Thus, the Respondent's decision, at the  time  it  was  made
    (that being the operative date), was lawful in this regard.

26. The judge's decision is set aside.

Remaking the decision

27. Mr Turner initially suggested that I should allow  the  appeal  to  the
    limited extent that the Respondent's  decision  was  not  otherwise  in
    accordance with the law. This was, as I understood his position to  be,
    on  the  basis  that  the  Respondent  had  failed  to   consider   the
    circumstances of the Appellant's child. However, such an argument could
    only properly succeed if there was a failure to  act  lawfully  on  the
    facts known to the Respondent as at the date of her  decision,  not  on
    subsequent developments. The decision was made in  November  2014;  the
    child was born in May 2015. I reject Mr Turner's first point.

28. Alternatively, he asked me to determine  the  appeal  on  the  evidence
    before me.

29. Ms Fijiwala submitted that I could remake the decision but perhaps  not
    reach findings on the Article 8 claim given that there was an  Appendix
    FM application pending.

30. I have decided that I should determine the merits of both the paragraph
    321A(2) and Article 8 issues on the evidence before  me.  There  is  no
    sound reason why this should not be  the  case.  The  evidence  I  have
    consists of: the Respondent's evidence contained in various  documents;
    the Appellant's bundle, indexed and paginated 1-42.



The paragraph 321A(2) issue

31. Paragraph 321A(2) states:


           Grounds on which leave to enter or remain which is in force is
           to be cancelled at port or while the holder is outside the
           United Kingdom


           321A. The following grounds for the cancellation of a person's
           leave to enter or remain which is in force on his arrival in, or
           whilst he is outside, the United Kingdom apply;
           ...

           (2) false representations were  made  or  false  documents  were
           submitted (whether or  not  material  to  the  application,  and
           whether or not to the holder's  knowledge),  or  material  facts
           were not disclosed, in relation to the application for leave; or
           in order to obtain documents from the Secretary of  State  or  a
           third party required in support of the application or,

32. Dishonesty must be proven by the Respondent.

33. Every case depends upon its own facts.

34. Although I have not had the certificate before me, it  was  before  the
    judge (see his record of proceedings) and  neither  representative  has
    suggested that it (the certificate) did  not  in  fact  show  that  the
    modules were completed on two separate days. I find that they were.  In
    sharp contrast, the Appellant has asserted that she did  all  parts  of
    the test on the same day (see Q15  of  interview  1,  conducted  on  21
    August 2014). I note too that the Appellant could not even  recall  the
    name of the college at which she claimed to have sat the tests (Q11).

35. I find that the Appellant has not  obtained  any  qualifications  since
    being in the United Kingdom  and  that  the  licence  of  her  previous
    sponsor was suspended. The first point in particular is indicative of a
    person who either did not intend to study or was incapable of doing so.
    On either scenario, there is an incentive to  seek  to  obtain  further
    leave by nefarious means.

36. The educational certificates from Pakistan, produced by the  Appellant,
    do not in my view materially undermine the Respondent's case. As far as
    I can tell, the results in English were poor.

37. The evidence  from  the  Appellant's  brother  takes  her  case  little
    further. He, like the Appellant herself, did  not  attend  the  hearing
    before me. In any event, I cannot see how he could directly  attest  to
    the Appellant having in fact sat the language test, and his  naming  of
    the college does not explain why the Appellant did not know it.

38. Taking the evidence as a whole, and of course directing myself that the
    burden rests with the Respondent, I  find  that  the  contents  of  the
    certificate are reliable and are to be preferred to the evidence of the
    Appellant. In turn, I find that the  Respondent  has  proved  that  the
    English language test  certificate  was  obtained  by  deception.  This
    finding is not dependent upon any of the generic evidence considered in
    detail in SM and Qadir.

39. It is highly likely, I find, that the test was in fact sat by  a  proxy
    on the two days shown on the certificate. Deception was used by a third
    party. There is no dispute that the certificate in question was used in
    making the application to the Respondent. Thus, even if  the  Appellant
    did not have knowledge of the deception by the third  party,  paragraph
    321A(2) bites.

40. However, I find that the Appellant did in fact know  of  the  deception
    when making the application. I  find  that  she  made  the  application
    herself and did not use an agent - there has been  no  suggestion  that
    she did. I find that it is inconceivable  that  she  did  not  see  the
    certificate before it was submitted. It is inconceivable that she would
    not have been aware of the fact that a proxy  sitter  took  the  tests.
    Thus, I find that the Appellant was herself complicit in the deception.



41. Paragraph 321A(2) applies and the appeal is dismissed on this basis.





The Article 8 claim

42. I accept that the Appellant is married to a British  citizen  and  that
    they have lived together since their marriage  in  2014.  I  find  that
    there is a genuine and subsisting relationship.

43. I find that the couple have a son, born on [ ] 2015. He is British too.



44. The Appellant cannot succeed under Appendix FM to  the  Rules  for  the
    following  reasons.  First,  S-LTR.4.2  applies  and   there   are   no
    compassionate or other factors which  would  justify  the  exercise  of
    discretion in the Appellant's favour.

45. Second, I have no  evidence  of  the  couple's  financial  affairs,  or
    compliance  with  Appendix  FM-SE.  I  cannot  be  satisfied  that  the
    financial requirements are met.

46. Third, in relation to EX.1 I have no evidence as to  why  it  would  be
    unreasonable for the Appellant's son to go to Pakistan, and  why  there
    would be any insurmountable obstacles to the family life established by
    the  marriage  continuing  outside  of  the  United  Kingdom.   British
    citizenship is not a trump card. The statements from the Appellant  and
    her husband in the bundle  are  brief  in  the  extreme.  There  is  no
    evidence of ill-health or any other compelling  circumstances  in  this
    case. The burden is on the Appellant  and  I  find  that  EX.1  is  not
    satisfied.

47. In terms of Article 8 outside  the  Rules,  I  find  that  there  is  a
    distinct  absence  of  any  compelling  or  exceptional   circumstances
    pertaining to the Appellant's case.

48. I have no evidence about the child and I find that his  best  interests
    and welfare rest entirely with remaining with his parents. They do  not
    necessarily also rest with him remaining in the United Kingdom.

49. The Rules cater for all facets of  the  Appellant's  case  that  I  can
    conceive of, and those Rules have not been met. This counts against the
    Appellant.

50. The public interest weighs heavily against the Appellant too. The  fact
    that she has practised deception only adds to the public interest.

51. I am not satisfied that she speaks English to a reasonable  degree.  In
    terms of financial support, I will accept  that  the  husband  provides
    this (although the requirements of the Rules are not met). However, the
    Appellant had used the NHS already in respect of her pregnancy.

52. As I have already found, it would not be  unreasonable  to  expect  the
    child to go to Pakistan.

53. The claims fails outside of the Rules.





Anonymity

54. No direction has been sought and none is appropriate.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.
I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.
I re-make the decision by dismissing the appeal on all grounds.



Signed                                       Date:  17 May 2016


H B Norton-Taylor

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                       Date:  17 May 2016

Judge H B Norton-Taylor

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
