
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/40875/2013
                                                               IA/43835/2013
                                                               IA/43831/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 5 June 2014                                  |On 10 July 2014            |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                           mrs Digna Pinili Racuya
                              mr Gerald Racuya
                        miss Diana Kate Pinili Racuya

                          [no anonymity order made]
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr M Bhuiyan, a Legal Representative with Universal
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer
Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are a family of citizens of the Philippines,  a  husband
    and wife and their five year old  daughter.   The  infant  son  of  the
    principal appellant ('the wife') is also a citizen of the  Philippines.
    Both children were born here.

 2. They appeal with permission against the decision of First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Walker, dismissing their appeal against the respondent's decision
    to refuse to grant them leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  on
    Article 8 ECHR grounds, within or outwith the Immigration Rules, and to
    remove them by way of directions under s. 47 of the Immigration  Asylum
    and Nationality Act 2006.

 3. The wife arrived in the United Kingdom in November 2008 as  a  student,
    with valid leave until 18 February 2010.  She was then pregnant by  the
    second appellant ('the husband').  Their daughter was born on 26  March
    2009, and on 16 February  2011,  the  husband  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom as his wife's dependant partner.   Both  were  granted  further
    leave to remain until 15 July 2013, the  wife  as  a  student  and  the
    husband as her dependant. In 2012 the wife became pregnant again and on
    19 May 2013, she gave birth  to  their  son.   Their  daughter  attends
    school and has some friends there but is still only five years old.

 4. On 4 July 2013, the family applied for  leave  to  remain  outside  the
    Immigration Rules on Article 8 grounds:  their son was then  about  six
    weeks old.   The family are living with the  wife's  mother  who  is  a
    British citizen; her aunt and other relatives and are  settled  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The respondent refused and the appellants appealed.

First-tier Tribunal determination

 5. At the First-tier Tribunal hearing, the appellants accepted  that  they
    could not bring themselves within the Rules, with particular  reference
    to Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE.  The First-tier Tribunal dismissed
    the appeals, holding that the adult  appellants'  accounts  were  self-
    serving and lacking in credibility as to essential  facts  relevant  to
    the Article 8 assessment.    At  paragraphs  [30-[33],  the  First-tier
    Tribunal considered Article 8 outside the Rules:

          "30.    It is quite clear that family life  exists  here  for  the
         appellants.  They are a family unit comprising  of  mother,  father
         and two young children.  I  do  not  accept  that  the  appellant's
         mother enjoys Article 8 family life with  the  appellants.   Whilst
         they are currently living together, what will happen  in  the  near
         future and when the  appellant's  mother  loses  her  accommodation
         connected  with  her  employment  is  not  known.   Even  if  their
         intention is to live together as a large family unit I find it  has
         not been shown that there is a relationship and dependency with the
         appellant's mother and which goes beyond normal emotional ties.   I
         do not  accept  that  the  appellant's  mother  is  supporting  the
         appellants financially.  The evidence today points towards both the
         appellant and her husband working and  earning  at  some  point  in
         time.

         31.  If the appellants return to the  Philippines  then  they  will
             return as a family unit and so their established  family  life
             will not be interfered with.  As far as the best interests  of
             the two children are concerned it is quite clear  and  obvious
             that this is for them to remain with their  parents  and  each
             other.  They are not British citizens so  have  no  rights  to
             remain.  Their best interests are to stay with  their  parents
             and each other wherever  they  may  be.   I  have  taken  into
             account Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration
             Act 2009 as well as the case law that has been referred to  by
             Mr Hasan and also the solicitor's application  letter  of  4th
             July 2013.

         32.  I  do  not  accept  that  the  family  will  be  returning  to
             difficulties or  severe  hardship  in  the  Philippines.   The
             evidence today shows that they have extended family  there,  a
             family home, the possibility of financial support from the  UK
             as well as job prospects in the Philippines.

         33.  I accept that the appellants  will  have  established  private
             lives in their time in the UK but this  has  been  established
             with the full knowledge that their leave to remain has  always
             been temporary and at some stage they will be  going  back  to
             the Philippines.  The appellant was  a  student  and  she  has
             accepted in evidence today that she knew that once her studies
             had finished she would be returning to the  Philippines.   She
             has failed to explain how the circumstances have  changed  and
             so that she and her family now need to stay in the UK."

 6.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the  interference   with   the
    appellants' family life was of insufficient gravity to  engage  Article
    8(1) and that, having regard to Article 8(2), the respondent's decision
    was in accordance with the law and proportionate.

Permission to appeal

 7. When granting permission, First-tier Tribunal Judge White considered it
    arguable that the First-tier Tribunal had given insufficient weight  to
    the best interests of the child  appellants,  who  had  been  born  and
    raised in the United Kingdom.  He applied the guidance given by Sales J
    in Nagre, R (on the application of) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) and by the Upper Tribunal in Gulshan
    (Article 8 - new Rules -  correct  approach)  [2013]  UKUT  640  (IAC).
    There were no exceptional or  compelling  circumstances  requiring  the
    exercise of the respondent's discretion under Article  8  ECHR  outside
    the Rules.

Respondent's rule 24 Reply

 8. The respondent in her Reply argued that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    had directed himself appropriately; that  the  best  interests  of  the
    children had been considered at paragraphs 31-33 of the  determination;
    that one of the children was  only  just  5  years  old  and  could  be
    expected to adapt to the Philippines by reason of her  relative  youth;
    and that the First-tier Tribunal Judge's approach was  consistent  with
    Nagre and Gulshan.



The Upper Tribunal hearing

 9. I heard oral submissions only: there were no skeleton  arguments.   For
    the respondent, Mr Kandola relied on the respondent's letter of refusal
    and rule 24 Reply.

10. For the appellants, Mr Bhuiyan accepted that the grounds of appeal  did
    not challenge the findings of fact  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   He
    asserted that the fact that the family lived together  had  been  given
    insufficient weight and that there was no evidence that the  family  in
    the Philippines would be  prepared  to  accommodate  or  support  these
    appellants if they were to be returned there.   Mr  Bhuiyan  sought  to
    distinguish the decisions in Nagre, Gulshan and Azimi-Moayed  on  their
    facts because of the better immigration history in  this  case.   These
    appellants had not remained unlawfully in the United  Kingdom  and  the
    application was made while they still have extant leave.

Azimi-Moayed guidance

11. The guidance given by the Upper Tribunal  in  Azimi-Moayed  and  Others
    (decisions affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 197(IAC)  is
    relevant and is set out in the judicial headnote:

       "Decisions affecting children
        (1)  The case  law  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  has  identified  the
       following principles to assist in the determination of appeals where
       children are affected by the appealed decisions:
              i)      As a starting point it is in the  best  interests  of
                children to be with both their parents and if  both  parents
                are being removed from the United Kingdom then the  starting
                point suggests that so should dependent  children  who  form
                part of their household unless  there  are  reasons  to  the
                contrary.
             ii)    It is generally in the interests  of  children  to  have
                both stability and  continuity  of  social  and  educational
                provision and the benefit of  growing  up  in  the  cultural
                norms of the society to which they belong.
             iii)  Lengthy residence in a country other than  the  state  of
                origin can  lead  to  development  of  social  cultural  and
                educational ties that it would be inappropriate to  disrupt,
                in the absence of compelling reason to  the  contrary.  What
                amounts to lengthy residence is not clear cut but  past  and
                present policies have identified seven years as  a  relevant
                period.
              iv)   Apart from the terms of published policies  and  rules,
                the Tribunal notes that   seven  years  from  age  four   is
                likely to be more significant to  a  child  that  the  first
                seven years of life. Very young  children  are  focussed  on
                their parents rather than their peers and are adaptable.
              v)    Short periods of residence, particularly ones  without
                leave or the reasonable expectation of  leave  to  enter  or
                remain, while claims are promptly considered,  are  unlikely
                to give rise to private life deserving  of  respect  in  the
                absence of exceptional factors. In any event, protection  of
                the economic well-being of society amply  justifies  removal
                in such cases.
         Onward appeals
          (2)  Duties to have regard as a primary consideration to the best
         interests of a child are so well established that  a  judge  should
         take the point for him  or  herself  as  an  obvious  point  to  be
         considered, where the issue arises on the evidence, irrespective of
         whether the appellants or the advocates have done so.

         (3)  Although in some cases this may require  a  judge  to  explore
         whether the duty requires further information  to  be  obtained  or
         inquiry to be made, the judge primarily acts on the evidence in the
         case. Where that evidence gives no hint of a  suggestion  that  the
         welfare of the child is threatened by the immigration  decision  in
         question,  or  that  the  child's  best  interests  are  undermined
         thereby, there is no basis for any further judicial exploration  or
         reasoned decision on the matter. ..."

Discussion

12. I accept that this family has not overstayed and  that  the  Article  8
    application was made when they still had extant  leave.   However,  the
    children are extremely young:  one of them is barely 1 year old and the
    other only a little over 5.  They are of an age where the Tribunal  was
    entitled to find that they could be expected to adapt  to  living  with
    their parents in their country of nationality.

13. Contrary to Mr Bhuiyan's submissions, the First-tier Tribunal Judge had
    evidence before  him  on  which  he  was  entitled  to  find  that  the
    appellants had family and property in the Philippines and there  is  no
    challenge in the grounds of appeal to  those  findings  of  fact.   The
    finding by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the  links  between  these
    appellants and their British grandmother, whilst  they  may  amount  to
    private life, do not amount to family life stands unchallenged  in  the
    grounds of appeal.

14. The wife was aware throughout that at the end of her  studies  she  and
    her little family  would  have  to  return  and  begin  living  in  the
    Philippines again and the First-tier Tribunal did not even arguably err
    in law in the detailed and careful reasoning by  which  it  upheld  the
    respondent's decision that the time had now come  when  she  should  be
    removed with her family to begin her life  again  in  the  Philippines.
    There is no want of reasoning in the First-tier Tribunal in relation to
    Article 8 outside the rules  or  section  55:  there  was  very  little
    evidence before the Judge in relation to the children, save  that  they
    exist and one of them has started primary school and has friends.   The
    adult appellants have transferable skills and are  young  and  healthy,
    and have accommodation and family support in the Philippines.

15.  There  is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    determination and I dismiss these appeals.

Conclusions

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.  I do not set aside the decision.


Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
