

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/43963/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |                   Decision & Reasons |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 9 November 2015                    |                   On 12 November 2015|
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                               MR SHAH KHALID
                                                                    Claimant

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Holmes, Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Iqbal, Counsel, instructed by Britain
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1.  The  Secretary  of  State  appeals   with   permission   against   the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Thanki,  promulgated  on  9
    April 2015, in  which  he  allowed  the  claimant's  appeal  against  a
    decision of the Secretary of State made on 18 October  2014  to  refuse
    grant him leave to remain as the spouse of a person settled here.





Factual background to the appeal


 2. The respondent had previously had leave to remain in the United Kingdom
    as a Tier 4 (General) Student migrant, last granted on  20  April  2011
    until 14 August 2014.   On 14 August 2014, he applied for further leave
    to  remain  but  as  the  partner  of  a  person  settled  here.   That
    application was refused on 18  October  2014  on  the  basis  that  the
    Secretary of State considered that he  did  not  meet  the  suitability
    requirements of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules as he had  in  the
    past submitted with an  application  an  English  Language  certificate
    issued by ETS who had later confirmed that the  test  result  had  been
    obtained by deception.

 3. On that basis the respondent concluded that  the  claimant  had  sought
    leave to remain by deception,  and  thus  the  application  was  to  be
    refused pursuant to paragraph S-LTR 2.1 with reference to paragraph  S-
    LTR 2.2 a).  The application was also refused pursuant to S-LTR 1.6

 4. The claimant could not therefore meet the  requirements  for  leave  to
    remain as a partner or under paragraphs 276ADE.

The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The judge heard submissions but no oral evidence. The judge found that:-



       i) there was not sufficient evidence so show that  the  claimant  had
          sued deception [25];

      ii) the Secretary of State had erred in not considered a  more  recent
          English language test certificate obtained on 9 August  2014  when
          assessing the suitability requirements [27]; and, accordingly  the
          decision was not in accordance with the law [27].

 6. The judge then allowed the appeal on that limited basis and  "remitted"
    it for a lawful decision to be made.

 7. The Secretary sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred in law:-

       i) in failing to give adequate reasons for finding that the  evidence
          adduced by the Secretary of  State  outlining  the  investigations
          undertaken by ETS and the process of identifying those tests found
          to be invalid, the judge having failed  properly  to  engage  with
          this evidence; and,  in  failing  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
          rejecting the evidence;

      ii) in remitting the appeal to the respondent to reconsider  the  more
          recent English Language test certificate of 9 August 2014  as  she
          had already taken it into account.

 8. On 10 August 2015, Upper Tribunal Judge Storey  granted  permission  on
    all grounds.
The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

 9. I heard submissions from both representatives.  It was accepted  by  Mr
    Iqbal that the judge had erred in allowing the appeal on the basis that
    the decision was not in accordance with the law, and in "remitting"  it
    to the respondent.

10. I am satisfied also that judge did not properly  consider  the  witness
    statements adduce by the respondent, in that  there  is  no  indication
    that he engaged with evidence in the statements as  to  the  mechanisms
    and procedures applied by ETS to the investigation of test results,  or
    that  as  the  statement  of  Michael  Sartorious  indicates,  ETS  had
    identified  to  the  Secretary  of  State  that  as  a  result  of  the
    application of these methods, the claimant had  been  identified  as  a
    person who had.   The judge appears to have considered  only  the  fact
    that the witness statements pre-date the date of decision and  are  not
    specific to him. I consider that there was thus  a  failure  to  engage
    with all the evidence adduced and to give proper and  adequate  reasons
    for rejecting the evidence as there is no  indication  that  the  judge
    considered the evidence  that  there  was  in  place  a  mechanism  for
    identifying deception, and that it had been applied  to  the  claimant;
    and, thus, his name  had  been  placed  on  the  spreadsheet  of  those
    believed to have used a proxy test-taker.

11. While it is evident from the evidence of  Rebecca  Collings  and  Peter
    Millington that there may be room for errors in that there may be false
    positive results and that evaluation by  human  analysts  may  lead  to
    error, there is  no  indication  this  was  considered  by  the  judge.
    Equally, there is no indication  that  he  engaged  with  the  evidence
    adduced by the claimant in the form of a witness statement.

12. I indicated that, although there  had  been  no  cross-appeal,  it  was
    evident from the decision that no proper findings had  been  made  with
    regard to the Immigration Rules.

    Re-making the decision

13. Although I heard submissions from both representatives, on reflection I
    consider that given the extent of the new fact-finding exercise  to  be
    undertaken, including an evaluation of the claimant's evidence on which
    neither party made submissions, that it would in all the  circumstances
    of this case be appropriate to remit ti to the Frist-tier Tribunal  for
    a fresh determination on all issues.

Summary of Decisions:

1.    The determination of the First-tier Tribunal involved making an  error
    of law and I set it aside.

2.    I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision  on
    all issues.

3.    No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                       Date: 11 November 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
