
 [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/43117/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 September 2015                 | On 11 September 2015                |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

                                Mr Raj KUMAR
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr V Makol, counsel instructed by Maalik & Co
solicitors


                             DECISION & REASONS

1.    The Respondent is a national of India, born on 20 June 1983. He  first
arrived in the United Kingdom on 29 July 2011  with  leave  to  enter  as  a
dependent on his wife, Kuljit Saini, who had previously been granted Tier  4
general leave as a student. Mrs Saini  then  applied  for  and  was  granted
further leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Post Study Work) Migrant visa valid  to
28 August 2014  and  the  Respondent  was  granted  leave  in  line  as  her
dependant. Mrs Saini then applied for and  was  granted  a  further  Tier  4
(General)  student  visa  valid  until  26  December  2016,   however,   the
Respondent's application for  leave  as  her  dependant  was  refused  in  a
decision dated 29 October 2014.

2.    The Respondent appealed and his appeal came before Judge of the  First
Tier Tribunal Clapham for consideration on the papers on 5 March 2015. In  a
decision promulgated on 19 March 2015 the Judge allowed the  appeal  to  the
extent of remitting  it  back  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department to reconsider on the basis that  she  had  erroneously  concluded
that the Respondent's most recent leave  was  as  a  Tier  1  HS  post-study
dependent partner when his most recent leave was as a Tier 1 PSW dependent.

3.    The Secretary of State for the Home Department  sought  permission  to
appeal, in-time, on the basis that as a  dependant  partner  the  Respondent
was unable to switch between categories and reference was made to  paragraph
319C(h) of the Immigration Rules. Permission to appeal was granted by  Judge
of the First Tier Tribunal Chambers on 15 May 2015 on  the  basis  that  the
Judge appears to have misconstrued the immigration  history  and  nature  of
the application being appealed against and should  have  decided  the  issue
raised and should not have remitted.

4.    Before me, Mr Makol conceded that First Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Clapham
had erred materially  in  law  and  submitted  that  the  appeal  should  be
remitted back to the First Tier Tribunal for a fresh  hearing  de  novo.  Ms
Pal agreed with this proposed course of action. The  parties  accepted  that
paragraph 319(c)(h) of the Rules was not applicable but rather the  relevant
sub-paragraph was 319(c)(i)(i) and  (ii)  which  makes  provisions  for  the
dependants of Tier 4 migrants.  Ms  Pal  also  submitted  that  Mrs  Saini's
college, Westminster Academy, was not a recognised body and so  was  not  on
the list of approved suppliers and it was likely that the Presenting  Office
would raise this issue at the remitted appeal.

5.    In light of Mr  Makol's  concession  and  the  agreement  between  the
parties that the appeal should be remitted,  I  find  that  the  First  Tier
Tribunal Judge made a material  error  of  law  and  the  appeal  should  be
remitted for a de novo  hearing  at  York  House.  No  interpreter  will  be
required and the time estimate is 1 hour.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

10 September 2015
