
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/43637/2014
                                                               IA/43638/2014
                                                               IA/43639/2014
                                                               IA/43640/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 December 2015                  |On 14 January 2016                   |
|Extempore                            |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                            LANRE LOOKMAN AJIBOYE
                              TITO RUKA AJIBOYE
                                     FTA
                                     FA
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss V Akimtola, Counsel, instructed by J'Leon & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Coffey which was promulgated on 12  May  2015  dismissing  the  appeals
    under the Immigration Rules and in respect of  Article  8.   The  first
    appellant arrived in the United Kingdom, it appears in  2005,  and  was
    joined by his wife. They have two children born on 2 December 2007  and
    20 January 2012 who are the third and fourth appellants in this case.

 2. The applications which led to the appeals to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    were made on 13 April 2012 and were  for  discretionary  leave  on  the
    basis that to remove them to Nigeria would be in breach of Article 8 of
    the Human Rights Convention.  Those applications were considered by the
    Secretary of State but were refused on 13 October 2013.

 3. Subsequent to that there was an  application  for  judicial  review  of
    those decisions which was settled by consent, the  respondent  agreeing
    to reconsider those matters stating that  this  would  be  done  within
    three months of the date of the consent order being  sealed  absent  of
    special circumstances and from the Secretary of State agreeing that  if
    not granted leave they would be served with the notice giving rise to a
    right of appeal. This was signed on 14 July 2014.

 4. The respondent then reconsidered the applications and refused  them  on
    16 October 2014 in this case as agreed making decisions which gave rise
    to a right of appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal.   In  each  case  the
    refusal letters stated

         "I have reconsidered your client's application under Article  8  of
         the European  Convention  for  Human  Rights  taking  into  account
         Section 65 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and
         the Immigration Rules put in place on 9 July  2012  under  Appendix
         FM."

 5. The grounds as drafted are summarised in  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Simpson in granting permission.  It is said  that  Judge
    Coffey erred in considering the applications under the new Rules  (that
    is, the Immigration Rules  in  force  from  9  July  2013)  as  if  the
    application had been made on or after 9 July 2012.  Second the decision
    to proceed under the new Rules cast doubts on the overall fairness  and
    lawfulness of the decision reached.

 6. It is instructive to note at this point that  in  the  grounds  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal the issue of whether, as was contended  before  me,
    the respondent had erred in considering the applications under the  new
    Rules was not raised, instead the argument being  that  the  respondent
    had improperly applied the provisions of the Immigration Rules.

 7. The judge in  a  decision  promulgated  on  12  May  did  consider  the
    Immigration Rules first and then went on to consider Article 8  outside
    the Immigration Rules and considered also the effect of Section  55  of
    the UK Borders Act 2009.  As a preliminary matter I should record  that
    Miss Akimtola did accept that  the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal did not include  a  challenge  to  the  judge's  approach  and
    findings in respect of Article 8 outside the  Immigration  Rules.   She
    sought permission to amend the grounds taking into account  the  points
    raised in her skeleton argument. This was opposed by Mr Avery  for  the
    Secretary of State.

 8. I am not satisfied that it would be in  the  interests  of  justice  to
    permit an amendment of grounds of appeal at this late stage, some  four
    months after permission was granted.  No notice of this application was
    provided and no application was made prior to the hearing.

 9. Further, and in any event, I do not consider that it can be argued, for
    reasons which I will deal with later,  that  the  judge  erred  in  her
    approach to paragraph 276ADE or the Immigration Rules  in  general  and
    further, there appears to me to be little or no merit in the submission
    that the judge's decision with regard to Article 8  outside  the  Rules
    was perverse and one to which she was not entitled to come.

10. I now deal with the formal grounds of appeal dealt with  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The submission first is that the changes in the  Immigration
    Rules brought in by HC194 did not apply.  This issue is  considered  in
    detail in the decision of the Court  of  Appeal  in  Singh  and  Khalid
    [2014] EWCA Civ 74.  These appellants are in the same position  as  one
    of the parties in that case (Mrs Khalid) who had made an Article 8 only
    application prior to 9 July 2012.

11. The issue is carefully set out and summarised in paragraph  56  of  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal and it is this: it is when the  changes
    were brought in on 9 July 2012 the Secretary of State was not  entitled
    to take into account the  provisions  of  the  new  Rules  when  making
    decisions on private and family life applications made  prior  to  that
    date.  It is also, however, clear as the Court  of  Appeal  identified,
    that this position was altered by the changes to the Immigration  Rules
    set out in HC565 specifically the introduction of a new paragraph A277C
    with effect from 6 September 2012.  As of that date  the  Secretary  of
    State was entitled to take into account the provisions of  Appendix  FM
    and paragraphs 276ADE to 276DH in  deciding  private  and  family  life
    applications even if they were made prior to 9 July 2012.

12. In the circumstances I am satisfied that the Secretary of State did  on
    the facts of this case act lawfully and that  in  considering  the  new
    Rules this is not a case in any event where there were  any  applicable
    Immigration Rules prior to 9 July 2012.

13. Accordingly it is simply not arguable, and Miss Akimtola did  not  seek
    to persuade me  otherwise  with  any  great  effort,  that  this  is  a
    situation in which the decision of the decision of the Court of  Appeal
    in Singh & Khalid does not apply and accordingly I do not consider that
    the judge made an error of law in considering the situation  under  the
    new Immigration Rules.

14. Second, and for completeness sake, I am not satisfied that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge erred in concluding that  the  appellants  did  not
    meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE  given  their  ages  and  the
    length of time spent in the United Kingdom.  There is no  challenge  to
    the conclusion that they have not lived here for twenty years  or  that
    they were unable to return to Nigeria or that they would be  unable  to
    reintegrate to life there.

15. Thirdly, it is clear  that  the  youngest  child  could  not  meet  the
    requirement to have lived in the United Kingdom  for  seven  years  and
    that in respect of the older of the two children the judge was  clearly
    entitled to conclude that he did not meet the requirement in paragraphs
    276ADE to have lived  here  for  seven  years  prior  to  the  date  of
    decision.

16. The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  adequately  set  out  in  her  decision
    details of the children's life in the United Kingdom. It cannot be said
    that no proper regard was given to the children's  best  interests  nor
    could it be said that there  was  improper  consideration  of  all  the
    relevant factors.

17. It is simply not arguable that the decision was not  one  open  to  the
    judge on the material before her and accordingly for  these  reasons  I
    find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve  the
    making an error of law and I uphold it.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law and I uphold it.

 2. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date:  14 January 2016
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

