
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43413/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6th April 2016                      |On 28th April 2016                   |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY

                                   Between

                                    C S U
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Canter, Counsel, for 1215 Chambers, London
For the Respondent:    Miss Willocks-Briscoe,  Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born on [ ] 1974.   He  appealed
    against the Respondent's decision dated 14th October 2014 refusing  him
    a residence card on the basis of being in a durable  relationship  with
    Agnieszka Dworak, an EEA citizen.  His appeal was heard by Judge of the
    First-tier Tribunal Easterman on 7th May 2015. The appeal was dismissed
    in a decision promulgated on 25th  August  2015.   An  application  for
    permission to appeal was lodged and permission was refused by Judge  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  Hollingworth  on  19th  January  2016.    An
    application for permission to appeal was lodged with the Upper Tribunal
    and permission was granted by Judge of the Upper  Tribunal  Perkins  on
    23rd February 2016. The permission states that it is arguable that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  wrongly  limited   himself  to  a  reviewing
    rather than a deciding role and wrongly ignored the Appellant's Article
    8 rights when considering how discretion should have been applied.  The
    permission goes on to state that the judge may have erred by failing to
    consider the impact that refusal of a residence card would have on  the
    Sponsor's  rights as an EEA national.

 2. There is a Rule 24  response  on  file  dated  10th  March  2016.   The
    response makes reference to the Secretary of State's  discretion  which
    is dealt with in the refusal letter.  The refusal letter is  quoted  in
    the response at page 2, (the last seven paragraphs  thereof),  and  the
    first paragraph  of  page  3.   The  response  states  that  the  judge
    considered the factual matrix and concluded that the Secretary of State
    was justified in not  exercising  her  discretion  in  the  Appellant's
    favour.  The response refers to the case of Aladeselu and Others  (2006
    Regulations -  Regulation  8)  (Nigeria)  [2011]  UKUT  00253  and  the
    response goes on to state that it is not clear how  the  refusal  of  a
    residence card to the Appellant would hamper the Sponsor exercising her
    treaty rights as there is currently no removal decision.

The Hearing

 3. The application is for the issue of a residence card to  the  Appellant
    as an extended family member. The Appellant's partner  is  Polish.  The
    Appellant's representative handed to  me  the  cases  of  RH  (Jamaica)
    [2010] UKUT 423 (IAC) and Aladeselu and Others.

 4. Counsel submitted that the judge did not decide  if  the  Secretary  of
    State should have exercised her discretion differently.  I was referred
    to paragraph  40  onwards  in  the  decision.   He  submitted  that  at
    paragraph 49 the First-tier Tribunal Judge states that the issue to  be
    considered is whether the Secretary of  State  should  be  required  to
    issue a residence certificate  in  the  face  of  the  Appellant's  bad
    behaviour in the past over which the Secretary of State has discretion.
     He submitted that that is not really the issue.  The issue is  whether
    the judge, on re-exercising his discretion,  should  have  allowed  the
    appeal.  I was referred to paragraph 53 of the decision  in  which  the
    judge states that the Appellant is Nigerian.  At paragraph 54 the judge
    states that  the issue is whether the Secretary of State should,  where
    the Appellant has lied about his nationality, lied about his  name  and
    provided a passport which he bought with a forged Home Office stamp  on
    it, be obliged to issue such a person with a residence card.  The First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge   states   that   notwithstanding   the   durable
    relationship, the  Secretary  of  State  is  not  obliged  to  issue  a
    residence card.  Counsel submitted that the Secretary of State and  the
    judge have a discretionary power.  There is a durable relationship  and
    this is accepted by the judge.  Counsel submitted that the judge should
    have considered the matter again and exercised his own  discretion.  He
    submitted that the only reasoning  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    relates to the Respondent's discretion and this must be an error.

 5. I was referred to paragraph 55 of the decision.  Counsel submitted that
    what the judge appears to be saying is that discretion should have been
    exercised in favour of the appellant but it was not.  He submitted that
    the way this paragraph is worded is not clear and this is an error.

 6. I was referred to paragraph 57 of  the  decision  in  which  the  judge
    states that the Respondent's decision is in accordance  with  the  law.
    Counsel submitted that it is not clear from this what the judge's  view
    is and this is where the material error of law comes in.  He  submitted
    that the judge has omitted an essential stage in his decision  and  has
    materially erred in law as he has not given his own view.

 7. Counsel then referred to the assessment of the impact of  the  decision
    on the EEA national partner.  He submitted that this  assessment  stems
    from her right of free movement.  I was referred to the said case of RH
    (Jamaica) at paragraph 28.  I was referred to the second head  note  in
    this case which refers to the proper exercise of discretion afforded by
    Regulation 17(4) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006  and  states
    that the decision maker has to take into account  whether  or  not  the
    effect of the refusal of a residence card would hinder or frustrate the
    continuing exercise of the free  movement  rights  of  the  EEA  family
    member/union citizen.  He submitted  that  the  Appellant  is  the  EEA
    national's extended family member. They have entered into  a  six  year
    relationship although they are not married.

 8. I was then referred to paragraph 52 of  the  said  case  of  Aladeselu.
    This states that the judge has to consider all the  circumstances  when
    deciding whether it is appropriate to issue  a  residence  card,  which
    circumstances include the  extent  of  the  Appellant's  financial  and
    emotional dependency on the Sponsor, the fact that  the  Appellant  was
    unlawfully in the United Kingdom before he made his application and any
    evidence as to the importance  of  the  Appellant's  residence  in  the
    exercise of the  Sponsor's  rights  of  free  movement  and  residence.
    Counsel submitted that the judge did  not  deal  with  this.   This  is
    something he should have considered and he submitted  that  this  is  a
    material error of law and had he considered it he  would  have  had  to
    look at the Sponsor perhaps having to leave the United Kingdom and move
    to Nigeria if a residence card is not issued  to  the  Appellant.   The
    Sponsor's only alternative would be staying in the United Kingdom  with
    someone who has no right to be here.  He submitted  that  if  she  does
    this,  the  Sponsor  will  be  facilitating  a  criminal  offence.   He
    submitted, therefore, that to refuse  the  residence  card  must  be  a
    restriction on the Sponsor's free moment  rights.   He  submitted  that
    there is another issue and that is that the Appellant cannot work.   He
    submitted that the judge did not consider any of these matters.

 9. With regard to whether Article 8 can be considered since  the  case  of
    Amirteymour and Others [2015] UKUT 00466 Counsel submitted that Article
    8 has to be considered when the exercise of discretion is  dealt  with.
    He submitted that the Appellant has been  in  the  United  Kingdom  for
    fourteen years.  He and his partner have lived together for six  years.
    His first application was in January 2013 and Counsel submitted that he
    and his partner are still together  and  this  has  to  be  taken  into
    account by the judge.  He submitted that the judge erred by not looking
    at the wider factors in this claim and that this is a material error of
    law.  He submitted that had he done so the his decision might have been
    different.

10. The Presenting Officer made her submissions referring to discretion.

11. I was referred to paragraph 44 of  the  decision  in  which  the  judge
    states that, based on the case of  FD  (Algeria)  [2007]  UKAIT  00049,
    discretion was never intended to be appealable and that it can only  be
    appealed on the basis of Wednesbury  unreasonableness.   She  submitted
    that it was  on  this  basis  that  the  judge  made  his  findings  on
    discretion and whether the Secretary of State should have exercised her
    discretion differently. She submitted  that  the  judge  exercised  his
    discretion on the facts before him, as did the Secretary of  State.   I
    was referred to paragraph 45 of the decision and she submitted that  in
    this paragraph the judge does not just adopt what  the  Respondent  has
    stated but has considered the facts and "dealt  with  the  exercise  of
    discretion in his view".  She submitted that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge made his own findings on the exercise of discretion.

12. I was referred to paragraph 57 of the decision and paragraph 55 and she
    submitted that paragraph 55 cannot be taken on its own, it  has  to  be
    considered with the rest of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  decision
    and looked at in the round.

13. The Presenting Officer referred to the second two grounds  referred  to
    in the permission, in particular the EEA national's ability to exercise
    free movement.  At paragraph 16 of the decision the judge refers to the
    findings of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Fox in the original appeal
    decision, which led to First-tier Tribunal Judge  Easterman  having  to
    make the decision relating to the Secretary  of  State  exercising  her
    discretion appropriately.

14. At paragraph 54 of the decision the  judge  refers  to  there  being  a
    durable relationship and she submitted that the  First-tier  Judge  has
    taken this relationship into account along with the  other  factors  in
    the claim.  She submitted that the residence card has been refused  and
    in these circumstances the EEA national can return to Poland or stay in
    the United Kingdom with the Appellant although he has no  right  to  be
    here or she can apply  to  go  to  Nigeria  with  the  appellant.   She
    submitted that the situation before this application was  made  was  no
    different to this.  The Appellant had no leave to remain then  and  has
    no leave to remain now.

15. The Presenting Officer submitted that there have been issues  from  the
    start about the Appellant's identity.  The Presenting Officer submitted
    that the EEA Sponsor is in no worse a position than she was before  the
    application was made, relating to free movement.  She submitted that if
    the judge finds that the sponsor's right to free movement  is  affected
    by the refusal of the residence card then every application for an  EEA
    residence card would have to be allowed.  The Appellant has been  in  a
    relationship with the Sponsor for six years and  this  application  has
    made no difference to the EEA national's situation.  She submitted that
    the Sponsor can travel anywhere she wants to in the EU and there are no
    removal directions so the Appellant can reapply for a  residence  card.
    He may wish to apply on a different basis because of the refusal of his
    claim.

16. Counsel submitted that he accepts that the decision has to be read as a
    whole.  He submitted that when this is  done  no  discretion  has  been
    exercised by the judge.

17. He submitted that the judge considered the relationship and found it to
    be durable.  He submitted that the judge did not take into account  the
    effect of the refusal of the residence card on the EEA national.   With
    regard to the Sponsor having no difficulty exercising  free  moment  he
    submitted that that is not  the  case.   I  was  referred  to  the  two
    statements from the Sponsor, being the statements made  for  the  first
    appeal heard by  Judge  Fox  and  the  second  appeal  heard  by  Judge
    Easterman.  In these statements the Sponsor states that because of  the
    Appellant's  unresolved  immigration  status  she  feels   uneasy   and
    stressful and is prevented from making future plans and  this  deprives
    her of the basic right to work and move  freely  from  one  country  to
    another.  She also  states  that  due  to  the  Appellant's  unresolved
    immigration status, their situation remains difficult both on  personal
    and financial levels.  She is the only person bringing an  income  into
    the household and so they have an interest only mortgage.

18. Counsel submitted that the situation is taking its toll on her physical
    and mental health. Not only is the Sponsor frustrated and stressed,  so
    is the Appellant. The Sponsor states  that  she  has  problems  staying
    focused at work although she tries to remain positive and he  submitted
    that these are extreme difficulties.  He submitted that the Sponsor  is
    here lawfully working and it cannot be right to  expect  her  help  her
    partner commit a criminal offence.

19. I was referred to paragraph 55 of the decision in which the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge states that the Appellant has been left in limbo and yet
    he makes his decision against the Appellant.

20. I was asked to find that there are material errors of law in the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge's decision and to set that decision aside.

Decision and Reasons

21. The judge's findings of fact have not been challenged.  Judge Fox found
    that the Appellant was in a durable relationship with the  Sponsor  and
    this has been taken into account by Judge Easterman  in  his  decision.
    There is no question but that the  Appellant  has  a  poor  immigration
    history.  This has to be taken into account when  discretion  is  being
    exercised.  I have  to  decide  whether  the  discretion  contained  in
    Regulation 17(4) has been exercised correctly by the Respondent and  by
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge.   The  refusal  letter  deals  with  the
    Respondent's exercise of discretion. I was asked to consider  the  said
    case of RH (Jamaica) but the facts are very different in this case  and
    there are no  children  in  this  case.   In  that  case  there  was  a
    deportation order whereas in this case there  is  not  even  a  removal
    decision.

22. The Directive which the Regulations are intended  to  transpose  states
    that the host member state shall facilitate  entry  and  residence  for
    certain persons.  One of these persons is a partner with whom the union
    citizen has a durable relationship.  That is the case here but the host
    member  state  shall  undertake  an  extensive   examination   of   the
    appellant's personal circumstances and  shall  justify  any  denial  of
    entry or residence to these people.  The respondent  did  that  in  her
    decision and I have to decide whether the judge has also done.

23. The Appellant's argument is that the judge had to consider for  himself
    whether discretion should have been exercised differently  rather  than
    determining whether the Respondent's exercise of discretion is  lawful.
    The Appellant's stance is that the judge did not do  this.   The  judge
    states at paragraph 43 that the Appellant has to show  that  he  is  an
    extended family member because he is  in  a  durable  relationship  but
    being in a durable relationship is not enough.  The Secretary of  State
    still has to exercise her discretion.  The judge goes on  at  paragraph
    44 to state that in his  view  the  discretion  should  not  have  been
    exercised differently  on  the  facts  before  him.   Counsel  for  the
    Appellant states that  what  the  judge  has  done  is  considered  the
    Respondent's decision and has not made his own decision but I find from
    the wording at paragraph 44 that is not the case.

24. The judge goes on to deal with the facts. The Appellant was encountered
    working and gave a false name.   A passport was found in another  name.
    This was a South African passport.  The  passport  had  a  counterfeit,
    indefinite leave to remain, vignette  thereon  and  the  Appellant  was
    imprisoned for using false documents.  It  is  not  clear  whether  the
    Appellant was subject to  a  deportation  order  or  not  but  it  then
    transpired that his identity as per this  passport  was  wrong  as  the
    Appellant is not South African, he is Nigerian.  At  paragraph  49  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge states that none of this  is  denied  by  the
    Appellant  and  that  the  Secretary  of  State,  based  on  this,  had
    discretion as to whether to issue the residence card or not.  The judge
    goes on to find that because of the Appellant's history the  Respondent
    was correct to refuse the issue of a residence card and the judge  then
    states that in his view there were good reasons for  her  declining  to
    exercise her discretion in the Appellant's favour. That is his view and
    he has considered whether discretion ought to have  been  exercised  in
    favour of the Appellant or not and has found that it  should  not  have
    been exercised in the Appellant's favour.  The judge finds that  it  is
    unsatisfactory that the Appellant is left in limbo  but  when  this  is
    read with the rest of the decision this is only because the  Respondent
    has not made a removal direction.

25. The judge states that he cannot consider Article 8 relating to  private
    and family life but he should consider Article 8 when  considering  the
    issue of discretion.  He states that based on the evidence  before  him
    the  Appellant  has  not  discharged  the  burden  of  proof  and   the
    Respondent's decision is in accordance with the law.

26. With regard to discretion it is difficult to see what the  judge  could
    have done differently.  The judge found the Appellant and  his  partner
    are in a durable relationship  but  also  found  that  there  are  many
    reasons for refusing to issue a residence card.  This  will  of  course
    have an impact on the Appellant's and his partner's private and  family
    life but based on the judge's findings and the facts of the case  I  do
    not find that he has made an error of law by not specifically referring
    to Article 8 when dealing with  discretion.   I  find  that  these  two
    points are merely disagreements with the judge's decision.

27. The said case of FD  states  that  when  extended  family  members  are
    considered under the EEA Regulations the Tribunal is  not  confined  to
    considering whether the decision is a lawful one and  I  find  that  in
    this case the judge has complied with this.  It was for  the  Appellant
    to show that the Secretary  of  State's  discretion  should  have  been
    exercised differently.  In this case, as in the said case  of  FD,  the
    Appellant entirely fails to persuade the judge that  discretion  should
    have been exercised differently.

28. The third issue is whether the judge erred by failing to  consider  the
    impact that the refusal of a residence card will have on the  Sponsor's
    rights as an EEA national. The Appellant  and  the  Sponsor  have  been
    together for six years.  When the relationship  started  the  Appellant
    had no right to be in the United Kingdom.   He  had  entered  illegally
    using false documents  and  had  a  conviction  against  him.   He  had
    acquired leave to remain by deception and the judge has taken all  this
    into account and has taken into account the fact that his partner  must
    have known about this.  The Sponsor  knowingly  and  willingly  entered
    into a relationship on this basis and to say that  the  Sponsor's  free
    movement is affected because a residence card has not  been  issued  to
    the Appellant  cannot  be  how  the  Regulations  are  supposed  to  be
    considered.  I have noted the Sponsor's  statements  for  the  previous
    hearings and it is clear that as the Appellant has not been issued with
    a residence card this may impact on the Sponsor exercising  her  rights
    of free movement if she wants to  continue  in  the  relationship.  Her
    rights however have been affected since she took up with the Appellant.
     The Appellant does not have a right of residence without  a  residence
    card and the Secretary of State and the First-tier Tribunal Judge  both
    found that he was not entitled to a residence card.   The  Sponsor  has
    always known that she was likely to be  faced  with  either  having  to
    leave the UK with the Appellant or  remaining  here  with  him  in  the
    knowledge that he has no right to be here which is what  she  has  been
    doing. There has been no change.  He has been unable to  work  lawfully
    in the United Kingdom since she met him.  It is true that they are in a
    durable relationship  but  when  the  circumstances  of  the  case  are
    considered there is no error of law in the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's
    decision.  The skeleton argument states that the Appellant accepts  his
    adverse immigration history is relevant to the exercise  of  discretion
    but the Appellant's Sponsor entered into a  relationship  with  him  by
    choice knowing the situation and knowing that previous applications had
    been refused. The refusal of a residence card affects the EEA  national
    and her rights of free movement but by refusing the application and the
    appeal the EEA National is in no worse a position than she has been for
    the last six years. Crucially, there is no removal decision.

29. At paragraph 55 the judge states "Whether overall it  is  desirable  to
    decline  to  issue  such  a  certificate  and  fail  to  issue  removal
    directions is a matter I have taken into account."  He  finds  that  it
    leaves the Appellant in limbo but as  previously  stated,  the  judge's
    meaning is clearly, from the wording of this paragraph, that  not  only
    should the residence card have been refused, removal directions  should
    have been issued.

30. I find that the First-tier Tribunal Judge's reasons  for  his  decision
    justify the refusal of the residence permit.

Notice of Decision

31. There is no material error of law  in  the  judge's  decision  and  the
    decision promulgated on 25th  August 2015 must stand.

32. Anonymity has been directed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray

