
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/43968/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 21st September 2017                |On 27th September 2017                |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                     HK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Lee of Counsel, instructed by Patricks
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of  Judge  Norton-Taylor  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 16th June 2017.

 2. The Appellant is a male national of the Netherlands, born  7th  October
    1986.   He  appealed  against  the  Respondent's  decision,  dated  5th
    November  2014,  to  make  a  deportation  order  with   reference   to
    regulations 19(3)(b) and 21 of the Immigration (European Economic Area)
    Regulations 2006.

 3. The FtT heard the appeal on 12th May 2017.  At the hearing the FtT took
    the view that the appeal should be considered  with  reference  to  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2016,  not  the  2006
    Regulations.  Both representatives agreed.

 4. The FtT found that the Appellant had not accrued continuous ten  years'
    residence, had not proved that he was entitled to permanent  residence,
    and found  that  the  Appellant  represented  a  genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting several fundamental interests  of
    society.  The  FtT  found  there  was  a  strong  likelihood  that  the
    Appellant would resume his offending behaviour and did not accept  that
    he was a reformed individual.  The FtT attached little  weight  to  the
    Appellant's claimed integration into the United Kingdom, and found that
    he had in fact re-established himself in the Netherlands.

 5. The FtT concluded that the Respondent's decision was not, and is not, a
    breach of the Appellant's rights under EU law.  The FtT found that  the
    Appellant's family could relocate  to  the  Netherlands  and  join  him
    there,  without  that  being  unreasonable  or  contrary  to  the  best
    interests of the children.  In the alternative, even if the Appellant's
    partner and children did not relocate, the FtT found that separation of
    the family was, on the facts of this particular case, justified by  the
    threat to the fundamental interests of society.

 6. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    In summary Counsel who prepared the grounds, contended that the FtT had
    erred in law in applying the 2016 Regulations,  rather  than  the  2006
    Regulations, and Counsel accepted that she had erred by conceding  that
    the 2016 Regulations were appropriate.

 7. It was contended that the  FtT,  having  unlawfully  applied  the  2016
    Regulations, went on to err in considering regulation 3(3), paragraph 4
    of Schedule 1, regulation 29(3), and paragraph 7 of Schedule 1  to  the
    2016 Regulations.

 8. It was contended the FtT had erred in law by making erroneous findings,
    in  concluding  that  the  Appellant  was  not  entitled  to  permanent
    residence, and the  FtT  had  failed  to  take  into  account  material
    considerations and had acted unfairly by concluding that the  Appellant
    could not be believed about his regret and his  change  in  outlook  on
    life, because  this  allegation  had  not  been  made  in  the  refusal
    decision, and the Appellant was not present to  give  evidence  and  be
    cross-examined.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Doyle who found  it  arguable
    that the  FtT  had  "applied  the  wrong  set  of  regulations  to  the
    Appellant's case."  Judge Doyle found that the Grounds of Appeal raised
    an arguable error of law.

10. Following the grant of permission the Respondent submitted  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, accepting that  the  appeal  should  have  been  considered  with
    reference to the 2006 Regulations, but contending that  it  was  not  a
    material error to have considered the 2016 Regulations.

11. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the  Upper  Tribunal  to  ascertain  whether  the  FtT  decision
    contained an error of law such that it should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

12. Mr Tarlow, on behalf of the Respondent, did not rely upon the  rule  24
    response.  Mr Tarlow accepted that the FtT had materially erred in law,
    because the appropriate regulations which should have  been  considered
    in this appeal, are the 2006 Regulations, and not the 2016 Regulations.
     Mr Tarlow accepted that the FtT decision  was  materially  flawed  and
    must be set aside.  It was accepted that application of  the  incorrect
    regulations had infected the findings made, and Mr Tarlow accepted that
    no findings should be preserved.

13. Mr Lee agreed  that  no  findings  of  the  FtT  should  be  preserved,
    commenting that  the  application  of  the  incorrect  regulations  had
    infected the findings made.

14. Both representatives were therefore in agreement that the FtT  decision
    should be set aside with no findings preserved and re-made.  There  was
    however a difference of opinion as to which Tribunal should re-make the
    decision.

15. Mr  Lee  argued  that  the  appeal  should  be  remitted  to  the  FtT,
    notwithstanding that Judge Norton-Taylor, was the third  FtT  Judge  to
    have adjudicated in this appeal.  Two previous appeals had  been  found
    to be wrong in law, and had been remitted back to the FtT by the  Upper
    Tribunal.

16. Mr Lee submitted that the fact finding required, should be carried  out
    by the FtT, and in addition, submitted that  a  fair  hearing  had  not
    taken place, because the incorrect regulations had  been  applied.   Mr
    Lee also made the  point,  that  the  Appellant  had  not  yet  had  an
    opportunity to give live evidence  before  a  Tribunal.   He  had  been
    removed to the Netherlands, and had made an application to  be  allowed
    to return to the UK in order to give evidence at his appeal before  the
    FtT, but his application had been refused by the Respondent.

17. Mr Tarlow accepted that judicial fact  finding  would  be  required  in
    order to  re-make  this  decision,  and  submitted  that  finality  was
    required, in view of the previous history of this appeal, and therefore
    it was more appropriate for the decision to be  re-made  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

18. Mr Lee responded by submitting that there could be finality before  the
    FtT, if a decision was made that could  not  be  challenged  by  either
    party.  He also submitted that there is a two-Tier system  for  dealing
    with appeals for a reason, and it would  not  be  appropriate  for  the
    Upper Tribunal to act as a primary fact finder.

19. I announced at the hearing that I accepted that the FtT had  materially
    erred in law and the  decision  must  be  set  aside.   I  reserved  my
    decision to reflect upon whether it would be more appropriate  for  the
    decision to be re-made by the Upper Tribunal, or remitted to the FtT.

My Conclusions and Reasons

20. My reason for setting aside the FtT decision is that the appeal  should
    have been considered with reference to  the  2006  Regulations,  rather
    than the 2016  Regulations.   This  is  confirmed  by  The  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) (Amendment) Regulations 2017 and in particular
    paragraph 4 which states;

         "After paragraph 2 of Schedule 4 insert -

         Appeals

         3 -  (1) Notwithstanding the revocation of the 2006 Regulations by
                  paragraph 1(1), those Regulations continue to apply -

                  (a)  in respect  of  an  appeal  under  those  Regulations
                      against an EEA decision which is pending (within  the
                      meaning of regulation 25(2) of the 2006  Regulations)
                      on 31st January 2017;

                  (b)  in a case where a person has, on 31st January 2017, a
                      right under those Regulations to  appeal  against  an
                      EEA decision.

             (2)  For the purposes of this paragraph,  'EEA  decision'  has
                  the meaning given in regulation 2 of the 2006  Regulations
                  and the definition of 'EEA decision' in  regulation  2  of
                  these Regulations does not apply."

21. I accept the submissions made by both representatives that  application
    of the incorrect regulations infected the findings  made  by  the  FtT.
    The decision is therefore not safe and for that reason is set aside.

22. I have reflected upon the appropriate disposal of this appeal.   I  set
    out below paragraph 7 of the Senior President's Practice Statements;

         7.   Disposal of Appeals in Upper Tribunal

             7.1  Where under section 12(1) of the 2007 Act (proceedings on
                  appeal to the Upper Tribunal)  the  Upper  Tribunal  finds
                  that the making of the  decision  concerned  involved  the
                  making of an error on a point of law, the  Upper  Tribunal
                  may set aside the decision and, if it does so, must either
                  remit the case to the First-tier  Tribunal  under  section
                  12(2)(b)(i)  or  proceed  (in  accordance  with   relevant
                  Practice Directions to re-make the decision under  section
                  12(2)(b)(ii).

             7.2  The Upper Tribunal is likely on  each  such  occasion  to
                  proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting  the
                  case to the First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper Tribunal
                  is satisfied that;

                  (a)  the effect of the error has been to deprive  a  party
                      before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair  hearing  or
                      other opportunity for that party's case to be put  to
                      and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

                  (b)  the nature or extent of  any  judicial  fact  finding
                      which is necessary in order for the decision  in  the
                      appeal to be re-made is such that, having  regard  to
                      the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate
                      to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

             7.3   Re-making  rather  than  remitting   will   nevertheless
                  constitute the  normal  approach  to  determining  appeals
                  where an error of law is found, even if some further  fact
                  finding is necessary.

23. It is clearly undesirable for an appeal to be repeatedly considered  by
    the FtT, and thereafter considered by the Upper Tribunal and sent  back
    to be heard afresh.  However, I take into account that it could be said
    that the FtT hearing was unfair, in that the incorrect regulations were
    considered.  There  is  also  a  need  for  substantial  judicial  fact
    finding.  I am also persuaded that Mr Lee has made a relevant point, in
    that the Appellant has not yet had the opportunity to give evidence  in
    person before a Tribunal.

24. I have not found this to be an easy decision, but  I  conclude  in  the
    interests of fairness, the appropriate course is to remit  this  appeal
    once again to the FtT to be heard  afresh.   The  only  finding  to  be
    preserved, is a finding made from an earlier  appeal  (Judge  Adio)  in
    relation to the positive findings as to  the  Appellant's  family  life
    with his children and matters related to those children.  This  finding
    was preserved in an earlier  Upper  Tribunal  decision  made  by  Judge
    Kamara and promulgated on 20th September 2016 (paragraph 21).

25. It appears that the appropriate hearing centre would be  Taylor  House,
    as the Appellant's partner appears to live within the  jurisdiction  of
    that hearing centre.  The parties will be advised of the time and  date
    of the hearing in due course.  The appeal is to  be  heard  by  an  FtT
    Judge other than Judge Norton-Taylor.  A time estimate of  three  hours
    has  been  given  for  the  hearing,  and  it  is  understood  that  no
    interpreter is required.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that it  is  remitted  to
the FtT.

Anonymity

The  FtT  made  an  anonymity  direction  because   this   appeal   involves
consideration of the best interests of children.  I continue that  direction
pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008.
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 21st September 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made by the Upper Tribunal.  The  issue  of  any  fee  award
will need to be considered by the FtT.






Signed                              Date 21st September 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

