
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/43861/2014
                                                               IA/43865/2014
                                                               IA/43866/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14th January 2016                 |On 28th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                            Gabriel Boakye-Yiadom
                                    S B-Y
                                    G B-Y
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwncyz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellants are a family  who  are  all  citizens  of  Ghana.   They
    comprise the first Appellant, who was born on 13th August 1964, and his
    two  children  born  on  29th  June  1999  and   21st   November   2006
    respectively.  The first Appellant first arrived  in  the  UK  on  12th
    September 2007 when he was given leave to enter as a student  initially
    until 15th January 2009 and  thereafter  until  31st  July  2014.   The
    remaining Appellants arrived in the UK on 23rd  April  2010  when  they
    were given leave to enter as the  dependants  of  the  first  Appellant
    initially until 30th November 2011 and thereafter until 31st July 2014.
     They all applied for leave to remain on human rights grounds  on  29th
    July 2014.  Those applications were refused for the  reasons  given  in
    Notices of Decision dated 9th October 2014.

 2. The Appellants appealed, and their appeals were heard by Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Foudy (the Judge) sitting at Manchester on 25th May
    2015.  She decided to dismiss the appeals for the reasons given in  her
    Decision also dated 25th May 2015.   The  Appellants  sought  leave  to
    appeal that decision, and on 4th September  2015  such  permission  was
    granted.

Error of Law

 3. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 4. The case for the Appellants was that the refusal of their  applications
    amounted to a disproportionate breach of their right to a family  life.
    This was because the first Appellant  suffered  from  sciatica  and  he
    wanted his children to have the benefit of a good education in the  UK.
    The youngest Appellant could no longer speak a Ghanaian  language,  and
    needed dental treatment.  The minor Appellants were settled in  schools
    in the UK where they had friends.  All the Appellants would be at  risk
    of Ebola infection if returned to Ghana.

 5.  The  Judge  dismissed  the  appeals  having  treated  as   a   primary
    consideration the best interests of the minor Appellants.  However, she
    found that the public interest outweighed any circumstances relating to
    the Appellants.  Ghana had a functioning education system and there was
    no evidence that the minor Appellants  would  be  denied  an  education
    there.  Likewise there was no evidence that  in  Ghana  the  Appellants
    could not obtain  treatment  for  sciatica  and  the  necessary  dental
    treatment.  Although the minor Appellants had settled into  schools  in
    the UK, they had not left Ghana for very long  and  would  be  able  to
    readjust to life there as they had when removing to the UK.

 6. The lengthy grounds of application of the Appellants amount  to  little
    more than a disagreement with the  decision  of  the  Judge  which  was
    described as simplistic, unfair, and worrying.  It was argued that  the
    reasoning of the Judge was fundamentally flawed.

 7. At the hearing, the first Appellant appeared in person and indicated to
    me that he was happy for the hearing to proceed without the  Appellants
    being represented.  He argued that the Judge  had  erred  in  law.   He
    referred to the grounds of application  which  to  a  large  extent  he
    repeated.  He  submitted  that  the  Judge's  decision  was  ambiguous,
    controversial, and difficult to understand.  The Judge had ignored  the
    evidence, particularly that relating to  the  education  of  the  minor
    Appellants.  The Judge had been mistaken as to the  best  interests  of
    the children.  The children now had no friends in Ghana.

 8. In response, Mr Diwncyz submitted that there had been no error  of  law
    by the Judge.  The hearing had  taken  place  in  the  absence  of  the
    parties and the Judge had analysed all the documentary evidence  before
    her.  The Judge had come to a conclusion open to her.

 9. The Judge made an unfortunate error  when  referring  to  allowing  the
    appeal when deciding not  to  make  a  fee  award.   However,  that  is
    irrelevant to the issues before me.  I find no  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the Judge so that it should be set aside.  It is clear from
    reading the Decision that the Judge took into account all the  relevant
    evidence, such as it was, and came to a conclusion which  was  open  to
    her.   The  Judge  gave  sufficient  reasons  for  her  decision.   The
    Appellants had been admitted  to  the  UK  on  a  temporary  basis  and
    particularly in the case of the  minor  Appellants,  had  not  spent  a
    lengthy  period  away  from  Ghana.   The  Judge's  decision  that  the
    Appellants could return to that country and resettle there without  any
    great difficulty cannot be described as perverse.  The medical problems
    of the Appellants amount to very little and there was no evidence  that
    they could not obtain the approach treatment in Ghana.  All that  being
    the case, the Judge was entitled to conclude that the  public  interest
    represented by the Immigration Rules carried the most weight

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.  The  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so, and in any event I find no reason to do so.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
