
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/43067/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 4 February 2016                   |On 17 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                        SYED HAMMAD ALI  SHAH BUKHARI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Mustafa., of Britain, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Griffith promulgated on 22  May  2015,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background

3.    The Appellant was born  on  27  August  1987  and  is  a  national  of
Pakistan.

4.    On 17 October 2014 the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application for further leave to remain as a Tier 1 (entrepreneur) Migrant.

The Judge's Decision

5.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal Judge Griffith ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision.

6.    Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 16 October  2015  Upper  Tribunal
Judge Reeds gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

    "2.    It is further arguable that the Rules do not  specify  that  the
    documents must be dated and that the findings at [23]  do  not  provide
    reasons for rejecting the documents when viewed cumulatively.

    3.     There are a number of appeals  concerning  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 41-SD(e)(iii) and I consider the issue is  one  the  Tribunal
    may wish to give guidance. Consequently I grant permission"

The Hearing

7.    (a)   Mr Mustafa, for the appellant, adopted the terms of the  grounds
of appeal and argued that  at  [23]  the  Judge  was  incorrect  to  exclude
documentary evidence. He told me that the initial application was  submitted
on 28 August 2014,  and  that  additional  documents  were  submitted  of  4
September 2014. The decision was taken at  17  October  2014,  so  that  all
documents  were  submitted  before  the  application  was  decided  by   the
respondent. He relied on Nasim &  Others  (Raju:  reasons  not  to  follow?:
Pakistan) [2013] UKUT 610  (IAC)  &  Nwaigwe  (adjournment:fairness)  [2014]
UKUT 00418 (IAC).

    (b)    Mr Mustafa told me that there is a further material error of law
at [24] where the Judge, he argued, incorrectly applied paragraph  245AA  of
the immigration rules and failed to exercise discretion  in  favour  of  the
appellant. He took me to the documents reproduced in the appellant's  bundle
before the First-tier, and argued that the documents between  pages  18  and
25 of the appellant's bundle meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  41  -SD
(e)(iii) of the rules, so that the Judge was incorrect to find at [23]  that
they do not. He urged me to allow the appeal and said the decision aside.

8.    Mr Tarlow, for the respondent, relied on the  terms  of  the  rule  24
note dated 3 November 2015, and told me that the decision does  not  contain
errors of law, material or otherwise. He drew my  attention  to  [22]  where
the Judge finds  that  the  appellant  gave  incorrect  information  to  the
tribunal about the documents submitted with  the  application.  He  told  me
that at [23] the Judge was correct to find that the documents could  not  be
considered, but that the Judge then went on to find that in any event  those
documents do not comply with the requirements of paragraph 41  SD.  He  told
me that, in so far as there is any discretion contained in  paragraph  245AA
of the rules, it is a discretion which only the respondent can exercise.  He
urged me to dismiss the appeal and allow the decision to stand.

Analysis

9.    In R (on the application of Patel) v SSHD  [2014]  EWHC  1861  it  was
held that the purposes of paragraph 245 AA of  the  Immigration  Rules  that
the word format in the phrase went "in the wrong format" did not  extend  to
mean the information contained within the document. Format meant the way  in
which something was arranged or set out and  the  appropriate  question  was
whether  the  balance  certificate  was  simply  in  the  wrong  format  but
nevertheless confirmed that the availability of  funds.  Where  the  balance
certificate did not include the  information  required  by  the  rules,  and
prove that  the  necessary  funds  were  held  for  a  28  day  period,  the
certificate failed to meet the requirements  as  a  matter  of  content  not
format.

10.   In R (on the application of  Sabir  &  Others)  [2015]  EWHC  264  the
advertising material submitted with a Tier 1 application in  an  attempt  to
show that that appellant was  working,  which  was  listed  as  a  specified
document within paragraph 41-SD of Appendix A to the Rules, did not  include
the nature of the business linked to the Claimants' names and a  contractual
document submitted did not comply with the language of  paragraph  41-SD  as
it failed to provide a landline number of the other party  involved  in  the
contract. It was held  that  Rule  245AA  applied  where  an  applicant  had
submitted  specified  documentation  but  in  the  wrong  format   and   the
Respondent had discretion to allow the errors to be rectified.  The  problem
with the Claimants' documents was not with their  format,  but  rather  that
they did not contain information which, on the face of the rules, they  were
obliged to contain. The omission of specified details such as  names,  phone
numbers etc. from documents were material defects which did not fall  within
the definition of 'the wrong format':

11.   What is argued for the appellant (today) is that,  because  there  are
documents which do not contain all of the specified information,  discretion
should be exercised in the appellant's favour.  That  argument  is  hard  to
follow. The thrust of the grounds of appeal is that there is  no  defect  in
the  documents  produced  to  demonstrate  advertising  and  marketing.  The
reasons for refusal  letter  focuses  on  one  area.  This  application  was
refused because the respondent says "the evidence that  you  have  submitted
in relation to advertising and marketing is not acceptable as  it  does  not
cover a continuous period commencing before 11 July 2014, up to  no  earlier
than three months before the date of your application."

12.   It is the appellant's position that he has produced the documents,  so
an argument about the application of paragraph 245  AA  of  the  immigration
rules is irrelevant. The real focus in this appeal is contained  in  grounds
one and two. Permission to appeal was granted  specifically  with  reference
to the Judge's rejection of certain documents at [23], and the  requirements
of paragraph 41 SD(e)(iii).

13.   In Nasim and others (Raju: reasons not to  follow?)  [2013]  UKUT  610
(IAC) it was said (obiter) that, as held in Khatel and others (s85A;  effect
of continuing  application)  [2013]  UKUT  44  (IAC),  section  85A  of  the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  precludes  a  tribunal,  in  a
points-based appeal, from considering evidence as to compliance with points-
based rules, where that evidence was not before the SSHD when she  took  her
decision; but the section does  not  prevent  a  tribunal  from  considering
evidence that was before the Secretary of State when she took the  decision,
whether or not that evidence reached her only after the date of  application
for the purposes of paragraph 34F of the Immigration Rules. That followed  a
concession by the Respondent, but the implication is that that the  date  of
application is not a fixed point in time.

14.   In Ahmed and Another (PBS: admissible evidence) [2014] UKUT 365  (IAC)
the Tribunal said that the purpose of section  85A  Exception  2  "is  quite
clear. It is that where a Points Based application is made and refused,  the
assessment by the Judge is to  be  of  the  material  that  was  before  the
decision-maker rather than a new consideration of  new  material.  In  other
words the appeal if it is successful is on  the  basis  that  the  decision-
maker with the material before him should have made  a  different  decision,
not on the basis that a different way of presenting  the  application  would
have produced a different decision".

15.   At [23] the Judge correctly takes guidance from the case of Ahmed  and
Another (PBS: admissible evidence), but in the  following  sentence  wrongly
applies that  guidance  saying  "I  am  therefore  unable  to  consider  the
evidence submitted on 2 September 2014." The Judge's  mistake,  however,  is
rectified in the next two sentences when she specifies that it is not  clear
what documentation was considered by the respondent  and  then  goes  on  to
consider the documentary evidence produced by the respondent. In so  far  as
the Judge's  declaration  that  she  is  unable  to  consider  some  of  the
documentary evidence is an error, it is not a  material  error  because  she
goes on to analyse all of the documentary  evidence  and  reach  conclusions
which are well within the range of conclusions open to the Judge  to  reach.
The Judge's belief that some documentary evidence could  not  be  considered
does not affect the outcome of  this  appeal  because  the  Judge  does  not
exclude that evidence. The Judge considered the evidence and found  that  it
does not comply with paragraph 41 SD. The fulcrum  of  this  appeal  is  the
Judge's treatment of paragraph 41 SD.

16.   The Judge correctly sets out the relevant part of paragraph  41-SD  at
[20]. The Judge concludes [21] by saying "the documents were not dated".  It
is not a requirement of  paragraph  41-SD  that  advertising  and  marketing
materials are dated, but the Judge correctly accepts at [23] that  there  is
no requirement in the rules that the documents must be dated.

17.   The documents produced by the appellant are  (a)  an  invoice  from  a
printing  company  dated  26  April  2014  for  business   cards,   posters,
letterheads and  brochures  (b)  a  business  card  (c)  a  brochure  (d)  a
screenshot of the appellants 192.com page showing  that  he  registered  his
business there on 20 May 2014 (e) a letter of reference dated 15 April  2015
from one of the appellant's customers

18.   The screenshot of the appellant's 192.com page is  evidence  that  the
appellant's business was registered with an advertising website  on  20  May
2014. It predates 11 July 2014. It is three  months  and  two  days  earlier
than the date of application. It is simply evidence that the  appellant  has
an account 192.com. At [23] the Judge considers the  documents  produced  by
the appellant and finds that none of those documents meet  the  requirements
of paragraph 41-SD, when taken either separately or together. That  is  what
the Judge was called on to decide; it was a decision which was open  to  the
Judge to reach.

19.   It was incumbent on the Judge to consider the documents  produced.  It
is clear from the terms of the decision at [23] that  the  Judge  considered
those documents against the requirements of paragraph 41-SD(e),  and  having
done so found that the appellant did  not  discharge  the  burden  of  proof
because the documentary evidence did not establish that the advertising  and
marketing materials produced met the requirements of 41 SD(e)(iii).

20.   At  [24]  the  Judge  correctly  considered  paragraph  245AA  of  the
immigration rules and concluded that there was  a  discretion  open  to  the
Secretary of State, and that that discretion had been  exercised  correctly.
The Judge correctly concluded that  the  documents  submitted  do  not  fall
within  the  categories  specified  in  paragraph  245AA(b).  That   was   a
conclusion which is well within the range a conclusion is available  to  the
judge on the facts as she found them to be.

21.    In  reality  the  grounds  of  appeal  amount  to  a   statement   of
dissatisfaction with the conclusions reached by the Judge  on  the  evidence
presented, but no material error of law is  identified.  The  Judge's  fact-
finding exercise cannot be  faulted.  The  Judge  correctly  identified  the
applicable law and the tests which must  be  applied.  The  Judge  correctly
applied the burden and standard of proof.

22.   In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that the Upper Tribunal would not  normally  set  aside  a
decision of the First-tier Tribunal where there has been no misdirection  of
law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised and the relevant  Country
Guidance has been taken into  account,  unless  the  conclusions  the  judge
draws from the primary data were not reasonably open to him or her.

23.   The Judge carefully considered each strand of evidence  placed  before
her. She carefully records the submissions that were made  and  then,  after
correctly directing herself in law, makes reasoned findings of  fact  before
reaching conclusions which were manifestly open to the Judge to reach.

24.   I find that the Judge's decision, when  read  as  a  whole,  sets  out
findings that are sustainable and sufficiently detailed and based on  cogent
reasoning. The decision does not contain a material error of law.

CONCLUSION

25.   No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

26.   The appeal is dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.


Signed      Date 12 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
