

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/43205/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 28 October 2015                    |On 29 February 2016                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                ABDUL NAVEED
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Rana (Sabz Solicitors)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State against the decision  of
       the First-tier Tribunal allowing Abdul Naveed's  appeal  against  the
       decision of the Home Office to curtail  his  leave  to  remain  on  1
       November 2014.


    2. The Respondent is a citizen of Pakistan born 15 September  1989,  who
       was granted leave to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  student  in
       February 2011 until 25 May 2012, that leave being extended until  May
       2013 and then again until February 2016. The  Respondent's  leave  to
       remain was curtailed as he passed through immigration  control  on  1
       November  2014  whilst  returning  from  his  brother's  wedding   in
       Pakistan, because, it subsequently came to light  (no  reasons  being
       provided to him at the time), of information provided by  Educational
       Testing Service Limited (ETS) that there had been some impropriety in
       his examination process, as had been shown by the results having been
       shown as questionable as part  of  their  general  survey  into  test
       results in recent years: thus the decision maker inferred that  false
       evidence of English language proficiency had been relied  on  in  the
       course of the application made in 2012 and again in June 2013.


    3. The Respondent's case as put to the First-tier Tribunal was  that  he
       had never used a false TOEIC certificate (thus referencing  the  Test
       of  English  for  International  Communication  by   which   language
       proficiency is measured), having attended for his test and  completed
       it successfully at a test centre at Gant's Hill in March 2012: he had
       not been helped by any  proxy  test  taker,  and  he  had  previously
       successfully passed a TOEIC test upon which he  had  relied  when  he
       originally entered this country;  he was fluent  in  English,  having
       obtained a MBA from Sunderland University taught in the language.


    4. Having noted that the Secretary of State had only provided a  "poorly
       copied bundle" that had been served late,  containing  three  witness
       statements made in relation to the well-known ETS scandal, which  did
       not deal with the specifics of the Respondent's case. The  First-tier
       Tribunal concluded that there was no evidence before  it  that  could
       discharge the burden of proof that lay on the Secretary of  State  to
       establish dishonesty, noting that he had not been cross examined  nor
       given an adequate  opportunity  to  challenge  the  contents  of  the
       witness statements relied upon by  the  Home  Office.  There  was  no
       reason to think that Mr Naveed was a dishonest  witness  or  that  he
       would, as a fluent English speaker, have found reason to cheat in his
       English language test.


    5. An application for permission to appeal was made by the Secretary  of
       State, the supporting grounds contending that the  reasoning  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal was inadequate, pointing to the  generic  witness
       statements as potentially cogent evidence  which  had  required  more
       detailed consideration it had  in  fact  received,  failing  to  give
       adequate reasons for accepting Mr Naveed's credibility,  and  failing
       to consider that there might be reasons why a person  able  to  speak
       English might nevertheless employ a proxy to take  a  test  on  their
       behalf.  Judge  Hollingworth  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   granted
       permission to appeal on 13 August 2015.  At the hearing before me  Ms
       Everett relied on the grounds of appeal. For the reasons that  follow
       I did not find  it  necessary  to  call  on  Mr  Rana  to  make  oral
       submissions.


  Findings and reasons


    6. The appeal falls  to  be  considered  against  Rule  321A(1)  of  the
       Immigration Rules:


           "Grounds on which leave to enter or remain which is in force is
           to be cancelled at port or while the holder is outside the
           United Kingdom
           321A. The following grounds for the cancellation of a person's
           leave to enter or remain which is in force on his arrival in, or
           whilst he is outside, the United Kingdom apply;
           (1) there has been such a change in the circumstances of that
           person's case since the leave was given, that it should be
           cancelled; or
           (2) false representations were made or false documents were
           submitted (whether or not material to the application, and
           whether or not to the holder's knowledge), or material facts
           were not disclosed, in relation to the application for leave; or
           in order to obtain documents from the Secretary of State or a
           third party required in support of the application ..."


    7. I do not consider that the  First-tier  Tribunal,  on  this  occasion
       comprised of a Panel of  experienced  Immigration  Judges,  made  any
       error of law in its disposal of the appeal. Its reasons are perfectly
       clear: absent cross examination, and given the  Respondent's  command
       of English established by the material before  it  and  his  outright
       denial of dishonesty, it found that the Secretary of State had failed
       to discharge the burden of proof on her to make good her  allegation.
       As was stated by Maurice Kay LJ in MS (Sri  Lanka)  [2012]  EWCA  Civ
       1548 at [14]:


           "It is important to recall that, throughout the  course  of  the
           litigation in the FTT and  the  UT,  the  Secretary  of  State's
           representatives declined the opportunity  to  cross-examine  the
           appellant. That has the necessary consequence that the Secretary
           of State must be taken to accept, or at least  not  to  dispute,
           the appellant's factual account."


    8. As was observed by Richards LJ in Giri [2015] EWCA  Civ  784,  whilst
       there is a single civil standard of proof,  it  is  flexible  in  its
       application and the more serious the allegation or  its  consequences
       the stronger must be the evidence before a court would find  it  made
       out on balance of probabilities. Given the severity of the allegation
       made against Mr Naveed, the First-tier Tribunal was entitled to  find
       that this relatively demanding threshold was not made out  given  the
       failure of the Secretary of State to probe the evidence of Mr  Naveed
       by cross examination.  In the circumstances, the  grounds  of  appeal
       amount to no more than a disagreement with  the  conclusions  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal, and identify no material error of law. In  these
       circumstances the grounds of appeal amount to mere disagreement  with
       the conclusions of the Judge below.


          Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error
    of law.
    The appeal is dismissed.

       [pic]
Signed:                                            Date: 2 November 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes
