
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/44063/2014
                                                               IA/44064/2014
                                                               IA/44067/2014
                                                               IA/44069/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 November 2016                  |On 5 December 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                    a m s
                                     s n
                                    m r s
                                    r a s
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr M Hasan of Kalam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I make  an  anonymity  order  as  the  two  of  the
    appellants are children.  Unless the Upper Tribunal  or  Court  directs
    otherwise, no report of these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly
    identify the Appellants.  This direction applies to both the appellants
    and to the respondent and a failure to comply with this direction could
    lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

Background

 2. A1 and A2 are nationals of Bangladesh.  They are a married  couple  and
    A3 and A4 are their children born respectively on 8 May 2005 and 9 June
    2008.  A3 and  A4  are  also  nationals  of  Bangladesh.   However,  in
    addition, A3 became a British citizen by registration on  28  September
    2015 subsequent to the decisions under appeal.

 3. A1 and A2 initially came to the UK as visitors.  A1 entered with  entry
    clearance valid between 28 March 2002 and 28 September 2002.  His leave
    was subsequently extended  until  1  September  2005.   Thereafter,  A1
    overstayed.

 4. A2 came to the UK with leave as a visitor valid from 9 November 2004 to
    9 May 2005.  Her leave was extended to 1 September  2005.   Thereafter,
    she overstayed.

 5. A3 was born in the UK on 8 May 2005.  A4 was born in the UK on  9  June
    2008.  It would appear that neither A3 nor A4 have ever  had  leave  to
    remain.

 6. The appellants have applied for further leave to remain on a number  of
    occasions.  On 28 October 2006, they applied for leave under Art 8  but
    that was refused on 8 December 2008.  A further application was made on
    26 January 2011 but, again, that  was  refused  on  22  February  2011.
    Further submissions were made on 20 June 2011  under  Art  8  but  were
    rejected on 27 January 2012.

 7. Finally, on 20 September 2012 A1 applied for leave to remain under  Art
    8 together with his wife (A2) and his  children  (A3  and  A4)  as  his
    dependents.  Leave was refused on 24 January 2014.  That  decision  was
    subsequently reconsidered but leave was again refused to the appellants
    on 16 October 2014 and decisions were made to remove the appellants  by
    way of directions to Bangladesh on that date.

 8. The basis of the refusals was that  the  appellant  could  not  succeed
    under the Immigration Rules:  under the partner route in  Appendix  FM;
    under the parent route in Appendix FM;  under  the  child  route  under
    Appendix FM and under para 276ADE based upon their private life in  the
    UK.  Further, the Secretary of  State  concluded  that  there  were  no
    exceptional circumstances to justify the grant  of  leave  outside  the
    Rules and that it was in the children's best interests  and  reasonable
    for them to return to Bangladesh as part of the family unit.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 9. The four appellants appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.   The  appeal
    was heard by Judge Page on 5 January 2016.  By that time A3 had  become
    a British citizen and so her appeal was  withdrawn.   Judge  Page  was,
    therefore, only concerned with the decisions in respect of A1,  A2  and
    A4.  The position of A3, as a  British  citizen  was,  nevertheless,  a
    central feature of the claims by A1, A2 and A4.

10. Before the judge, the appellants relied upon Art 8 outside  the  Rules.
    It was not suggested, correctly,  that  any  of  the  appellants  could
    succeed under Appendix FM.  Likewise,  none  of  the  appellants  could
    succeed under para 276ADE.  A1 and A2 had not been in  the  UK  for  at
    least twenty years (para 276ADE(1)(iii)).  Further, given that  A1  and
    A2 had spent 30 and 29 years respectively living in Bangladesh, it  was
    not  advanced  as  an  argument  that  there  were  "very   significant
    obstacles" to their integration in Bangladesh.  Further,  A4,  although
    under the age of 18, was at the date of application only  4  years  old
    and therefore could not establish that she had been resident in the  UK
    for  at  least  seven  years  at  that  date  as   required   by   para
    276ADE(1)(iv).

11. Before  Judge  Page,  the  appellants  argued  that  their  removal  to
    Bangladesh was disproportionate.  The appellants  relied  on  the  fact
    that both A3 and A4 were "qualifying" children under s.117B(6)  because
    A3 was a British citizen and, at the date  of  hearing  which  was  the
    relevant date, A3 had been in the UK for  over  seven  years.   It  was
    argued that it was not in the best interests of  either  A3  or  A4  to
    leave the  UK  and  it  would  be  unreasonable  for  them  to  do  so.
    Particular reliance was placed on the fact that A3  had  the  right  to
    live in the UK as a British citizen.  A3 was, at the date  of  hearing,
    10 years of age.  It was argued that as it was unreasonable  to  expect
    A3 and A4 to leave the UK, then it was disproportionate to  remove  not
    only A3 and A4 but also A1 and A2 their parents.

12. At paras 28-46 of his  determination,  Judge  Page  made  a  number  of
    findings which I can summarise as follows:

         (1)  A3 is a 10-year-old child who is a British citizen.  If A1, A2
             and A4 were removed to Bangladesh there are  no  relatives  in
             the UK with whom A3 could live and, as a result, she could not
             remain in the UK and would,  as  a  practical  matter,  go  to
             Bangladesh with her parents.

         (2)  A4, who had lived in the UK for seven years (and was  aged  7)
             would also, as a practical matter, have to go to Bangladesh if
             her parents A1 and A2 were removed.

         (3)  A1, A2, A3 and A4 were living together as a family unit in the
             UK and had established close  ties  in  the  UK  during  their
             residence.  They consider the UK to be their home.

         (4)  A3 and A4 are attending and doing  well  at  school  and  have
             adapted to life in the UK.  They are  well-settled  in  school
             with many friends.  They speak English at home  and  with  one
             another and have become accustomed to the British way of life.
              They have never travelled outside  the  UK  where  they  were
             born.

         (5)  It would be "harsh" for them to be removed from the UK or,  in
             the case of A3, to go  to  Bangladesh  with  her  parents  and
             younger sister.  However, they could settle in Bangladesh with
             the assistance of their parents.

         (6)  A1 and A2 have not severed  all  their  ties  with  Bangladesh
             notwithstanding they have not returned there since  coming  to
             the UK in 2002 and 2004 respectively.

         (7)  It would not be contrary to the best interests of A3 and A4 if
             they went to Bangladesh as part of a family  unit  where  they
             could continue their education.

         (8)  It would be reasonable for the appellants, including A3 and A4
             to return to Bangladesh.  A1 and A2 have the option of  making
             arrangements for A3 to remain  in  or  return  to  the  UK  to
             continue her education here as a British citizen.

         (9)  A1 and A2 came to the UK and remained here  unlawfully.   They
             choose to have a family in the UK in those  circumstances  and
             A3 was "primarily" registered as  a  British  citizen  shortly
             before the appeal as a strategy for the appellants as a family
             to remain in the UK.

         (10)     Any decision to "split the family"  is  not  that  of  the
             Secretary of State but would be a decision of A1 and A2.

         (11)  There  were  no   compelling   circumstances   and   it   was
             proportionate to remove A1, A2 and A4.

13. As a consequence, Judge Page dismissed the appeals of A1, A2 and A4.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

14. A1, A2 and A4 sought permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.   In
    particular, those grounds argue that Judge Page failed properly to deal
    with the issues of the children's best interests and whether  it  would
    be reasonable for them to leave the UK, in particular in the  light  of
    the fact that A3 is a British citizen.

15. On 27 June 2016  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Ford)  granted  the
    appellants permission to appeal.

16. On 6 July 2016 the Secretary of State filed a rule 24 response  seeking
    to uphold the judge's decision.

17. Thus, the appeals came before me.

Discussion

    1. Error of Law

18. Mr Hasan, who represented the appellants, relied upon  the  grounds  of
    appeal.  He sought to renew the application for permission  in  respect
    of ground 2 which criticised the judge for not positively  taking  into
    account under s.117B(2) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002 (the "NIA Act 2002")  that  the  appellants  were  able  to  speak
    English and were financially independent.  However, as I pointed out to
    Mr Hasan, the appellants sought to  renew  their  application  on  this
    ground, refused by Judge Ford (in para 3 of her decision) to the  Upper
    Tribunal.  In any event, the ground is wholly unarguable in  the  light
    of the Court of Appeal's decision in Rhuppiah v SSHD  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    803 at [58]-[62] that proficiency in English or financial  independence
    was a "neutral factor".   The  purpose  of  s.117B(2)  and  (3)  is  to
    recognise that an inability to speak English or  a  lack  of  financial
    independency is a negative factor in considering the  public  interest.
    Consequently, ground 2 is unarguable as identifying a material error in
    the judge's decision.

19. Mr Hasan did not specifically refer to ground 4  which  criticised  the
    judge for dismissing A3's appeal rather than treating it  as  abandoned
    or withdrawn on the basis that she was, by the time of the  hearing,  a
    British citizen.  Mr Hasan was, in my judgment, correct not  to  pursue
    this ground since Judge Page specifically concluded  that  A3's  appeal
    was withdrawn and that he was only concerned with the appeals of A1, A2
    and A4 (see para 9 of his determination).

20. Mr Hasan focused, therefore, upon the judge's approach to A3  and  A4's
    best interests and his finding that it was "reasonable" for them to  go
    to Bangladesh.  Mr Hasan relied, essentially, on three points.   First,
    he submitted that  the  judge  had  misdirected  himself  in  assessing
    whether it was reasonable for them to leave the UK by applying  a  test
    of whether it was "harsh" for them to do so.  Secondly, he relied  upon
    the decision of the Court  of  Appeal  (decided  since  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision in this appeal) in R (MA) (Pakistan) and  others  v
    UTIAC and others [2016] EWCA Civ 705.  In particular,  he  relied  upon
    what was said by Elias LJ that, in the case of a  child  who  had  been
    resident in the UK for at least seven  years,  "powerful"  or  "strong"
    reasons were required to establish that it was not in  a  child's  best
    interest to remain in the UK with his parents as part of a family unit.
     Thirdly, Mr Hasan placed  reliance  upon  the  Home  Office  guidance,
    "Appendix FM 1.0 Family Life (as a Partner or Parent) and Private Life:
    10 Year Roots" (August 2015) at para 11.2.3 in which it is stated  that
    it would be unreasonable to expect a British citizen child to leave the
    EU with a parent or primary carer if to do so was to  require  them  to
    return to a country outside the EU.  Mr Hasan placed reliance upon  the
    statement that:

         "In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant leave to the
         parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in the UK with  a
         child, provided there is satisfactory evidence  of  a  genuine  and
         subsisting parental relationship."

21. Mr Hasan submitted that he had relied upon  this  policy  before  Judge
    Page and, in concluding that it was reasonable to expect A3  to  return
    to Bangladesh, he had failed to consider that guidance.

22. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Richards  accepted  Mr  Hasan's
    assurance that  Judge  Page  had  been  referred  to  the  Home  Office
    guidance.  He accepted that Judge Page's decision must be set aside  on
    the basis of a material error of law and  that  the  decision  must  be
    remade.

23. In the light of this, I agree that Judge Page's decision  cannot  stand
    as he failed to take into account the Home Office's guidance.  That was
    highly material to the judge's decision in respect  of  s.117B(6)  when
    applied to A3.  A3 is a British citizen.  On the judge's own  findings,
    she will be required to leave the  UK  if  her  parents  (who  are  her
    primary carers) are removed to Bangladesh.

24. Further, in assessing the best interests of A3 and A4 (who has been  in
    the UK for seven years, the judge failed to give sufficient  weight  to
    those circumstances and, as the Court of Appeal stated in MA (Pakistan)
    at [46] the "very strong expectation that the  child's  best  interests
    will be to remain in the UK with his parents as part of a family unit".



25. For these reasons, therefore, the decision of Judge Page is  set  aside
    and as both representatives acknowledged, the decision must be  remade.
    Mr Hasan invited me to  remake  the  decision  rather  than  remit  the
    appeals to the First-tier Tribunal.

    2. Remaking the Decision

26. Although Mr Hasan relied (in relation to A4) on para 276ADE(1)(iv),  in
    truth none of the appellants can succeed under any of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  Although A3 has been in the UK for "at least  seven  years"  by
    the date of the First-tier Tribunal's hearing, para 276ADE(1)  required
    that period to be satisfied "at the date of application".  It was  not.
    It is not suggested that any of the  routes  in  Appendix  FM  or  para
    276ADE are otherwise met.  Of course, under s.117B(6), the  seven  year
    period is not tied to the "date of application" and A4, like A3,  is  a
    "qualifying child" for the purposes of  that  provision  by  virtue  of
    s.117D(1).

27. Mr Hasan submitted that it was not in the best interests of A3 or A4 to
    go to Bangladesh and it was not reasonable to  expect  them  to  do  so
    applying s.117B(6).  He invited me to allow the appeal under Art  8  on
    the  basis  that  the  removal  of  all  the   appellants,   in   those
    circumstances, was not proportionate.

28. On behalf of the Secretary of State,  Mr  Richards  indicated  that  he
    wished to make no submissions  in  respect  of  the  substance  of  the
    appeal.

29. The appellants claim relies upon Art 8 outside the  Immigration  Rules.
    In applying Art 8, I apply the 6-stage test in R (Razgar) v SSHD [2004]
    UKHL 27.

30. First, I  accept  that  the  appellants'  removal  to  Bangladesh  will
    interfere with their private and family life  in  the  UK  sufficiently
    seriously to engage Art 8.1.  Judge Page made clear findings  that  the
    appellants, in particular A4 (and for these purposes I will include A3)
    are embedded in the UK which  they  consider  as  their  home  and  the
    children are settled and fully engaged in school and with friends.   Of
    course, if they all return to Bangladesh together,  there  will  be  no
    infringement with their right to respect for their family life  but  A3
    has the right to remain in the UK.

31. Secondly,  the  decisions  are  in  accordance  with  the  law  as  the
    appellants cannot succeed under any of the Immigration Rules.

32. Thirdly, the appellants' removal is for a legitimate  aim,  namely  the
    maintenance of effective immigration control (see, s.117B(1) of the NIA
    Act 2002).

33. The crucial issue is whether the appellants' removal  is  justified  as
    being a proportionate interference with their Art  8  rights  and,  for
    this purpose, I take account of the rights of A3 as  a  member  of  the
    family unit (see, Beoku-Betts v SSHD [2008] UKHL 39).  That requires  a
    balancing of the individual's interests and rights against  the  public
    interest in effective immigration control (see, Razgar at [20]).

34. In determining proportionality, the best interests of A3 and A4  are  a
    primary, though not determinative, factor (see  ZH  (Tanzania)  v  SSHD
    [2011] UKSC 4 and Zoumbas v SSHD  [2013]  UKSC  74).   A  child's  best
    interest  may  be  outweighed  by  the  cumulative  effect   of   other
    considerations (see, for example Zoumbas at [10(3)].

35. In determining proportionality under Art 8.2, I must "have  regard"  to
    the  considerations  listed  in  s.117B  of  the  NIA  Act  2002  (see,
    s.117A(2)).

36. Section 117B provides as follows:

         "117B. Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
         cases

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
             public interest.

         (2)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
             interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak English, because persons who can speak
             English -

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
             interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons -

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to -

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the person is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the person's immigration status is
             precarious.

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where -

             (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
                  the United Kingdom."

37. Dealing first with the best interests of A3 and A4, both have lived  in
    the UK for their entire lives:  they are now aged 10 years and 7  years
    respectively.

38. Judge Page made a number of very  positive  findings  concerning  their
    integration into the UK.  At para 43 he stated that:

         "43.     I accept that the two girls,  [A3]  and  [A4],  are  well-
             settled in school with many friends here.  They speak  English
             at home with one another and have  become  accustomed  to  the
             British way of life.  I accept that they have never  travelled
             outside the United Kingdom.  They were born here  and  do  not
             know any other country."

39. Judge Page went on to state that it would be "harsh"  for  them  to  be
    removed from the UK but that they could settle in Bangladesh  with  the
    assistance of their parents.  Previously he referred to the  fact  that
    Bangladesh had an education system to which they would have access  and
    that A3 (being a British citizen) could if her parents wished come back
    to the UK to continue her education.

40. Although Judge Page concluded that it would be  in  A3  and  A4's  best
    interests to return to Bangladesh with their parents, I do  not  agree.
    A3 is a British citizen and has lived in the UK  for  ten  years.   She
    knows no other country.  Likewise, although not a British  citizen,  A4
    has lived in the UK for seven years and knows no other country.   Judge
    Page acknowledged that they had developed  strong  ties  and  therefore
    private life in the UK.  In MA (Pakistan), Elias LJ recognised, in  the
    context of the seven year residence requirement, the  underlying  basis
    of that at [46]:

         "After such a period of time the child will have put down roots and
         developed social, cultural and educational links  in  the  UK  such
         that it is likely to be highly disruptive if the child is  required
         to leave the UK.  That may be less so when the  children  are  very
         young because the focus of  their  lives  will  be  more  on  their
         families, but the disruption  becomes  more  serious  as  they  get
         older.  Moreover, in these  cases  there  must  be  a  very  strong
         expectation that the child's best interests will be  to  remain  in
         the UK with his parents as part of a family  unit,  and  that  must
         rank as a primary consideration in the proportionality assessment."

41. The point is all the more strong in the case of A3  who  is  a  British
    citizen.  Judge Page's findings, which I gratefully adopt, in  relation
    to the integration of both A3 and A4 in the UK lead me to conclude that
    if they were required to leave the UK that would be "highly disruptive"
    to them despite the availability of education in Bangladesh.   And,  of
    course, A3 is a British citizen  and,  as  such,  is  entitled  to  the
    benefits that flow from that by living and growing up in the UK.  In ZH
    (Tanzania),  Lady  Hale  at  [31]-[32]  identified  the  importance  of
    integration and citizenship in reaching a determination  on  a  child's
    "best interests".  She said this:

         "31.     ... they are British children; they are British, not  just
             through 'accident' of being born here, but by descent  from  a
             British parent; they have an unqualified right of abode  here;
             they have lived here all their lives; they are being  educated
             here; they have other social links with  the  community  here;
             they have a good relationship with their father here.   It  is
             not enough to say that a child may readily adapt  to  life  in
             another country.  That may well be  so,  particularly  if  she
             moves with both her parents to a country which they know  well
             and  where  they  can  easily  re-integrate  into  their   own
             community .... but  it  is  very  different  in  the  case  of
             children who have lived here all their  lives  and  are  being
             expected to move to a country which they do not know and  will
             be separated from a parent whom they also know well.

         32.  Nor should the intrinsic importance of citizenship  be  played
             down.  As citizens these children have rights which they  will
             not be able to exercise if they move to another country.  They
             will lose the advantage of growing up and  being  educated  in
             their own country, their own culture and their  own  language.
             They will have lost all this when they come  back  as  adults.
             ..."

42. Although the facts in these appeals do not  precisely  match  each  and
    every factor identified by Lady Hale, the substance of her comments are
    applicable.

43. In my judgment, it is in the best interests of A3 and A4 to  remain  in
    the UK and to do so with their parents, A1 and A2.

44. However, that is only a primary consideration.  It is not determinative
    of the issue of "reasonableness" under s.117B(6) (see MA (Pakistan)  at
    [47]).  The issue of  "reasonableness"  entails  a  balancing  exercise
    taking into account the public interest (see MA (Pakistan) at [45]).

45. I accept that the appellant's removal is in the public interest for the
    maintenance of effective immigration control (s.117B(1)).

46. Although it is not disputed that the appellants speak English  and  are
    financially independent, that is a neutral factor and does  not  dilute
    the otherwise existing public interest (Rhuppiah interpreting s.117B(2)
    and (3)).

47. I accept that the private life of all appellants was established either
    at a time when their immigration status was  precarious  or  when  they
    were in the UK unlawfully and therefore, in principle, is  entitled  to
    "little weight" (see s.117B(4) and (5)).  That  is  also  substantially
    the case for their family  life  as  a  family  unit.   However,  I  am
    entitled to bear in mind in respect of A3 and A4  that,  despite  their
    presence in the UK being unlawful, this not their responsibility  given
    their ages.  That is a feature which, in my judgment,  entitles  me  to
    give  due  consideration  to  their  private  life  consistently   with
    s.117B(4) (see Rhuppiah at [53] and [54]).

48. Mr Hasan's submission focused on s.117B(6).  I  have  already  set  out
    both Judge Page's findings in respect of the integration of A3  and  A4
    in the UK and my finding that it would be in the best interests  of  A3
    and A4 to remain in the UK and with their parents.  I  accept,  on  the
    basis of MA (Pakistan) that is not conclusive of the issue  of  whether
    it is reasonable for them to leave the UK.  However, as  the  Court  of
    Appeal recognised in MA (Pakistan), a child who has been in the UK  for
    seven years (and I would add, or is a British citizen as in the case of
    A3) is likely to have established a life in the UK such that there must
    be "strong" or "powerful" reasons why leave should not be granted.   In
    other words, that it would be unreasonable to expect them to leave  the
    UK.

49. I bear in mind that both A1 and A2 have been unlawfully in the UK since
    1 September 2005 having previously been here as visitors.   They  have,
    albeit  unsuccessfully,  sought  to  regularise  their  position  since
    October 2006.  Although  A1  has  a  conviction  for  contravening  the
    General Food Act, that was not relied upon  by  the  respondent  before
    Judge Page given A1's "conditional discharge" (see  para  13  of  Judge
    Page's determination) and it was not relied upon before me.

50. In the case of A3, not only has she been in the UK for more than  seven
    years (ten years in fact), she is also now a British citizen.  The Home
    Office guidance, to which I was referred by Mr Hasan,  at  para  11.2.3
    is, in that regard, highly relevant.  That guidance under  the  heading
    "Would it be unreasonable to expect a British citizen  child  to  leave
    the UK?" refers to the ECJ's judgment in Zambrano (C-34-09 [2011] ECR 1-
    1177).  The guidance is in the following terms:

         "Save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker  must  not
         take a decision in relation to the parent or  primary  carer  of  a
         British Citizen child where the effect of that decision would be to
         force that British child to leave the EU, regardless of the age  of
         that child.   This reflects the European Court of Justice  judgment
         in Zambrano. ....

         Where a decision to refuse the application would require  a  parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside the  EU,  the  case
         must always be assessed on the basis that it would be  unreasonable
         to expect a British Citizen child to leave the EU with that  parent
         or primary carer.

         In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant leave to  the
         parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in  the  UK  with
         the child, provided  that  there  is  satisfactory  evidence  of  a
         genuine and subsisting parental relationship."

51. The guidance then goes on to consider countervailing  circumstances  as
    follows:

         "The circumstances envisaged could cover amongst others:

                . criminality falling below the thresholds set out in
                  paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules;

                . a very poor immigration history, such as where the person
                  has repeatedly and deliberately breached the Immigration
                  Rules."

52. As these passages in the guidance  identify,  it  is  accepted  by  the
    Secretary of State that it would be unreasonable to  expect  a  British
    citizen child to leave the UK if the  removal  of  his  parents/primary
    carer was to require him to return with them to a country  outside  the
    EU.  In those circumstances, the guidance recognises that it  would  be
    usually appropriate to grant the  parent  or  primary  carer  leave  to
    remain.  That "usually" position might be countered  on  the  basis  of
    criminality or "a very poor immigration history".  As  I  have  already
    indicated, the respondent does not seek to rely on any  criminality  of
    A1 in this case and although A1 and A3 have overstayed since 2005 I  do
    not  consider  that  that  falls  within  the  rubric  of  "very   poor
    immigration history" the only example of which is given in the guidance
    as "repeatedly  and  deliberately"  breaching  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Here, as I have already indicated, since 2006, A1 and A2 have sought to
    regularise their position.

53. The guidance goes on to recognise, in effect, that a primary  carer  in
    the circumstances of A1 and A2 has an EU right  to  remain  in  the  UK
    based upon the Zambrano decision.  That is reflected  in  our  domestic
    law in the derivative right of residence set out in Reg 15A(4A) of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 (SI 2006/1003 as amended).  In  this
    case, A1 and A2 have not made  an  application  on  the  basis  of  any
    derivative right as A3's primary carers.  It is difficult, however,  on
    the basis of Judge Page's findings to conclude that,  because  of  A3's
    circumstances, A1 and A2 do not fall within the rubric in  para  11.2.3
    as parents who would be usually granted leave to remain and  there  are
    no sufficient countervailing circumstances to  deny  that  expectation.
    Both the guidance and the Zambrano line of argument, are in my judgment
    highly relevant to the issue of  whether  it  would  be  reasonable  to
    expect A3 to leave the UK and the application of s.117B(6).

54. In my judgment, it would not be reasonable to expect A3 to do so.

55. Further, having  regard  to  all  the  circumstances,  looking  at  the
    position of A4 there are no "strong" or "powerful"  reasons  to  depart
    from what Elias LJ in MA (Pakistan) described as  the  "starting  point
    that leave should be granted".

56. I am satisfied that it would not be reasonable to expect A3  or  A4  to
    leave the UK and, therefore, s.117B(6) applies.  That may,  in  itself,
    mean that the public interest does not  require  A1  or  A2's  removal:
    there is nothing left of the public interest to  justify  removal  (see
    MA(Pakistan) at [17]  and  Rhuppiah  at  [51])).   As  I  have  already
    indicated, Mr Richards did not seek to make any representations on  the
    substance or merits of the appellants'  claims  under  Art  8.  In  any
    event, for the reasons I have given above, carrying out  the  balancing
    exercise under Art 8.2, having regard to the best interests of  A3  and
    A4 and the factors as set out in s.117B, I find  that  the  appellants'
    removal would be disproportionate in that the public interest does  not
    outweigh any interference with their (and A3's) protected rights  under
    Art 8.

57. Consequently, the decisions to remove A1, A2 and A4 breach Art 8 of the
    ECHR.

Decision

58. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellants'
    appeals under Art 8 involved the making of an error of law and  is  set
    aside.

59. I remake the decision allowing the appeals of A1, A2 and A4 under Art 8
    of the ECHR.



                                 Signed




                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Date 5 December 2016


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have allowed the appeals under Art 8 and,  in  all  the  circumstances,  I
consider it appropriate to make a full fee award of any fee  that  has  been
paid.



                                 Signed


                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Date 5 December 2016



