
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/44024/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 24 November 2015                  |On 30 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Mrs NGOZI BLESSING NWANKO
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr E Pipi, Counsel (instructed by JDS Solicitors)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1.     The Appellant (the Secretary of State) appealed with  permission
         granted on 10 August 2015  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Shimmin
         against the decision  and  reasons  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Hunter promulgated on 29 May 2015.  Judge Hunter  had  allowed  the
         Respondent's appeal against the Secretary of  State's  decision  to
         revoke her EEA residence card.  The Respondent  is  a  national  of
         Nigeria, born on 10 May 1967.  She had denied that her marriage  to
         a Polish national was one of convenience.

    2.     The Respondent's  marriage  was  conducted  by  the  Rev.  Brian
         Shipsides on 21 February 2009 at All Saints and St. Edmunds Church,
         Forest Gate, London E11.  The Rev. Shipsides was  convicted  on  22
         February  2012  of  conspiracy  to  facilitate  the  commission  of
         breaches  of  immigration  law,  and  sentenced  to  three   years'
         imprisonment.  It had not been disputed by the Rev. Shipsides  that
         the majority of some 250 weddings conducted by him  at  his  church
         between 29 December 2007 and 31 July 2010 had  been  shams,  mainly
         between EEA nationals and Africans.  The Respondent's EEA residence
         card issued on 22 February 2010 had been revoked by  the  Secretary
         of  State  on  25  February  2014  following  the  Rev.  Shipsides'
         conviction.  Despite  the  misgivings  which  he  expressed,  Judge
         Hunter found that the Respondent's marriage was genuine and allowed
         her appeal, it seems on the basis that she had a retained right  of
         residence following her divorce.  That is, however, far from  clear
         from the decision and reasons.

    3.     Permission to appeal to the Secretary of State  was  granted  by
         Judge Shimmin because he considered it arguable that the judge  had
         failed to make a finding in respect of  disputed  material  matter,
         and had failed to explain why he found that the Respondent met  the
         Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006  and  which
         regulation in particular.

    4.     Mr Kandola for the Appellant relied on the grant  of  permission
         to appeal and the grounds of onwards appeal earlier submitted.  The
         judge had failed to resolve the conflict of fact as to  the  status
         of the Respondent's alleged spouse.   Was  he  a  qualified  person
         within regulation 6? The evidence which the Secretary of State  had
         placed before the judge strongly indicated that  he  was  not.  The
         judge had focussed on the sham marriage issue exclusively  and  had
         failed to identify why the  appeal  against  revocation  succeeded,
         given that the Respondent and her  alleged  spouse  were  divorced.
         The judge had failed to find that the spouse had been  a  qualified
         person at the critical date, i.e., the date of  the  divorce.   The
         relevant regulations, i.e., regulation 10(5)  and  10(6),  had  not
         been identified. The decision and reasons  were  wholly  inadequate
         and should be set aside  and  the  appeal  reheard  before  another
         judge.

    5.     Mr Pipi for the Respondent relied on his skeleton  argument  and
         contended that the findings which the judge reached had  been  open
         to him.  The determination contained no material error of law.  The
         judge did not have to cite the regulations in detail and  had  made
         sufficient findings on which to allow the appeal. The substance  of
         the appeal was against the decision to revoke  and  the  Respondent
         had succeeded.  The Secretary of State's onwards appeal  should  be
         dismissed.

    6.     At the conclusion of submissions the tribunal  stated  it  found
         that there were material errors of law by First-tier Tribunal Judge
         Hunter in his decision  and  reasons.   The  Secretary  of  State's
         appeal succeeded.  The errors were so material that  the  whole  of
         the decision must be set aside and  the  appeal  reheard  before  a
         differently constituted First-tier Tribunal.  It was  not  possible
         to proceed to  a  rehearing  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  because  the
         Respondent's witnesses were not available.  The  tribunal  reserved
         its decision which now follows.

    7.     The decision and reasons show that  no  Home  Office  Presenting
         Officer was present at  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  of  the
         appeal, which appears to have been assigned to the hearing centre's
         "float" list.  That is not the fault of Judge Hunter,  but  in  the
         tribunal's view a  sham  marriage  appeal  with  witnesses  is  not
         suitable to be heard as a float case, especially if  (as  here)  no
         Home Office Presenting Officer was available.  This was  an  appeal
         which demanded cross-examination to enable secure findings of  fact
         to be made.  In the tribunal's view the findings of fact which were
         made were not secure.

    8.     The suggested  relevant  factors  for  the  assessment  of  sham
         marriages  set  out  in  Papajorgji  (EEA  spouse  -  marriage   of
         convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT  00038  (IAC)  were  insufficiently
         followed by the judge.  A strong prima facie case had  been  raised
         by the Secretary of State and in the tribunal's  view  the  judge's
         analysis  was  deficient.   The  quality   and   brevity   of   the
         relationship were not  addressed.   There  is  no  mention  of  the
         Respondent's  United  Kingdom  immigration  status  prior  to   her
         marriage.  Indeed, she was careful not to mention  the  subject  in
         her witness statement. There were other relevant factors  seemingly
         ignored in the assessment of the parties' intentions at the date of
         the marriage, such  as  the  husband's  financial  situation.   His
         failure to file tax returns was part of the evidence.  The date  of
         the marriage was the critical date for determining whether  it  was
         an abuse in order to gain an advantage in EEA law, but  again  that
         was not adequately addressed.

    9.     The judge noted  a  number  of  deficiencies  in  the  documents
         produced, stating by way of comment on them at [59] of the decision
         and reasons: "I do see this as evidence for  the  proposition  that
         this was an attempt by the  Appellant  to  deceive  the  Respondent
         regarding her being in a subsisting relationship."   On  its  face,
         that was a conclusion open  to  the  judge  because  the  documents
         produced were incomplete and inadequate.  If  the  judge's  finding
         stood, it sits uncomfortably if  not  illogically  with  his  other
         findings in the Respondent's favour.  It may also be that the  word
         "not" is missing from the sentence quoted above.   In either event,
         it is plain that the decision is inadequately reasoned  and  cannot
         stand.

    10.    A further serious problem in the judge's decision is his failure
         to  identify  and  refer  to  the  relevant  Immigration  (European
         Economic Area) Regulations 2006.  It is essential to do so in every
         EEA appeal, not least so that it is clear that the judge is working
         from the applicable version of these much-amended regulations.  Had
         the judge considered the regulations properly in his  decision  and
         reasons, he might have been alert to the issue of  whether  or  not
         the Respondent had produced sufficient evidence to  show  that  her
         claimed ex-spouse had been a qualified person within  regulation  6
         as at the date of their divorce.   The  evidence  produced  by  the
         Secretary of State (which followed the  principles  of  cooperation
         set out in Amos [2011]  EWCA  Civ  552)  showed  that  he  was  not
         qualified.  The judge made no comprehensible finding on that point.
          It is doubtful  on  the  face  of  the  decision  that  there  was
         sufficient evidence to show that  the  Respondent's  ex-spouse  was
         even in the United Kingdom at the date of the divorce.

    11.    For all of these reasons, the basis on which the  judge  allowed
         the Respondent's appeal was unsustainable.

    DECISION

    The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

    There  were  material  errors  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision, such that the decision must be set aside in its entirety.

    The appeal must be reheard at the Hatton  Cross  hearing  centre  by  a
    judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Hunter,  on  a  date  to  be
    fixed.




    Signed Dated


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
