
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44665/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|(Employment Tribunal)                |On 21st January 2016                 |
|On 7th September and 9th November    |                                     |
|2015                                 |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                           PETER GACHATHI KINUTHIA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety on 7th September 2015; Mr D Mills on
                    9th November 2015, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. Following a hearing on 7th September 2015  I  reached  the  following
       decision and made  the  following  directions  (typographical  errors
       corrected):

           "1.    The appellant (hereafter the SSHD) sought and was granted
           permission to appeal a decision of the First-tier Tribunal which
           allowed the appeal of Mr Kinuthia  against  a  decision  of  the
           respondent dated 27th October 2014 refusing to vary his leave to
           remain outside the Rules and deciding to remove him pursuant  to
           s47 Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.




           Background

           2. Mr Kinuthia, a Kenyan citizen, entered the UK on 12th January
           2013 having been issued with entry clearance on 5th January 2013
           valid until 5th January 2014  as  a  Tier  5  (Charity)  Worker.
           Whilst in the UK he applied  for  and  was  interviewed  by  the
           British Army; successfully completed the selection  process  and
           on 25th November 2013  he  was  allocated  an  intake  into  the
           British Army of 24th February 2014. He immediately applied for a
           visa extension and on 25th February 2014 his leave to remain was
           varied and extended until 25th September 2015  endorsed  "Forces
           not exempt leave to remain". On 7th April 2014 the  Army  issued
           him with a provisional start date of 7th July 2014.

           3. On 19th August 2014 Mr Kinuthia applied for further leave  to
           remain outside the Rules having been informed by the  Army  that
           he could not take up his place until he had  completed  3  years
           lawful residence in the UK. That application was refused  and  a
           removal decision made on 27th October 2014 for reasons  set  out
           in  an  accompanying  letter  dated  the  same  date.  The  SSHD
           considered the application for leave to remain outside the Rules
           and stated:

                "The Secretary of State's policy  is  to  consider  granting
                leave  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  where  particularly
                compelling circumstances exist. Grants  of  such  leave  are
                rare and are given only for genuinely compassionate reasons.
                We have carefully considered your application for  leave  to
                remain to allow you to  complete  the  necessary  period  of
                residence in the United Kingdom prior to joining  the  Armed
                Forces,  for  which  there  are  no  provisions  under   the
                Immigration Rules. The Secretary of State is  not  satisfied
                that your circumstances are such that discretion  should  be
                exercised outside the Immigration Rules.

                Your application has been refused due to  the  fact  that  a
                variation of leave to remain is being sought for  a  purpose
                not covered by these Rules."

           4. The First-Tier Tribunal Judge found  the  following  material
           facts (which have not been challenged by the SSHD):

                "9.     The  Home  Office  has  previously   exercised   its
                discretion and granted the appellant Limited Leave to Remain
                in the United  Kingdom  from  25/02/14  until  25/09/14,  as
                "Armed  Forces  not  exempt  from  control"  [in  fact   the
                endorsement  read  FORCES  NOT  EXEMPT  LEAVE  TO   REMAIN].
                Evidently the Home Office had  decided  that  the  appellant
                fulfilled the discretionary leave criteria presumably  since
                the appellant's  application  to  join  the  Army  had  been
                successful.

                10.    [Mr Kinuthia] made a further application to remain on
                the same basis, requesting  the  Home  Office  exercise  its
                discretion  outside  of  the  Immigration  Rules   but   his
                application was refused.

                11.    In reaching the decision to refuse  the  application,
                the  decision  maker  (applying  Ukus,  in  the   "purported
                exercise of a discretion vested in him  noted  his  function
                and what was required to be done when fulfilling it")  noted
                that  s/he  should  consider  if  "particularly   compelling
                circumstances" existed. However it is  not  clear  from  the
                Reasons for Refusal Letter which such circumstances did  not
                exist. The decision maker simply writes, "the  Secretary  of
                State is not satisfied that your circumstances are such that
                discretion  should  be  exercised  outside  the  Immigration
                Rules" without any further elaboration.

                12.    The appellant fulfilled the discretionary criteria to
                be awarded Limited Leave to Remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
                from 25/02/14 until 25/09/14n much the same circumstances as
                existed when he made his further application in August 2014.
                Indeed [Mr Kinuthia] had progressed  further  and  had  been
                allocated a date to start Army training.

                13.    I am satisfied that the  Home  Office  has  given  no
                reason as  to  why  the  application  has  been  refused  in
                circumstances  where  it   is   previously   exercised   its
                discretion in  the  appellant's  favour.  Accordingly  I  am
                satisfied that the decision 'is not in accordance  with  the
                law' (s86(3)(a))."

           Error of law

           5. The grounds of appeal assert  that  the  description  of  the
           refusal letter as one without reason was

                "... wrong and constitutes, at the very least, an  error  of
                fact. The refusal lays out the policy  outside  the  IRs  as
                well as the requirements  for  success  under  it  and  then
                explains that it is not considered that the  A's  desire  to
                join the armed forces comes under that category.

                6. There is nothing in law or policy that required the R  to
                make reference to the pervious grant of leave to remain  and
                the FtJ had not detailed any factors separate from  the  A's
                desire to be in the armed forces which might be said  to  be
                missing from the R's consideration."

           6. I was not provided with a copy of the SSHD's policy in  force
           either at the date when Mr Kinuthia was granted his "Forces  not
           exempt Leave to remain" leave or at the date of that decision or
           the date of the decision the subject of this appeal. Nor  was  I
           provided with a copy of any policy  that  may  have  existed  at
           those dates that covered recruitment to the Armed Forces. It was
           agreed that I could look for these documents  on  conclusion  of
           the hearing and take them into account in reaching my decision.

           7. The Armed Forces Guidance in force prior to and at  the  date
           of decision as "Forces not exempt leave to remain"  was  Chapter
           15, Section 1 Armed forces:General. Section 3 reads:

                "... A person admitted  in  another  capacity  (eg  visitor,
                student) who wishes to join HM Forces should be  advised  to
                contact them directly - enlistment is entirely a matter  for
                the armed force concerned. Normally, initial contact with  a
                local recruitment office will be followed  by  a  series  of
                tests, interviews and later, an intensive selection  lasting
                1.5 days. After this, is a person is to be accepted into one
                of the armed forces, he will be invited to take an  oath  of
                allegiance ...

                Once the applicant has been  enlisted  into  HM  Forces,  he
                should submit his passport to the UK Border Agency ...  When
                submitted, the passport of the  person  should  be  endorsed
                with suspension of any limited leave  to  enter/remain.  The
                standard exemption  endorsement  should  be  used  ..."while
                Section 8(4) of the Immigration  Act  1971  applies  to  the
                holder" ...

                ...

                Delayed enlistment. There may  be  circumstances  where  the
                receiving unit only runs one or two basic  training  courses
                per year and the enlistment date is therefore delayed. Where
                evidence of this is supplied, a period of six months'  leave
                code 3 may be granted outside the Immigration Rules to cover
                the period up to the enlistment date provided.

                ...

           8. The Guidance Armed Forces on Appendix A Armed Forces  of  the
           Immigration Rules valid from 6th November 2014 does  not  permit
           switching and requires that for a person to be granted leave  to
           remain as a person subject to immigration Control, the applicant
           must have inter alia

                "... made a valid application for leave to enter  or  remain
                as a member of another armed force  subject  to  immigration
                control ...

                ...

                have last been grated entry clearance,  leave  to  enter  or
                remain  under  Part  9  or  under  the  previous  concession
                relating to course F

                ...

                Leave to remain will be issued for whichever is the  shorter
                period of either:

                The duration of the training, study or familiarisation, and

                Four years including any leave granted under paragraph 57 or
                59 or under the previous 'Course F' concession

                ...

           9. The LOTR policy valid at the date of the grant of  leave  and
           at the date of the decision the subject of this appeal states:

                "2.    ... It is not possible to give instances or  examples
                of  case-types  that  might  be   defined   as   "particular
                compelling circumstances".  However,  grants  of  such  LOTR
                should be rare, and only  for  genuinely  compassionate  and
                circumstantial reasons ..."

           10.    I was unable to find a copy of the 'Course F' concession.
           I was unable to establish whether and to what extent there  were
           any transitional provisions in the Armed  Forces  guidance  that
           related to individuals in the position  of  Mr  Kinuthia  namely
           granted a period of leave to remain in  order  to  undergo  army
           training but then falling within a Rule change at a time when an
           extension was requested. I was unable to  establish  whether  at
           the time the army  accepted  Mr  Kinuthia  in  their  assessment
           programme a 3 year residence requirement was in  place.  It  did
           not appear that the respondent has considered whether there were
           'circumstantial reasons' in deciding whether Mr Kinuthia  should
           be granted LOTR.

           11.    The FtT Judge did not have this information  before  him.
           Mr Kinuthia was unrepresented and it does not appear that  these
           matters were brought to  the  attention  of  the  judge  by  the
           presenting officer. Although it cannot normally be said  that  a
           FtT judge has erred in law in failing to have regard to  matters
           that were not brought to his  attention,  in  this  instance  it
           seems possible that these matters are such that should have been
           brought to his attention or at the very least considered by  the
           respondent in reaching her decision.

           12.    In these circumstances I am not therefore in  a  position
           at this stage to reach a decision as to  whether  there  was  an
           error of law in the FtT decision, albeit he was not directed  to
           policy,  concessions  and  Rule  changes  that  may  have   been
           relevant.

           13.    I accordingly direct that the  following  are  filed  and
           served on each party and on the tribunal within 28 days  of  the
           date this order is sent to the parties:

                (a)    The SSHD to file and serve copies of the  immigration
                directorate instructions relevant to the  Armed  Forces  and
                Leave outside the Rules(LOTR) on

                    (i)    The date the  decision  was  taken  to  grant  Mr
                    Kinuthia  his  FORCES  NOT   EXEMPT  LEAVE   TO   REMAIN
                    ("FNELTR") visa;

                    (ii)   The date the decision was  taken  to  refuse  him
                    leave to  remain  (the  decision  the  subject  of  this
                    appeal);

                (b)    The SSHD to file and serve a copy of the  'Course  F'
                concession;

                (c)    The SSHD to file and serve a  copy  of  the  relevant
                Immigration Rule in force at the two dates together with any
                transitional provisions;

                (d)    The SSHD to file and serve, any information  she  has
                as to whether at the date the decision was taken to grant Mr
                Kinuthia  his  FNELTR  visa,  the  army  required  3   years
                residence.

                (e)    Mr Kinuthia to file and serve such information as  he
                has as to whether at the date he was granted his FNELTR visa
                the Army required 3 years residence.

                (f)     Both  parties  at  liberty  to  make  such   written
                submissions as they wish within 7 days after service of  the
                above documents.

           14.    On receipt of these documents the Tribunal  will  proceed
           to determine this appeal, (save that consideration will be given
           to whether further oral submissions would be  of  assistance  to
           the Tribunal in which case a Notice of Hearing will be sent)."

    2. Pursuant to my directions, I received written  submissions  from  the
       SSHD, which included a copy of the  casework  instruction  dated  3rd
       April 2012. The SSHD confirmed that it appeared that I had found  the
       correct guidance relating to the periods when the decisions were made
       relating to Mr Kinuthia and confirmed that the  SSHD  was  unable  to
       find anything regarding the  length  of  time  the  army  required  a
       candidate  to  have  had  lawful  leave  in  the  UK.  The  Course  F
       instruction, the SSHD stated, was a category used by the UK  military
       when foreign countries  send  military  personnel  (normally  officer
       rank) for training at one of the UK's  training  establishments.  The
       SSHD did not file and serve a copy of the relevant Immigration  Rules
       in force at the two dates relevant to Mr Kinuthia (25th February 2014
       (grant of FNELTR)) and 27th October 2014 (refusal of further leave to
       remain and removal decision).

    3. Mr Kinuthia, submitted a copy of the emails from the army  confirming
       that he required 3 years lawful residence for his application  to  be
       continued.

    4. In the light of these submissions, I considered I would  be  assisted
       by further oral submissions and this appeal was set down for  further
       hearing on 9th November 2015.

    5. Mr Kinuthia had informed me on 7th September 2015, and the respondent
       did not dispute this, that he had applied for his first variation  of
       leave on 24th November 2013.

    6. The casework instruction provided to me by the respondent  dated  3rd
       April 2013 states:

           '2.2 It remains an option for staff to extend leave to remain if
           an applicant meets all applicable rules of the category they are
           applying under, even if there is a stated intention to  join  HM
           Forces or if there are exceptional  and  compelling  reasons  to
           allow an individual to remain in the UK.

           2.3 once an individual has taken their Oath  of  Allegiance  and
           starts basic training they will become exempt  from  immigration
           control.'

    7. There appears to be a discord at the various stages that Mr  Kinuthia
       has been through in his applications to remain in the UK to join  the
       British Army. He applied for, passed the basic test for admission  to
       the army, and was granted an extension of time by the UKBA to  remain
       to  take  up  the  training.  The  Army  then  informed  him  of  the
       requirement for 3 years lawful residence which he  did  not  at  that
       time have (although he now, at the time  of  writing  this  decision,
       does  have).  He  applied  for  further  formal   leave   to   remain
       specifically in order to obtain those three years (having  previously
       been granted leave to remain in  order  to  complete  the  assessment
       process) and that application was refused.  During this period, there
       have been Rule and policy changes, some of which appear to relate  to
       him and others of which do not.

    8. The reasons for the decision the subject of appeal state

           "... We have carefully considered your application for leave  to
           remain  to  allow  you  to  complete  the  necessary  period  of
           residence in the United  Kingdom  prior  to  joining  the  Armed
           Forces, for which there are no provisions under the  Immigration
           Rules. The  Secretary  of  State  is  not  satisfied  that  your
           circumstances are  such  that  discretion  should  be  exercised
           outside the Immigration Rules.

           Your application has  been  refused  due  to  the  fact  that  a
           variation of leave to remain is being sought for a  purpose  not
           covered by these Rules."

    9. The decision the subject of appeal was a combined decision dated 27th
       October 2014 both to refuse to vary leave to remain and to remove  Mr
       Kinuthia by way of  directions  under  s47  Immigration,  Asylum  and
       Nationality Act 2006. I have set out above at considerable length the
       various policies and statements by the SSHD in so far as I have  been
       able to find them.  In a commendably short and succinct  decision  by
       the First-tier Tribunal the First-tier Tribunal judge concluded  that
       the respondent had not given reasons for reaching a decision that the
       Mr Kinuthia did not benefit from consideration outside the Rules  and
       'remitted' the decision for a lawful decision to be taken.

   10. It is plain that Mr Kinuthia cannot  succeed  under  the  Immigration
       Rules per se There is no provision under the  Rules  for  him  to  be
       granted leave to remain for the required  period  to  enable  him  to
       acquire the three years necessary period of residence in  the  UK  to
       fulfil the Army's requirements. Mr Kinuthia did  not  seek  to  argue
       that the decision to refuse him leave to remain under the  Rules  was
       unlawful - his application had been made for leave to remain  outside
       the Rules and thus his appeal was founded upon that  decision.  -  Mr
       Kinuthia did not, at the time of his  application,  or  the  decision
       meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules, taking account of the
       transitional provisions.

   11.  In  reaching  her  decision  on  the  application  before  her,  the
       respondent appears to have  solely  considered  whether  Mr  Kinuthia
       meets the requirements of the Immigration Rules. She does not  appear
       to have taken any account whatsoever  of  her  previous  decision  to
       grant leave to remain to enable Mr Kinuthia to undertake the relevant
       admission procedures to the British Army. It  is  inconceivable  that
       she  would  not  have  known  of  the  three-year  lawful   residence
       requirement of the Army when granting leave  to  remain  outside  the
       Rules to enable him to undergo the recruitment process. One must  ask
       what was the point in granting Mr Kinuthia leave  to  remain  outside
       the Rules to undergo that process and yet not have in mind that there
       would be a further period of leave required to enable him to take  up
       the training if he passed that recruitment process. If she  were  not
       going to permit him leave to remain to access the training, then  why
       put Mr Kinuthia and the Army to the  expense  of  going  through  the
       recruitment process.

   12. It is simply unsatisfactory for the respondent  to  refuse  to  grant
       leave  to  remain  outside  the  Rules  without  at  the  very  least
       considering the full circumstances and the casework instructions when
       considering the exercise of her discretion  and  then  to  decide  to
       remove Mr Kinuthia. The reasons for such a decision are inadequate in
       the extreme  and  show  a  complete  disregard  to  her  policy  (see
       paragraphs 6 and 8 above).

   13. The First-tier Tribunal therefore, albeit not specifically allowed in
       such terms, was correct to find the decision to remove Mr Kinuthia to
       be unlawful. There is no material error of law in the decision of the
       First-tier Tribunal. I do not set aside the decision  of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal to allow the appeal.

       Conclusion

       There is no error of law in the First-tier Tribunal decision.

       Note: The consequence of this decision is that Mr Kinuthia has, since
       his arrival in the UK been lawfully in  the  UK.  He  has  thus  been
       lawfully present since 12th January 2013 and remains lawfully present
       until a lawful decision is taken and his appeal rights exhausted,  if
       it is an adverse decision. I have no doubt that the  respondent  will
       now consider afresh Mr Kinuthia's application in  the  light  of  his
       circumstances  and  the  previous  leave  granted   and   will   seek
       information from Mr Kinuthia as to  his  current  circumstances  with
       regard to his Army application.


     Date 20th January 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker

