
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44554/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10th June 2014                               |On 27th June 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

                             Mr Kum Bahadur Rai
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Uppal, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
                             EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT


 1. The Appellant appeals with permission  a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal promulgated on 18th February 2014, in  which  the  Appellant's
    appeal against the refusal of his  Tier  4  (General)  Student  Migrant
    application is dismissed.

 2. Permission has been granted on the basis of the finding  of  the  judge
    that the Appellant had submitted an application in time.   The  finding
    is not challenged.

 3. The Respondent's representative indicated that she could not resist the
    inevitable consequence, following the  case  of  Basnet,  that  such  a
    finding requires the Respondent to have assessed the evidence submitted
    with the application as being evidence submitted within  the  timeframe
    required by the Rules, and the apparent failure to do so  rendered  the
    Respondent's decision "not in accordance with the law.  The  judge  was
    bound to allow the appeal to that limited extent and the failure to  do
    so is a material error of law such that the decision must be set  aside
    and remade in those terms, leaving the  Appellant  awaiting  a   lawful
    decision in respect of an in time application.

 4. The Appellant has made an application for a fees award and  bearing  in
    mind the reasons that I have allowed the appeal I direct that an amount
    equivalent to any appeal fees paid should be paid to the  Appellant  by
    the respondent within 28 days of  the  date  of  promulgation  of  this
    decision.






Signed                              Date 25.06.2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge


