
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44866/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |                   Decision & Reasons |
|On 5 October 2015                     |Promulgated                           |
|                                      |On 14 October 2015                    |
|                                      |                                      |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                               mr muhammad taq
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:       Ms Amy Cooke, Counsel instructed by Farani Javid
Taylor Solicitors
For the Respondent:   Ms Julie Isherwood, Specialist Appeals Team

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Telford  sitting  at  Hatton  Cross  on  26
    February 2015) to dismiss  his  appeal  against  the  decision  by  the
    Secretary of State to refuse to vary his leave to remain so as to grant
    him ILR on the grounds of ten years' continuous lawful  residence.  The
    First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, and I  do  not
    consider that the appellant requires anonymity for these proceedings in
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a national of Pakistan,  whose  date  of  birth  is  1
    December 1979.  He first arrived in the United Kingdom  on  7  December
    2003 with valid entry clearance as a student. He remained lawfully as a
    student until 31 March 2009.

 3. On 6 March 2009 he applied for further leave to remain  as  a  student,
    and the application was rejected as invalid on 19 March 2009.

 4. On 26 March 2009 he made a second application, which  was  rejected  as
    invalid on 15 April 2009 (after his leave to remain  had  expired).  He
    was given 28 days to submit a new application.

 5. On 23 April 2009, he made a third application, which  was  rejected  as
    invalid on 20 July 2009.

 6. On 30 July 2009, he made a fourth application, which  was  accepted  as
    valid and which led to the grant  of  further  leave  to  remain  on  4
    September 2009. Thereafter the appellant had  continuous  lawful  leave
    until he applied for ILR on 2 July 2014.

 7. On 16 October 2013 the Secretary of State gave her reasons for refusing
    the application.   It  was  accepted  that  he  had  been  continuously
    lawfully resident in the United Kingdom until 15 April 2009,  when  his
    second in-time application had been rejected as invalid.   Although  he
    had re-submitted a third application within the 28 day time limit, this
    too had been rejected as invalid. So his leave "expired"  on  15  April
    2009, and he was without leave for  a  period  of  141  days  up  to  4
    September 2009.

The Hearing before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 8. The case advanced in the grounds of appeal was  that  the  SSHD  should
    have exercised discretion in the appellant's favour, as he had made his
    ultimately successful application (the fourth  application)  within  28
    days of the rejection of the third application on invalidity grounds.

 9. At the hearing before Judge Telford, Miss Jones of Counsel appeared  on
    behalf of the appellant. There was no Presenting Officer. At the outset
    of the hearing, Miss Jones renewed a request for an adjournment,  which
    the Tribunal had twice previously refused in writing.  Her  reason  for
    seeking an adjournment was to give the respondent time to  produce  the
    records held by the Home Office of the appellant's applications in 2009
    so as to establish the reason why the second and third applications had
    been rejected as invalid.  The judge refused the  application  for  the
    reasons given by him in  paragraphs  [5]  to  [10]  of  his  subsequent
    decision.

10. The judge dismissed the appeal under the rules for the reasons he  gave
    in paragraphs [13] to  [20].  He  found  that  the  appellant  was  not
    lawfully resident between 31 March 2009 and 30 July 2009, while  noting
    that the respondent relied on a different period as being unlawful.  He
    found at paragraph [22] that the  appellant  had  given  a  variety  of
    different and at times inconsistent and  conflicting  reasons  for  the
    refusals in 2009:

         To my mind that is not on the point as none were appealed and to my
         mind he cannot establish any unfairness or impropriety on the  part
         of the respondent in those refusals.

11. The judge went on to address an alternative claim under Article 8  ECHR
    at paragraphs [23] to [27] and he dismissed the appeal under the  Rules
    and on human rights grounds.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

12. The appellant's legal representatives advanced  one  ground  of  appeal
    only. This was that the judge had erred in  law  in  finding  that  the
    appellant's lawful residence was broken between the end of  March  2009
    and 4 September 2009. They relied on  sub-paragraph  (v)  of  Paragraph
    276B which provides as follows:

         (v)  the applicant must not be in the UK in breach  of  immigration
             laws except that any period of overstaying for a period of  28
             days or less will  be  disregarded,  as  will  any  period  of
             overstaying between periods of entry clearance, leave to enter
             or leave to remain of up to 28 days...

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

13.  On  2  June  2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hollingworth   granted
    permission to appeal, as  an  arguable  error  of  law  had  arisen  in
    relation to the construction to be placed upon the provisions governing
    lawful residence, and the respondent had argued the case on  a  footing
    as to a different period to that found by the Judge.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

14. At the hearing before me, Ms  Cooke  abandoned  the  ground  of  appeal
    advanced in the permission application (Ground 1) but sought permission
    to argue a new ground (Ground 2) which was that the judge had erred  in
    finding that the applications had  been  validly  rejected  and/or  the
    judge had erred in not granting an adjournment to allow  time  for  the
    subject  access  request  to  be  processed  so  as  to  find   further
    information about the reasons for the application being rejected.

15. Without formally granting her permission to advance  a  new  ground,  I
    allowed Ms Cooke to develop her case and to direct my attention to  the
    passages in  the  SAR  disclosure  from  the  Home  Office  which  were
    pertinent to the three rejected applications in 2009.

16. Ms Isherwood submitted that there was no merit in Ground 2, and invited
    me to hold that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was sound.




Discussion

17. Ground 1 was rightly abandoned by Ms Cooke. In order to be regarded  as
    lawful, the appellant's residence between 31 March 2009 and 4 September
    2009 had to be pursuant to existing  leave  to  enter  or  remain:  see
    Paragraph 276A(b)(i). It was not, so prima facie he  was  not  lawfully
    resident throughout that period. If the  appellant  had  made  a  valid
    application on 23 April 2009 (which was less than  28  days  after  his
    previous leave had expired), he would have been  able  to  invoke  sub-
    paragraph  (v)  of  Paragraph  276B.  But  he  did  not  make  a  valid
    application,  and  so  his   period   of   unlawful   residence   began
    (retrospectively) on 1 April 2009.  For an invalid application does not
    extend time. Although his fourth application was successful, he did not
    have existing leave to remain or section 3C leave at the time  he  made
    the application - and more than 28 days  had  expired  since  his  last
    grant of leave - and so the period of lawful residence did  not  resume
    until the grant of leave on 4 September 2009.

18. The differing periods of unlawful leave calculated  by  the  respondent
    and the judge are immaterial, as on any view the continuity  of  lawful
    residence had been broken by well over 28 days.

19. Turning to Ground 2, the ultimate objective in seeking  an  adjournment
    was the hope, not the expectation, that the material disclosed pursuant
    to a Subject Access Request would show that the appellant had been  the
    victim of an historic injustice which could  be  prayed  in  aid  as  a
    compelling circumstance which justified  the  appellant  being  granted
    Article 8 relief outside the rules. The hoped for  injustice  was  that
    one of the rejections on invalidity  grounds  had  been  unlawful;  and
    that, absent the unlawful  rejection,  the  appellant  would  have  had
    continuous lawful leave in the period  between  31  March  2009  and  4
    September 2009.

20. I am in no doubt that the judge gave adequate reasons for refusing  the
    renewed adjournment request on the evidence that was  before  him.  The
    evidence of the appellant  did  not  engender  reasonable  grounds  for
    believing that he might have been a victim of  injustice.  The  reality
    was that the appellant's representatives did not have evidence that the
    appellant had been a victim of injustice, but it  was  hoped  that  the
    pending SAR would improve the appellant's position evidentially.

21. There is no challenge to the judge's finding that  the  appellant  gave
    contradictory evidence as to the nature of the asserted  invalidity  on
    each occasion, or to the judge's finding that  the  appellant  admitted
    that it was his fault that he failed to pay the required  fee  for  the
    first application or for the  second  application  (the  appellant  was
    unclear as to which of these two applications  was  rejected  for  non-
    payment of the required fee).

22. So it was a reasonable exercise of  discretion  by  the  judge,  having
    regard to the overriding objective, to refuse the  adjournment  on  the
    ground that it was speculative, "without clarity  or  certainty  as  to
    what was sought or required and [which] might colloquially be termed  a
    fishing expedition."

23. While the appeal to the Upper Tribunal was pending,  the  SAR  material
    arrived. I take into account the SAR material de bene esse in  case  it
    shows, with the benefit of hindsight, that the appellant  was  deprived
    of a fair hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.

24. The SAR material clarifies the ground of invalidity upon which each  of
    the three applications was rejected. The first application was rejected
    because, "the dep's photo is unacceptable as parents'  head  in  photo"
    (page 5). The second application was rejected because no fee  had  been
    paid (page 8). The third application was rejected because the appellant
    had submitted the incorrect version of  the  Tier  4  application  form
    (page 12).

25. Ms Cooke submits that the  appellant  ought  to  have  been  given  the
    opportunity to submit an alternative photograph. Under paragraph 34C(b)
    the decision maker may contact the applicant  and  give  him  a  single
    opportunity  to  correct  any  omission  or  error  which  renders  the
    application invalid. But she accepts that this rule was not in force in
    2009. So the appellant has not shown that the rejection  of  the  first
    application was unlawful.

26. Ms Cooke submits that the respondent has not produced evidence to  show
    "the alleged non-payment of the  correct  fee"  She  relies  on  Basnet
    (validity of application - respondent) [2012] UKUT 00113 (IAC),  but  I
    do not consider that this case establishes  as  a  general  proposition
    that the burden rests with the respondent  to  prove  invalidity.   The
    case establishes that  if  the  Secretary  of  State  asserts  that  an
    application was not accompanied by a fee, and so  was  not  valid,  the
    Secretary of State has the onus of proof where the non-payment  of  the
    fee is a disputed issue.  But, as  is  apparent  from  paragraphs  [22]
    onwards of the decision, there  were  special  reasons  why  the  Upper
    Tribunal considered it appropriate for the onus of proof to  be  placed
    on the Secretary of State in these circumstances.  But  this  does  not
    detract from the general rule, which is that the burden of proving that
    an application has been validly made normally falls on  the  applicant.
    At paragraph [27], the Presidential panel said as follows:

         We turn to the question of who bears the burden of proving that  an
         application has been validly made.  This would normally fall on the
         applicant,  who  would  discharge  it  by  producing  evidence   of
         acknowledgement  of  receipt  or  proof  of  postage.    Here   the
         application was received in time, but the question  of  whether  it
         was accompanied by accurate billing data can be  answered  only  by
         the respondent.  In  those  circumstances,  we  conclude  that  the
         evidential burden of demonstrating that  the  application  was  not
         accompanied by such authorisation (of the applicant or other person
         purporting to pay) as will enable the  respondent  to  receive  the
         entire fee in question' must fall on the respondent.  We reach this
         conclusion both by application of first principles - the party that
         asserts a fact should normally be the one who demonstrates it:  and
         because the respondent is responsible for the procedure to be  used
         in postal cases, and the features  noted  above  prevent  both  the
         issue of a prompt receipt and  an  opportunity  to  understand  why
         payment was not processed.  An applicant is  not  present  when  an
         attempt to process payment  is  made,  and  has  no  way  of  later
         obtaining the relevant information.

27. The appellant's evidence before the First-tier Tribunal was that it was
    his fault that the SSHD had not been paid. So the burden did not  shift
    to the respondent to prove non-payment of the fee. There is nothing  in
    the SAR material which undermines the admission that the  fee  was  not
    paid; and that it was the appellant's fault it was  not  paid.  So  the
    appellant has not shown that the rejection of  the  second  application
    was unlawful.

28. Paragraph 34I provides as follows:

         Where an application or claim is made no more than  21  days  after
         the date on which a form is specified under the  Immigration  Rules
         and on a form that was permitted  for  such  application  or  claim
         immediately  prior  to  the  date  of   such   specification,   the
         application or claim shall be deemed  to  have  been  made  on  the
         specified form.

29. Ms Cooke submits that 28 days elapsed between the second application on
    26 March 2009 and the third application on 23 April 2009. She  says  it
    is unclear from the archives on which date the form changed.   But  she
    submits that it is likely that the form change took place no more  than
    21  days  before  the  third  application,  and  therefore  the   third
    application should have been treated as valid.

30. As the burden rests with the appellant, it  is  necessary  for  him  to
    prove when the form change took place and hence to  show,  if  he  can,
    that his third application complied with the requirements of  paragraph
    34I. The appellant has not discharged this burden. So he has not  shown
    that the rejection of his third application was unlawful.

31. Ms Cooke recognises that the SAR material is not sufficient  by  itself
    to make good a case of historic injustice, and  so  she  concludes  her
    skeleton argument with the submission that case should be remitted back
    to the First-tier Tribunal, "with directions for all evidence  relating
    to the rejections to be served". But there is no reason to suppose that
    the Home Office has not already disclosed all the evidence which it has
    on this topic.

32. Ms Cooke points out that the judge was wrong to say that the  appellant
    could have appealed against the rejections.  But  the  appellant  could
    have brought proceedings for judicial review.

Notice of Decision

33. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  contain  an  error  of
    law, and the decision stands. This appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.

Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

