
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
      (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Numbers:
                                                               IA/44935/2014

                                                               IA/44936/2014
                                                               IA/44939/2014
                                                               Ia/44943/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard                   at                    Field                    House
Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 17 March  2016                                                        On
28 July 2016


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                           MOBOLUWADURO ADARANIJO
                                    [E E]
                                    [A O]
                                    [J E]
                       (Anonymity directions not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the appellant:     Mr A Bajwa, legal Representative
For the respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellants are citizens of Nigeria born on 12  September  1976,  [  ]
   2004, [ ] 2004 and [ ] 2002 respectively. They are mother, son and  niece
   of the first appellant and her daughter. They appealed to the  First-tier
   Tribunal against the decision of the respondent 21 October 2014 to refuse
   to grant them leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  under  paragraph
   276ADE and Article 8 on compassionate grounds. First Tier Tribunal  Judge
   Rothwell dismissed the appellants' appeals in a  determination  dated  27
   July 2015.


2. Permission to appeal was at first refused by  first-tier  Tribunal  Judge
   AR Cox on 19 November 2015  and  subsequently  granted  by  Deputy  Upper
   Tribunal Judge Archer on 13 January 2016 dating that it is arguable  that
   the Judge has not considered the best interests of the second, third  and
   fourth appellants especially as the third appellant, who is the niece  of
   the first appellant as she has been in this country for nearly 10 years.


    First-tier Tribunal's findings


3. The Judge made the following  findings  in  his  determination  which  in
   summary are the following.


I. In respect of the  third  appellant,  who  is  the  niece  of  the  first
   appellant, she has been in the United Kingdom for 10 years, as  she  came
   when she was aged nine months. It is accepted  that  she  has  only  ever
   lived in the United Kingdom. However, her parents are in Nigeria and  she
   does have some contact with them. The first appellant said she  was  able
   to contact them last year because the third  appellant  has  their  phone
   number on her mobile phone. It is considered settled law  that  her  best
   interests of a child are to be with their parents.  The  first  appellant
   has taken care of the third appellant since 2005, but she  does  not  and
   has not ever had leave to remain save a six months visit visa.


II. The first appellant has told the  Tribunal  that  she  is  supported  by
   friends, but none them attended the Tribunal and  missed  the  chance  to
   give evidence  in  support  the  appeal.  The  evidence  shows  that  the
   appellant are also supported by a variety of organisation in addition  to
   funds given by friends. There is a letter  from  Kids  Company  dated  10
   February 2015 that shows that all the appellants were living  in  a  dire
   situation as the accommodation provided was completely unsuitable  for  a
   family.  She  has  reported  that  there  were   bedbugs   and   ladybird
   infestations. There were male tenants  living  downstairs  who  regularly
   broke the rules.  There  were  not  receiving  food  or  toiletries.  The
   safeguarding manager for  Kids  Company  provided  a  food  parcel  which
   included food, toiletries and bedding.


III. It is accepted that the third appellant is about to change  schools  in
   September 2015 and that she has spent all her life in this  country  save
   for a few months, but given the situation in which she lives I find  that
   it must be in her best interest to return to parents, with whom  she  has
   some contact.


IV. It would not be unreasonable for her to leave  the  United  Kingdom  and
   return to Nigeria to be with her parents. Further, the  other  appellants
   have no leave to remain in the situation has always been precarious.  She
   can continue her relationship with the other appellants in Nigeria.


V. The third appellant's appeal has been considered outside the  Immigration
   Rules and in the case of SS Congo v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
   Department [2015) EWCA Civ 387, it was made  clear  that  in  respect  of
   children where their interests are  an  issue,  will  be  a  contributing
   factor which tends to reduce to some degree the width of  the  margin  of
   appreciation which the  State  authorities  would  otherwise  enjoy.  The
   European Convention on Human Rights has to be interpreted and applied  in
   light of the UN Convention on the rights of the child but the  fact  that
   the interests of a child are an issue does not  simply  provide  a  trump
   card so that a child applicant for positive action to  be  taken  by  the
   State in the field of article 8 (1) must always  have  their  application
   acceded to. In the case of the ZH Tanzania v Secretary of State  for  the
   Home Department [2011] UK SE 4 it was stated that the  interests  of  the
   child are a primary consideration, i.e. an important matter but  not  the
   primary consideration. It is  a  factor  relevant  to  the  fair  balance
   between the individual and the general  community  which  goes  some  way
   towards tempering the otherwise wide margin of appreciation available  to
   the State authorities in deciding what to do. The age of the  child,  the
   closeness of their relationship with the  other  family  members  in  the
   United Kingdom and whether the family could live together  elsewhere  are
   likely to be important factors which should be borne in mind.


VI. The case of AM Malawi [2015] UKUT 2016 has also been considered  whether
   the position was that where  one  child  was  a  qualifying  child  under
   section 117D (6) i.e. had been in the United Kingdom for seven years, the
   Tribunal stated that the test was essentially the same as under paragraph
   276 ADE (iv). For the reasons  given  above  the  Judge  found  that  the
   circumstances of the appellant's case it is not  unreasonable  to  expect
   the third appellant to return to Nigeria with the rest of her family.


VII. The first appellant does not fall within the Immigration Rules and  she
   has been in the United Kingdom unlawfully and therefore does not meet the
   requirements of the Immigration Rules.


VIII. Considering her case outside the Immigration  Rules  the  case  of  SS
   Congo has been considered which sets out the approach when  an  appellant
   does not fall within the Immigration Rules. The case  of  Gulshan,  Nagre
   and MM (Lebanon) have also been considered and it is considered that  the
   Immigration Rules are a complete code for  determination  of  family  and
   private life claims.


IX. The Judge found that there are no circumstances in this case  where  the
   appellant should succeed under Article 8. The first  appellant's  private
   life can continue in Nigeria as she goes to church and she  can  continue
   to do so in that country. Her private life has been developed  while  she
   has been in this country illegally  and  it  was  a  condition  of  entry
   clearance was that she intended to return to Nigeria. The economic  well-
   being of the country is important and her  rights  have  been  considered
   against the public interest. Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration
   and Asylum Act 2002 applies because the appellants' situation has  always
   been precarious.


X. The first appellant has developed  a  family  life  by  bringing  in  the
   second and fourth appellants to the United Kingdom as visitors  when  she
   had been in the United Kingdom illegally and had overstayed as a visitor.
   Balancing the public interest with  that  of  the  rights  of  the  first
   appellant who brought in other appellants to the United Kingdom  none  of
   whom have status or can have had  any  expectation  that  they  would  be
   allowed to remain. The problems of the second fourth appellant's problems
   in Nigeria were caused by the absence of the first appellant and this  is
   why she brought them here as visitors in the knowledge  that  they  would
   not be returning to Nigeria. The appellants  appeared  to  be  living  in
   difficult circumstances in the United Kingdom and this may be because she
   does not have status.


XI. The first appellant is clearly a resourceful woman and  she  managed  to
   survive with other appellants in the United  Kingdom.  She  was  able  to
   obtain employment and promotion as a chef and was able to earn sufficient
   funds to send money to Nigeria and then bring her children to the  United
   Kingdom.  She  is  able  to  obtain  accommodation  and  resources   from
   charitable organisations. Therefore, she can use the skills on return  to
   Nigeria where she also has family members. Therefore, it i would  not  be
   disproportionate for the first appellant to return to  Nigeria  with  her
   family.


XII. The second  and  fourth  appellants  are  the  children  of  the  first
   appellant. She left them in Nigeria with their father when she decided to
   visit the United Kingdom with her niece in 2005 and  did  not  return  to
   them in Nigeria. On the balance I accept that they have some difficulties
   with that the presence of the first appellant as she is their mother  and
   she left them in 2005. I do not accept they  may  have  had  difficulties
   living with their uncle, but as I found above  the  first  appellant  has
   chosen to exaggerate a position for this appeal, as she did  not  mention
   this until the appeal before me. But I am prepared to  accept  the  first
   appellant's brother was unkind to them as this is supported by the letter
   of Miss Adebisi. The second and  fourth  appellant  came  to  the  United
   Kingdom in 2012 and  therefore  they  do  not  fall  within  any  of  the
   Immigration Rules because of the short time they have been here.


XIII. Considering the appeal outside the Immigration Rules  it  is  accepted
   that her family and private life in the United  Kingdom.  However,  there
   will be no interference with that  family  life  as  the  appellant  will
   return to Nigeria together. They have developed  private  life  but  they
   have only been in the United Kingdom for three years and have been living
   in Nigeria until July 2012.  They  can  be  no  interference  with  their
   private life to return them to Nigeria because they  can  continue  their
   education and they will be with their mother, the first appellant.


XIV. Balancing the statute-based public interest consideration  against  the
   rights of the second and fourth appellants, much of the reasons  why  the
   second and fourth appellants have had difficulties in Nigeria are because
   the first appellant was in the United  Kingdom  without  them  for  seven
   years before they came here. They lived with their father who was  unkind
   to them, then without maternal grandmother who died and then  with  their
   maternal uncle, who was also unkind to them. They will be returning  with
   their mother the first appellant and their cousin the third appellant. So
   they will not be the protection  issues  that  occurred  when  the  first
   appellant was not there. The first appellant is a resourceful  woman  who
   has been able to survive with three children even though she has not been
   able to work since October 2014. She has family members are Nigeria.


XV. The Judge dismissed the appellants appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules
   and under Article 8.




    Grounds of appeal


4. The appellant in her grounds of  appeal  states  the  following  which  I
   summarise. The Judge materially erred in law in failing  to  have  proper
   regard to paragraph 276 (vi)  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  That  section
   provides that if the appellant is under the age of 18 and  has  lived  in
   the United Kingdom for at least seven years.....  And  it  would  not  be
   reasonable to expect the appellant to leave the United Kingdom. The first
   appellant's niece, the third appellant is plainly under the age of 18 and
   has lived continuously in the United Kingdom for at least seven years  in
   accordance with 276 (vi) of the  Immigration  Rules.  The  Judge  plainly
   misunderstood this  paragraph  and  wrongly  decided  that  it  would  be
   reasonable for the third appellant to leave the United Kingdom. It cannot
   reasonably be expected for  the  appellants  to  just  leave  the  United
   Kingdom with the third appellant who is currently set in a  standard  way
   of life and that is all she knows.


5. The Judge failed to take the best  interests  of  the  first  appellant's
   children  and   niece   as   a   primary   consideration   in   assessing
   proportionality under article 8. In the case of Azimi-moayed  and  others
   (decisions affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT197 (IAC) it is
   stated that the starting point is the best interest of the children to be
   with both their parents and if both parents are being  removed  from  the
   United Kingdom then the  starting  point  suggests  that  so  should  the
   dependent children who form part of  their  household  unless  there  are
   reasons to the contrary. The third  appellant  has  been  living  in  the
   United Kingdom for over 10 years. It should be accepted  that  a  lengthy
   residence in the country other than the  state  of  origin  can  lead  to
   development of social cultural and educational  ties  that  it  would  be
   inappropriate to disrupt, in the absence of  compelling  reasons  to  the
   contrary. It is submitted that  there  are  no  compelling  reasons  that
   justify the disruption that will be caused to the children.


6.  The  Judge  did  not  consider  s55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
   Immigration Act 2009 which states that the best interests of children are
   a primary concern in decision-making. In ZH Tanzania it was held that the
   best interests of the child must be a primary consideration and that  the
   children are not to be blamed for the errors of their parents.  It  would
   therefore be in the best interest of the children to remain in the United
   Kingdom. The children are in full-time  education  and  have  established
   their way of life here. It would not be in their best interest to  uproot
   them from everything as they have become accustomed to and expect them to
   start again in the country they are not familiar with.

         The hearing

7. I heard submissions from both parties at the hearing the  full  notes  of
   which are in my Record of Proceedings.

        Decision on error of law

8. The first-tier Tribunal Judge in a  careful  and  detailed  determination
   considered all  the  evidence  in  the  appeal  in  respect  of  all  the
   appellants individually. The Judge found that the first  and  second  and
   fourth appellants did not meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules
   and there were no exceptional circumstances as  to  why  they  should  be
   allowed to remain pursuant  to  Article  8  when  they  cannot  meet  the
   requirements of the Immigration Rules. This was a  finding  open  to  the
   Judge considering that the first appellant, their  mother  came  to  this
   country on a visitor's visas and left her children in  Nigeria  in  2005.
   She then brought them to this country,  in  2012,  even  though  she  was
   living here illegally. They  have  therefore  all  been  living  in  this
   country illegally. The Judge was completely and  absolutely  entitled  to
   find that there were no exceptional circumstances in  the  first,  second
   and fourth appellants' appeals  that  they  should  succeed  pursuant  to
   Article 8 when they cannot satisfy the requirements  of  the  Immigration
   Rules.


9. It has been argued that the third appellant, who  is  the  niece  of  the
   first appellant, has been in this country for 10 years. It  was  accepted
   by the Judge that the appellant's niece has been in this country all  her
   life, bar six months. The Judge did not find the first appellant credible
   and  said  that  she  has  exaggerated  her  and  the  third  appellant's
   circumstances in Nigeria. The Judge took  into  account  that  the  first
   appellant's evidence was that her brother, her nieces father, was  unkind
   to his daughter. She found that given that the first  appellant  will  be
   accompanying her and her children to Nigeria, she will be  able  to  look
   after the third appellant. The third appellant has been living  with  the
   first appellant in this country for 10 years and they are clearly bonded.
   Therefore, when they return to Nigeria, the Judge was  entitled  to  find
   that they will live together with the first appellant  and  her  children
   and she will look after her niece if there was any  suggestion  that  the
   father will be unkind to his daughter. The  Judge  also  found  that  the
   first time that the  appellant  mentioned  this  unkindness  was  at  the
   hearing but accepted that that might be the position because there was  a
   letter from a witness. She was entitled to find  that  having  the  first
   appellant with her would cause her no problems.


10. The Judge was entitled to find that all the  appellants  can  return  to
   Nigeria and continue with their family and private life in that  country.
   There is nothing perverse in this conclusion based on the  evidence  that
   all the appellants have no right to remain in this country. She took into
   account that paragraph 276 (vi) of the Immigration Rules provides that if
   the appellant is under the age of 18 and has lived in the United  Kingdom
   for at least seven years..... and "it would not be reasonable  to  expect
   the appellant to leave the United Kingdom." The  judge  was  entitled  to
   found that it would be reasonable to expect the appellant in this  appeal
   to leave the United Kingdom with the first  appellant  and  her  cousins.
   There is no material error of law in this conclusion.


11. The Judge took into account that the first appellant left  her  children
   in Nigeria for nearly 7 years and therefore must have been confident that
   someone is looking after them. The Judge found that the  appellants  have
   other family in Nigeria who can assist them in settling down.  The  Judge
   found that the first appellant  is  a  very  resourceful  woman  who  has
   managed to live in this country with three children and therefore on  her
   return she can prevail upon her resourcefulness and settle down with  all
   the appellants. The Judge was entitled to find that the  third  appellant
   would be under the protective umbrella of the first appellant.  In  those
   circumstances all the appellants are able to return to Nigeria. The third
   appellant is not a British citizen and continues  to  be  a  national  of
   Nigeria. She will be going home to our own country.


12. The Judge stated in her determination that the  best  interests  of  the
   third appellant must inform her decision. There is no perversity  in  her
   finding that the all the appellants can accompany the first appellant  to
   Nigeria s all have no right to remain in this country.


13.  The  Judge  took  into  account  all  the  relevant  factors   in   his
   proportionality exercise and gave cogent reasons for  her  decision.  The
   Judge took into account the  Article  8  rights  of  all  family  members
   individually. The appellants appeal is no more than a  quarrel  with  the
   Judge's findings which she was entitled to make on the evidence.


14. The upshot is that the determination of the Judge is not affected  by  a
   material error and I find that the Judge did conduct a proper  assessment
   of all the appellants' rights individually pursuant  to  the  Immigration
   Rules and Article 8. The Judge also took into account the best  interests
   of the all the child appellants and came to a sustainable conclusion.


15. I find that there is no material error of law in  the  determination  of
   First-tier Tribunal and I uphold her decision.


Conclusions

16. I therefore find that the appellants appeal must fail  pursuant  to  the
   Immigration Rules and Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
   Rights.

DECISION

The appellant's appeal is dismissed

I make no anonymity orders
The appeal has been dismissed in the can be no fee order


Signed by

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Mrs S Chana                                               Dated 19th day  of
    April 2016

