
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Ia/44780/2013
                                                               IA/44781/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 April 2014                               |On 24th April 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                           DESIGNATED JUDGE MURRAY

                                   Between

                     MR DARSHAN SINGH (FIRST appellant)
                        lABH kAUR (sECOND appellant)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Chapman, Counsel for Bindmans LLP London
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnston, Home Office Presenting Officer




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of India and are husband  and  wife.   They
    were born on 18 February 1946 and 10  March  1954  respectively.   They
    appealed against the decision of the respondent dated 16  October  2013
    refusing them leave to remain in the United Kingdom  as  the  dependant
    relatives of their son, Harpreet Singh,  who  is  present  and  settled
    here.  The appeals were heard  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Devittie on 27 January  2014,  who  dismissed  the  appeals  under  the
    Immigration Rules and allowed  them  on  human  rights  grounds,  in  a
    determination promulgated on 14 February 2014.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged  by  the  respondent
    and  permission  was  granted  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Sommerville on 12 March 2014.  The grounds of  application  state  that
    the judge failed to give adequate reasons as to why family  life  could
    not be maintained by regular visits from India.  The grounds go  on  to
    state that the judge failed to follow the guidance  in  cases  such  as
    Gulshan [2013] UKUT640 (IAC) and  Nagre  [2013]  EWHC  720  (Admin)  in
    assessing the Article 8 case.

 3. The background  to  this  case  is  that  the  appellant's  oldest  son
    committed suicide in India in 2009.  The appellants came to the  United
    Kingdom on 7 March 2012, with entry clearance as visitors, valid  until
    17 August 2012.  They made their applications for leave  to  remain  as
    dependant  relatives  on  13  June  2012  and  on  31  July  2012  that
    application was returned for want of compliance with formalities to  do
    with the  completion  of  the  application  form.   On  13  August  the
    appellants made a further application outside the Immigration Rules for
    leave to  remain.   They  also  requested  that  their  application  be
    considered under paragraph 317 of the Immigration Rules.



THE HEARING

 4. The Presenting Officer submitted that the judge failed to consider  the
    medical care of  the  appellant  in  India.   She  submitted  that  the
    appellants had both sought treatment  there  for  depression  and  this
    treatment  is  ongoing.   She  submitted  that  the  support   of   the
    appellants' family members in the United Kingdom can continue as it  is
    at present and that the Immigration Judge at the first-tier hearing had
    been told that the appellants had been caring for  their  granddaughter
    on their own, in India, for some time and this makes it clear that they
    do not need continuing support from their son in  the  United  Kingdom.
    She submitted that their son in the United Kingdom must have considered
    their health good enough for them to look after their young daughter in
    India and the judge did not deal with this issue.

 5. The Presenting Officer directed me to paragraphs 23(iii) and 26 of  the
    determination where the judge deals with proportionality and refers  to
    the effect of their eldest son committing suicide  on  the  appellants.
    She submitted that the judge has not properly considered the appellants
    and their family members in  the  United  Kingdom  living  apart.   She
    submitted that the appellants' grandchildren's  parents  can  care  for
    them. The appellants are not their primary carers.

 6. She submitted that if the appellants go back to India this will not  be
    a permanent separation as they can visit at any time.  I  was  referred
    to the case of Zoumbas v SSHD (2013) UKSC 74.  She submitted that there
    is nothing in the evidence to indicate that the grandchildren's parents
    are unable to care for their  children.  The  appellants'  son  in  the
    United Kingdom would like the appellants to live with  his  family  but
    this is not an absolute requirement.  The appellants  state  that  they
    require emotional support but this contradicts the statement that  they
    are primary carers of their grandchildren.

 7. I was referred to the said case of Gulshan and the  Presenting  Officer
    submitted that the appellants' applications cannot meet  the  terms  of
    the Immigration Rules and there are no compelling  circumstances  which
    would enable them to remain in the United Kingdom outside the Rules.  I
    was asked to overturn the decision.

 8. I put to the Presenting Officer that the judge  has  given  a  detailed
    explanation of why he found there were compelling  circumstances.   She
    submitted that the judge put too much weight  on  the  suicide  of  the
    appellants' eldest son and the appellants and their  grandchildren  can
    still have a close relationship through visits.

 9. The appellant's representative submitted that she  is  relying  on  her
    Rule 24  response.   She  submitted  that  the  determination  is  well
    reasoned and there is no error of law therein.  She submitted that  the
    main ground of application is that the judge failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons as to why family life could not be maintained by regular visits
    and this is not accepted.

10. I was referred to Mr Horrocks' Social Work Report.  It deals  with  the
    family life ties between  the  appellants  as  grandparents  and  their
    grandchildren and the history of this family since  the  death  of  the
    appellants'  eldest  son,  Major  Singh.   The  report  refers  to  the
    appellants being primary carers for the grandchildren. They  have  been
    primary carers since the grandchildren were born.   They  came  to  the
    United Kingdom for the birth of their oldest grandchild,  Jasleen,  and
    have always been a focus in her life.  She stayed on her own  with  her
    grandparents in India for 9 months but their daughter-in-law wanted her
    daughter with her, so they returned with her  to  the  United  Kingdom.
    She submitted that their daughter-in-law is British born  and  all  her
    family members are in the United  Kingdom.   The  appellants'  original
    applications were made under the previous  Immigration  Rules  but  the
    payment box was not ticked on  the  form  and  by  the  time  this  was
    rectified the Immigration Rules of 9 July 2012 applied.  She  submitted
    that if the appellants' original applications had gone ahead under Rule
    317, they would have been successful and as a result of this,  this  is
    an Article 8 case and is well founded.  She submitted  that  the  judge
    dealt properly with the appeal and gave  proper  reasons  for  all  his
    findings finding that family  life  can  no  longer  be  maintained  by
    visits.  Each time the appellants return to India their  mental  health
    is affected badly. The social work report states that separation  would
    constitute significant harm not only  to  the  appellants  but  to  the
    grandchildren  and  that  this  reaches  the  "family   threshold"   of
    significant harm. The report states that the birth of  the  appellants'
    granddaughter gave them hope in their lives and based on her  religion,
    the second appellant believes that Dalsheen, the  youngest  grandchild,
    is a reincarnation of Major, the boy who committed suicide.

11. I was then referred to the medical report of Dr  Sinha.   He  has  been
    treating the appellants privately since December  2009  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  At paragraph 3 he refers to the appellants' mental  illnesses
    and their suicidal ideations.  They tried to self  harm  by  taking  an
    overdose and the doctor states that if they were  to  return  to  India
    their mental health would  deteriorate  and  their  health  appears  to
    improve with family support. He states that if they are able to  settle
    in the  United  Kingdom  he  believes  there  would  be  a  substantial
    improvement in their health.  He refers to the 2 grandchildren having a
    special bond with the appellants and refers to them  as  their  "saving
    grace".  He also refers to the situation if they return to India almost
    definitely causing the appellants' mental health to deteriorate.

12. The representative submitted that the judge was correct to find that it
    would not be proportionate for the appellants  to  have  to  return  to
    India and visit. The evidential background has been properly considered
    by the judge and his findings are  based  on  this.  Ground  1  of  the
    application fails to realise the strong family  life  of  the  extended
    family in this case. The judge anchored his findings  on  the  relevant
    case law referring to Best v United Kingdom [1984] 40DR196 and Kugathas
    [2003] EWCA Civ 31. She submitted that the individual circumstances  of
    each case have to be considered. She submitted  that  the  judge  deals
    with the best interests of the grandchildren based on the  social  work
    report, the  other  evidence  and  the  background  circumstances  that
    underlie  the  social  work  report,  including  the  suicide  of   the
    appellants' eldest son. Its  effect  on  their  mental  health  is  not
    contested.  The judge finds that separation is  not  in  anyone's  best
    interests and that is enough to make the decision sustainable.

13. The judge at paragraph 23 deals with public interest, referring to  the
    economic  well-being  of  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  necessity  of
    immigration control.  When dealing  with  proportionality  he  did  not
    consider the original application which was  rejected  because  of  the
    lack of a tick in the form. The representative submitted that when this
    is taken into account the appellants'  claim  is  even  stronger.   The
    judge recognises the social need of the appellants  to  be  with  their
    grandchildren and finds that living in India and  visiting  is  not  an
    option.

14. She submitted that the determination deals with all the  points  raised
    in the grounds of application.  The appellants  are  vulnerable  adults
    who need support in a family unit and the  most  satisfactory  way  for
    this to happen is for their applications to be allowed.

15. I was referred to the Rule 24 response and the representative submitted
    that  the  judge  has  not  failed  to  consider  unjustifiably   harsh
    consequences.  That phrase is rolled up  with  the  phrase  exceptional
    circumstances. At paragraph 9(b) the judge refers to the said  case  of
    Nagre.  At paragraph 10 he refers to exceptional features and the  fact
    that suicide has not been ruled out.  She submitted that the respondent
    has not properly considered the  consequences  if  the  appellants  are
    removed.  At paragraph 11 the judge refers to compelling  circumstances
    and Article 8 and the test in Nagre and Gulshan.  At  paragraph  26  he
    refers  to   compelling   reasons   and   exceptional   features.   The
    representative  submitted  that  public  interest  fails  when  weighed
    against the circumstances of this case.  I  was  asked  to  uphold  the
    determination.

16. The Presenting Officer submitted that the terms of paragraph 317 of the
    previous Rules would not necessarily have been met  as  the  appellants
    have not shown that they are mainly  dependant  on  their  son  in  the
    United Kingdom.  They have a daughter, sister-in-law and  grandchildren
    in India and there is nothing to say that they will not  help  them  if
    they return.

17. The Presenting Officer submitted that there is no evidence that medical
    treatment for the appellants in India cannot be supplied.  On return to
    India there is no evidence to indicate that their life expectancy would
    be shortened. She submitted that the judge has  not  properly  assessed
    this part of the evidence.

18. With regard to the appellants  being  primary  carers,  the  Presenting
    Officer submitted that no significant  harm  would  be  caused  to  the
    children if the appellants are returned to India.   The  children  will
    still be with their parents.  I was asked to consider the said case  of
    Zoumbas.  She submitted that the  evidence  makes  it  clear  that  the
    oldest child has been left with a childminder and has been  in  nursery
    and there is nothing to stop her parents from continuing with this. She
    asked me to find that there is a material error of law in  the  judge's
    determination.

19. I reserved my decision.



DETERMINATION

20. The determination in this case is detailed and thorough. The grounds of
    application state that Article 8 is  not  a  means  through  which  the
    appellants can choose where to conduct their family life and  that  the
    appellants have been and can continue to be  regular  visitors  to  the
    United Kingdom. They state that there is ongoing medical assistance  in
    India for the appellants and that the judge has given too  much  weight
    to the suicide of Major Singh in India. They state that the  judge  was
    wrong to find that this amounts to exceptional circumstances,  as  this
    phrase applies only when removal would result  in  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences notwithstanding the public interest in removal and so  his
    determination is flawed. The grounds point out that the applications do
    not meet the terms of the new Immigration Rules, might  well  not  have
    met the terms of the previous Rules and the result of removal would not
    result in unjustifiably harsh consequences.

21. The determination makes it clear that the judge is  aware  of  all  the
    issues in this case and has considered all of the evidence before  him,
    including Dr Sinha's medical report  and  Peter  Horrocks'  independent
    social work report.  He has referred to the said cases of  Gulshan  and
    Nagre relating to Article 8.  He finds that these  claims  cannot  meet
    the terms of the Rules and  finds  there  is  good  arguable  case  for
    consideration of the claims under Article 8 of  ECHR.   He  finds  that
    there is family life among the appellants and their  son,  daughter-in-
    law and grandchildren and states that the particular  circumstances  of
    each case must be taken into account.  The social  work  report  states
    that the relationships between the appellants and  their  grandchildren
    are much more than normal emotional ties. The  judge  states  that  the
    approach to Article 8 in the case of an  entry  decision  is  different
    from the approach in removal cases.

22. At paragraph 20 the judge notes that the appellants have been living in
    the same household as their son and his family  for  2  years.   During
    that period their bonds have been strengthened and he goes through  the
    5 step process in Razgar (2004) UKHL27.  At paragraph 21 he deals  with
    proportionality and the best interests of the  grandchildren  referring
    to the social work report and stating that there is  little  difference
    between the roles played by the grandparents in the  lives  of  Jasleen
    and Deshan and the roles of their parents. He finds that a permanent or
    semi permanent separation would cause the children  significant  trauma
    and distress.  The social  work  report  refers  to  significant  harm,
    reaching the threshold required for the Family Court to make  an  order
    in respect of a child. At paragraph 22, based on the social work report
    and the factual evidence, he  concludes  that  the  separation  of  the
    grandchildren  from  their  grandparents  would  not  be  in  the  best
    interests of the appellants or their grandchildren.

23. At paragraph 23 the judge deals with public interest and adequate means
    to provide for the maintenance and accommodation of the appellants.  He
    gives considerable weight to  the  appellants'  mental  health  as  the
    result of the suicide of their eldest son.  The judge  states  that  he
    cannot ignore the evidence on the subjective states of mind of both the
    appellants which points to potentially grave consequences if  they  are
    separated from their family in the United Kingdom.

24. The judge goes on to state that the scales are finely balanced and  the
    appellants must demonstrate  compelling  reasons  why  they  should  be
    granted leave to remain.  He has clearly considered the possibility  of
    the appellants' son and his family going to  live  in  India  and  when
    proportionality is assessed he finds that  the  appellants  might  well
    contemplate suicide if forced to live apart  from  their  son  and  his
    family and finds that visiting would not be sufficient.  He finds there
    are exceptional features which tilt  the  balance  in  the  appellants'
    favour and that the public interest considerations are not sufficiently
    compelling to outweigh the gravity of the consequences of removal.  The
    appellant's eldest son's suicide took place in India.  This  must  have
    played a part in the judge's decision. He has not taken  into  account,
    when  assessing  proportionality  that  had  the  appellants'  original
    applications not been rejected they might well have succeeded under the
    previous Rules but had he considered this he might have  attached  more
    weight to their claims.

25. All aspects of these claims have been considered by the  judge  and  he
    has given adequate reasons for all of his findings. He  has  considered
    the totality of the evidence and finds that because  of  exceptionality
    the appeals should be allowed under Article 8 of  ECHR.  He  has  taken
    into account the relevant case law, the Immigration Rules and ECHR.

26. He finds that removal would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences,
    notwithstanding the public interest.  He states that the new Rules will
    not achieve an  Article  8  compliant  result  and  he  has  identified
    compelling  circumstances.  He  finds  the  risk  of  suicide  by   the
    appellants, due to their mental condition, an exceptional  feature.  He
    has identified a compelling  reason  for  allowing  this  appeal  under
    Article 8 of ECHR. His decision is sustainable.

                                  DECISION

27. There is no error of law in the judge's determination.

28. The judge's decision must stand.  The  appeals  are  allowed  on  human
    rights grounds.

29. No anonymity order is made.




Signed                                  Date



Designated Judge Murray
Judge of the Upper Tribunal



