
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44749/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 March 2014                              |On 3 April 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE PARKER
               SITTING AS A DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                          Md Imtius Kabir chowdhury
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Chowdhury, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the determination of the First-tier Tribunal,
    Judge Carroll, promulgated on  14  January  2014.   The  appellant,  Mr
    Chowdhury, born on 5  July  1982  is  a  national  of  Bangladesh.   He
    appealed  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the  respondent's
    decision of 10 October 2013 which refused an application for  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant on the basis of  paragraph
    322(1A) of HC 395.

 2. It is submitted on behalf of the  appellant,  Mr  Chowdhury,  that  the
    Tribunal  made  an  error  or  errors  of  law  in  the  determination.
    Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Chambers  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  He referred to the grounds and  said,  among  other  things,
    that Article 8 and common law  fairness  were  raised  in  the  written
    grounds before the judge but were not dealt with in the  determination.
    That constituted an arguable error of law.  He noted also that  at  the
    date of the hearing the statutory provision that the respondent  relied
    on was in force, rendering the removal decision lawful.  Therefore, the
    respondent's grounds on the cross appeal were also arguable.

 3. Turning to the appellant's submission that there was an error or errors
    of law, it is first submitted that  the  judge  was  wrong  in  law  in
    refusing the application to adjourn the hearing before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The First-tier Tribunal dealt at length with that matter  in
    paragraphs 2 to 7 of the  determination,  reciting  in  particular  the
    history of the proceedings and previous attempts to have the hearing of
    the appeal adjourned.

 4. In paragraph 7 the First-tier Tribunal said that it had had  regard  to
    all the evidence bearing on the adjournment.  It  said,  however,  that
    there was no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal to show  that  the
    appellant's caseworker was ill with  a  chest  infection  as  had  been
    claimed.  Also the appellant had  been  refused  an  adjournment  twice
    before.  The First-tier Tribunal went on to say that he may  have  been
    certified as unfit to work but that did not of itself make him unfit to
    attend the hearing of the appeal.  It also noted that he may have  been
    given a request by his GP for referral to a hospital on 6 January 2014.
     Mr Chowdhury however said that he was suffering from severe back  pain
    and chest pain.  The GP's request however refers to abdominal pain  and
    gallstones and there was no credible  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to show that the appellant had, as claimed, actually  attended
    hospital for any X-ray or ultrasound on 6 January.  It was therefore on
    that basis that the application was refused.

 5. In our judgment, there is no error of law.  It is quite plain that  the
    Tribunal had regard to all relevant matters bearing  on  the  issue  of
    adjournment and was not satisfied, particularly on the medical evidence
    that had been provided, that  the  interests  of  justice  required  an
    adjournment.  The Tribunal said, in  effect,  that  it  had  sufficient
    material before it on the papers and that it would proceed to determine
    the appeal on the documents that it had before it.  We see no intrinsic
    unfairness in that procedure.  The Tribunal was in a  position,  as  is
    apparent from the determination, to proceed to deal  with  the  central
    issue without any further assistance beyond the documentation.

 6. As to the second alleged error of law, this  arises  in  the  following
    way.  As already noted, the  application  made  by  the  appellant  was
    refused on the basis of paragraph 322(1A) of HC 395.  The  refusal  was
    predicated upon the position that a document had been provided that was
    a false document.  This was a statement  of  account  from  the  Mutual
    Trust Bank Limited in Dhaka Bangladesh.  On that  issue,  the  evidence
    before the Tribunal included a Document Verification Report in  respect
    of the very document that had been submitted by the appellant.  In that
    report the bank representative had  confirmed  that  the  bank  records
    indicated that the account did exist but the  bank  statement  was  not
    issued by the bank.  The information held by  the  bank  differed  from
    what was detailed in the information or documents that were provided in
    support of the application form.  The decision maker then  went  on  to
    say that he was satisfied that the bank  statement  for  the  indicated
    account was not genuine.

 7. That issue had been brought to the attention of  the  appellant  on  13
    October 2013.  The appeal was  not  heard  until  6  January  2014  and
    therefore the appellant had had a period of several months in which  to
    challenge the contention of the respondent that the document was  false
    and that, for some reason or other, the verification report itself  was
    either unreliable or was not complete because it could  be  shown  from
    other material that the account did exist in the form  that  was  being
    put forward.

 8. In connection with the appeal, the appellant did rely upon two  further
    bank statements.  The First-tier Tribunal dealt with that at  paragraph
    10 of the determination.  The First-tier  Tribunal  recorded  that  the
    pages of those accounts were in  different  typeface  and  a  different
    format from  the  document  which  was  the  subject  of  the  Document
    Verification Report giving rise to the decision under appeal.

 9. Just pausing there, the presentation of such further documents would be
    of great concern to any court or Tribunal  because  not  only  was  the
    verification report not being directly challenged but now  two  further
    bank statements were being presented instead.  There  appears  to  have
    been no explanation as to how the two further statements originated and
    as to why they were in a different form as explained by  the  Tribunal.
    The Tribunal then went on to say that the first  statement  of  account
    included three deposit entries on 2 May 2013 and the second item  shown
    in the balance was a figure of 541,000  and  the  second  statement  of
    account relied upon by the appellant was for the period from 2 May to 3
    June 2013.  The Tribunal, however, noted that the  second  entry  shown
    under the balance column for 2 May differed from the figure set out  in
    the preceding sentence of the determination  and  showed  a  figure  of
    540,100 and the Tribunal also noted that there was no explanation as to
    why a statement of account for the same account number should show  two
    different balances on the same day of 2 May 2013.  It  noted  that  the
    figure of 541,000 was shown on the statement of account which  was  the
    subject of the Document Verification Report.

10. Again, pausing at that  point,  it  would  be  fair  to  summarise  the
    position as follows.  The appellant had not taken  the  opportunity  to
    obtain documentation from the bank that explained that there  had  been
    some mistake or incomplete  understanding  of  the  position  when  the
    verification report was made.  Furthermore, there were no  steps  taken
    to obtain from the Mutual Trust Bank Limited documents  that  could  be
    shown to be intrinsically valid, something along the lines of a  letter
    from the bank in question  that  was  beyond  challenge  as  authentic,
    showing that indeed the accounts existed in the form claimed.

11. Far from producing credible material of  that  kind,  and,  out  of  an
    abundance of caution, having documents of that kind transmitted through
    an impeccable source such as the High  Commission,  the  appellant  had
    done no more than produce two further  accounts  that  were  internally
    inconsistent and difficult to reconcile, both in form and content, with
    the earlier document that had been produced and  rejected  on  a  sound
    basis.  However, before us today, Mr Hussain submitted,  that  even  if
    the Tribunal on the basis of this material came to  a  conclusion  that
    was inescapable, namely that the documentation had not been shown to be
    authentic, nonetheless the Tribunal had committed an error  of  law  by
    not referring expressly to the balance of proof.   It  is  indisputable
    that the respondent, having raised the authenticity of the document had
    to show on balance of probabilities that the document was indeed false.
     It has now been held on high authority that, even if an allegation  of
    falsity raises issues of possible fraud on the part  of  a  party,  the
    burden in a civil case is simply the balance of probability  and  there
    is no explicit sliding scale that should be applied in response to  the
    specific allegation that is under examination.

12. It is plain in our judgment that the Tribunal approach  this  issue  in
    the correct manner.  It looked  at  the  allegation,  namely  that  the
    document was false, and it had regard to the evidence that was produced
    by the respondent to support its claim.  That evidence on the  face  of
    it was powerful.  It was a statement from the bank  itself,  admittedly
    obtained through another source, being  technically  hearsay,  but  not
    seriously questionable, that the document relied on was  not  one  that
    had been issued by the bank.  That evidence, as  we  have  stated,  was
    powerful to support the position that the respondent  had  taken.   The
    Tribunal then considered the evidence  that  was  put  forward  by  the
    appellant to respond to that.  As we have shown, that evidence  on  its
    face simply made the matter worse from the appellant's  point  of  view
    and did no more than reinforce the evidence that the respondent  itself
    had produced to show that the document was false.

13. In a case of this kind, there was simply no  need  for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to rehearse the burden of  proof  because  on  any  view  that
    burden had been amply discharged on the material that  was  before  the
    Tribunal and the incantation of the burden of proof  would  have  taken
    the matter further.

14. That disposes of the appellant's appeal.  We find  that  there  was  no
    error of law by the Tribunal, firstly in refusing the  adjournment  for
    the reasons that it gave, and secondly for reaching the conclusion that
    the substantive decision was on the  material  before  it  correct  and
    unchallengeable.

15. Before leaving the appellant's appeal, we should record that the appeal
    under the grounds of Article 8 has not been pursued before  us  and  we
    simply note that in our judgment that was an understandable and  proper
    course to take.

16. Turning to the appeal of the Secretary of State, it appears to us  that
    there was a plain error of law.  The Tribunal referred  to  Section  47
    and held that the removal direction could not be given at the same time
    as the substantive decision.  The legislation has now been amended,  as
    recorded by the judge granting permission, and  there  is  no  question
    about the lawfulness of the removal directions.  For those reasons,  we
    uphold the appeal of the respondent.





Signed                                  Date


Mr Justice Parker sitting as a Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
