

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/44889/2013




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Promulgated |
|On 29 September 2014                   |On 30 September 2014      |
|                                       |                          |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                            MISS DENISE MACDONALD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Ms Anifowoghe (Counsel)
For the Respondent:     Mr Kandola (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       1. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica.  She has  appealed  against
          the respondent's decision dated  7  October  2013  to  refuse  her
          application for leave to remain.











Procedural history



       2. This is a matter that has previously  been  considered  by  First-
          tier Tribunal Judge Warren Grant in  a  determination  promulgated
          on 8 July 2014, in which the  appellant's  appeal  was  dismissed.
          The grounds of appeal are difficult to follow  but  they  seem  to
          submit that the Judge should  have  found  that  the  respondent's
          decision was not in accordance with the law because it  failed  to
          consider the appellant's EEA rights as a separated  spouse.   This
          is how Judge PJG White understood  the  grounds  when  he  granted
          permission on 5 August 2014.

       3. The matter now comes before me  to  decide  whether  or  not  the
          determination contains an error of law.

Hearing and findings

       4. The  hearing  began  at  2.30pm.   The  appellant  seemed  to  be
          unrepresented.  I heard brief submissions  from  Mr  Kandola  and
          gave the appellant an opportunity to outline her  position.   She
          indicated that she had been in contact with her husband about two
          months ago but did not know if he was working.  After I indicated
          that I would be reserving my determination, Ms Arifowoghe arrived
          within the building.  She apologised for being late and indicated
          that she had to return home to change her clothes  because  of  a
          medical emergency.  In these circumstances  I  heard  submissions
          from  Ms  Arifowoghe  and  invited  Mr  Kandola  to  re-make  his
          submissions, to which Ms Arifowoghe responded.

       5. Ms Arifowoghe  accepted  that  in  order  to  meet  the  relevant
          requirements the appellant had to establish  that  her  separated
          spouse was exercising Treaty rights, and that she could not do so
          before Judge Grant.  She however submitted that the  SSHD  should
          have exercised her power to make  relevant  enquiries  about  the
          husband.

       6. Whilst I accept that the respondent should have made  a  decision
          regarding the appellant's EEA rights, I do not  accept  that  the
          Judge erred in law in not remitting the outstanding  decision  to
          the respondent.  I agree with Mr Kandola that this is a  case  in
          which the Judge was entitled to make a decision  for  himself  on
          the basis of the evidence available to him.   In  any  event,  it
          would have been illogical to remit the decision  when  there  was
          simply no evidence that the appellant's  husband  was  exercising
          Treaty rights  as  the  Judge  clearly  explained  [14-15].   The
          appellant's  application  under   the   EEA   Immigration   (EEA)
          Regulations 2006 was bound to fail absent such evidence.  In such
          circumstances remittal was not an appropriate course.  This is  a
          case in which the burden lay upon the appellant - she provided no
          evidence before the Judge that her husband was exercising  Treaty
          rights.  She still had no evidence at the  date  of  the  hearing
          before me.  Whilst the respondent might have the  power  to  seek
          such evidence the burden remains on the  appellant.   It  appears
          that she has not made reasonable efforts to obtain this evidence.
       7. Even if  the  Judge  was  wrong  to  find  that  the  respondent's
          decision was in accordance with the law, I do not regard  this  to
          be a material  error  of  law  and  I  would  not  set  aside  the
          decision.   This  is  because  the  application  under   the   EEA
          Regulations is bound to fail.  In addition, the argument that  the
          respondent should have exercised her power to seek  such  evidence
          was not put before the Judge and it is difficult  to  see  how  he
          can be said to have erred in law in these circumstances.   In  any
          event this  argument  is  also  bound  to  fail  as  it  has  been
          reasonably argued on behalf of the respondent that they  will  not
          be exercising their  powers  in  cases  such  as  this  where  the
          appellant has not exhausted all reasonable enquiries herself.

Decision

       8. I find there is no error of law in the decision of the  First-tier
          Tribunal and I do not set it aside.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
29 September 2014

