
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
              (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/44794/2014
                                                               IA/44810/2014
                                                               IA/44811/2014
                                                               IA/44812/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 September 2015                  |On 7 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                                     MZK
                                     NFK
                                     MAK
                                     LK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Pipe, instructed by Bushra Ali Solicitors
For the Respondents:   Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision promulgated on 13 February  2015
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Burns  which  refused  the  appeals  under
    paragraph 276ADE and on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

 2. The appellants are a family from India. MZK  and  NFK  are  father  and
    mother to MAK and LK. MAK was born on 6 September 2007 and LK was  born
    on 26 September 2012. Both were born in  the  UK.  As  of  the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal, therefore, MAK had been in the  UK  for
    over 7 years and fell to be considered under paragraph  276ADE(iv).  As
    identified by Judge Burns at [6] this required an assessment of whether
    it would be "reasonable to expect" MAK (and therefore the rest  of  the
    family) to leave the UK.

 3. The family argued that it would be unreasonable to expect MAK  to  live
    in India where the marriage of the parents  was  not  approved  of  and
    where MAK had medical problems. The family would be doubly  stigmatised
    because of the disapproval of the parents' marriage and the  children's
    difficulties.

 4. The family also  argued  that  a  second  stage  Article  8  assessment
    succeeded for the same reasons, the best  interests  of  both  children
    clearly being to remain in the UK  and  because  LK  also  had  complex
    medical needs.

 5. Judge Burns found that the best  interests  of  the  children  were  in
    remaining with their parents, that it was reasonable to expect  MAK  to
    return to India and that the decision did not amount a disproportionate
    interference with the family's Article 8 rights.

 6. As conceded for the appellants, Judge Burns decision is very  detailed.
    To my mind it was  also  entirely  sound  and  the  grounds  of  appeal
    somewhat in line with those identified in VHR  (unmeritorious  grounds)
    Jamaica [2014] UKUT 00367 (IAC) which stated in the head note:

         "Appeals should not be mounted on the basis of a litany of forensic
         criticisms of particular  findings  of  the  First  Tier  Tribunal,
         whilst ignoring the basic legal test which  the  appellant  has  to
         meet"

    and at [24]:

         "This is not how appeals should be mounted. As  McCombe  LJ  in  VW
         (Sri Lanka) [2013] EWCA Civ 522 said:  "Regrettably,  there  is  an
         increasing  tendency  in  immigration  cases,  when  a   First-tier
         Tribunal Judge has given a judgment explaining why he has reached a
         particular decision, of seeking to burrow out  industriously  areas
         of evidence that have been less fully dealt with  than  others  and
         then to use this as a basis for  saying  the  judge's  decision  is
         legally flawed because it did not deal  with  a  particular  matter
         more fully.  In my judgement, with respect, that  is  no  basis  on
         which to sustain a proper challenge to a judge's finding of fact".

 7. The first ground of appeal states that the  judge  failed  to  make  an
    assessment of the children's best interests and that this "should  have
    been  considered  first  and  informed  the   Judge's   assessment   of
    reasonableness under the rules."

 8. Judge Burns indicates at [15] in the very  first  paragraph  under  the
    heading  "Findings  of  Fact"  that  "I  am  mindful  that  my  primary
    consideration is the welfare of the children and will deal with the two
    minor appellant's welfare first." What follows at [16] to  [47]  is  an
    assessment of the children's best interests including consideration  of
    all the material issues raised. It is simply wrong to assert  that  the
    best  interests  were  not  assessed  first  and  did  not  inform  the
    assessment of reasonableness of return of MAK.

 9. The second ground argues that Judge Burns made a material error  as  to
    the country evidence on corporal  punishment  in  Indian  schools.  The
    grounds state that the  judge  "made  sweeping  assumptions  about  the
    education system in India, which do not  engage  with  the  country  or
    expert evidence." On analysis, those "sweeping assumptions" are limited
    to comments made at [25] about corporal punishment  in  Indian  schools
    and [55] about India having a functioning education system.

10. The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  contained  in  the  expert
    report of Dr Holden at pages 43 to 69 of the appellant's bundle and  in
    media articles on corporal punishment was not such as to  oblige  Judge
    Burns to find that it showed it would be unreasonable for MAK to go  to
    school there. On the contrary, at page 60 of the appellants' bundle  Dr
    Holden does not does not make a clear statement about a high  level  of
    corporal punishment in  Indian  schools.  She  states  "maybe  it  just
    depends on the school." She does not state that corporal punishment was
    "pervasive"  as suggested in the grounds.

11. Given that evidence it was open to Judge Burns to find that  the  fears
    of MAK of being subject to  corporal  punishment  on  return  were  not
    objectively well-founded. Much was made at the hearing  of  failure  to
    refer to the media articles provided on corporal punishment  in  Indian
    schools but even a decision as detailed as that of Judge  Burns  cannot
    address every piece of  evidence  and  those  articles  are  not,  when
    considered with the appellant's expert report on the  Indian  education
    system, capable of showing that Judge Burns made a  material  error  of
    law regarding the evidence of corporal punishment  and  MAK's  concerns
    about it.

12. The objection in the grounds to the comment at [55] that  India  has  a
    functioning education system has no merit whatsoever. It  was  not  the
    view of the appellant's experts or  the  other  country  evidence  (see
    [10], for example) that India does not  have  a  functioning  education
    system.

13. The third ground argues that the First-tier Tribunal at  [26]  took  an
    incorrect approach to MAK's possible diagnosis of ADHD, made  at  [310]
    of the appellant's bundle. A diagnosis of ADHD was rejected in the more
    recent report of Dr Newth at page 83 of  appellant's  bundle,  however.
    The judge was therefore entitled to find that it  had  not  been  shown
    that MAK had a diagnosis of ADHD. It  is  not  the  case  that  if  she
    accepted that part of Dr Newth's report she had to accept all of it and
    was not entitled to  distinguish  the  comments  about  MAK's  fear  of
    corporal punishment. The conclusion at [26] that MAK did not have  ADHD
    was not solely based on Dr Newth's report in any event but  also  on  a
    teacher's report and there being  other  social  stressors  that  could
    account for his behaviour.

14. Ground 4 maintains that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  at  [29],  [30]
    and [45] in not accepting Dr Newth's comments  about  difficulties  for
    the children on return as a result of their disabilities and the stigma
    arising from the marriage of their parents. Firstly,  the  marriage  of
    MZK and NFK was arranged by  the  NFK's  parents.  Even  if  her  wider
    relatives do not approve and will not assist the family on return, that
    cannot be the case with her parents. MZK's family  are  not  stated  to
    disapprove of the relationship at  all  and  family  support  has  been
    offered whilst the family has been in the UK. The case for difficulties
    arising due to a lack of family support for the marriage  is  not  made
    out, therefore, those facts not being addressed in  the  report  of  Dr
    Holden on the point. It was also manifestly open to the judge  to  find
    that MZK could be expected to  find  work  where  he  is  qualified  IT
    engineer who has found work in that field in the UK  and  where  family
    support has not been shown to be absent it was entirely open  to  Judge
    Burns at [29] and [45] to find that the family would not be  living  in
    poverty and unable  to  provide  for  the  particular  needs  of  their
    children on return.

15. The submission made at paragraph e. of the grounds about  an  incorrect
    date being ascribed to a payment in a bank statement has  no  merit  at
    all. It is a very minor point, there being a number of  other  findings
    as above and at [38] more than justifying why the judge found that  the
    family would have funding on return. Mr Pipe conceded  at  the  hearing
    that this was not his strongest point.

16. For these reasons, I did not find that the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal disclosed an error on a point of law such that  it  should  be
    set aside.

Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
    point of law such that it should be set aside and it shall stand.


Signed:     [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt    4 September 2015
