



                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44480/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                         |              Decisions and Reasons     |
|                                         |Promulgated                             |
|26 June 2015                             |              27 July 2015              |
|                                         |                                        |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                            BELINDA KIERAN-EJIMADU


                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Petterson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr J Bryce, Advocate instructed by Latta & Co
Solicitors.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is a simple case that has been drawn by carelessness into a rather
    bizarre procedural history.  The respondent (whom  we  shall  call  the
    claimant) is a national of Nigeria, born in 1971.  She has been in  the
    United Kingdom since 2005.  Whilst she was here with student leave  her
    husband arrived, apparently as a visitor, accompanied by the claimant's
    eldest child.  That was in February 2005.  Two  further  children  were
    subsequently born in the United Kingdom.  The entire family is, so  far
    as  we  are  aware,  of  Nigerian  nationality  only.   The  claimant's
    husband's leave expired in  2006.   The  claimant's  leave  expired  in
    January 2007.  The Secretary of State has been aware  of  the  family's
    continued unlawful presence in the United Kingdom since 2011 at  least,
    when an application for leave to remain was made.

 2. The claimant's application of 2011 was refused.  There was no right  of
    appeal against that decision, but a judicial review claim  was  settled
    on the basis that the Secretary of State would reconsider, and  make  a
    new decision which, if adverse, would carry a right of appeal.  The new
    decision was made on 13 June 2015.  The claimant exercised her right of
    appeal, and her appeal was heard by Judge Morrison  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 6 February 2014.  The grounds of  appeal  before  him  were
    copious.  He rejected a number of them.  He  did,  however,  allow  the
    appeal.  He did so on the basis of arguments put to him in relation  to
    article 8, particularly insofar as it affected the claimant's children,
    and a precise argument based on paragraph 276 ADE of the  Statement  of
    Changes in Immigration Rules, HC 395 (as amended).   Judge Morrison was
    persuaded in relation to three propositions, which are as follows:

          "1. The children's position should be considered  under  paragraph
             276 ADE as it stood at the date of  the  claimant's  [which  is
             perhaps correctly described as the family's] application, on 23
             December 2011.


          2.  Applying that paragraph, as it then stood, to  the  claimant's
             two elder children would have shown that they merited  a  grant
             of indefinite leave to remain.


          3. In those circumstances the claimant could  derive  a  right  to
             indefinite leave to remain on the analogy of derived rights for
             the carers of EEA national children."

 3. Having so concluded, the judge allowed the appeal under the immigration
    rules and on the basis of article 8.  The Secretary of State sought and
    was granted permission to appeal in relation to  the  conclusion  under
    the  immigration  rules.   The  judge's  conclusion  in   relation   to
    proposition 1 has not been disputed.  The Secretary of State's  grounds
    of appeal related to proposition 3,  and  evidently  have  considerable
    merit.

 4. There was then a hearing before Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson.   At  that
    hearing the Secretary of State sought to enlarge her grounds to include
    a challenge to the judge's conclusion on proposition  2.    We  do  not
    know precisely the terms of  the  application:  it  may  have  included
    argument about the correctness of proposition 1.  Judge Dawson  refused
    to allow the Secretary of State to  amend  her  grounds  in  that  way,
    because "the grounds of application were  clearly  on  the  basis  that
    there was no desire to disturb the finding under paragraph 276 ADE  but
    instead the focus was on the consequences".  He did not  determine  the
    appeal: instead, he gave directions  for  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    provide a skeleton argument on the one  issue  which  had  always  been
    live.

 5. The continuance of the appeal in that way, however, presented two major
    difficulties, as recognised by both parties before us.   The  first  is
    that proposition 2 is clearly and simply wrong.  We do not know how  it
    came to happen, but neither of the judges, and neither of the  parties,
    appears to have looked at the wording of the relevant  paragraph.   The
    issue is whether the children  are  entitled  to  indefinite  leave  to
    remain on the basis of seven years presence in the United Kingdom.  The
    paragraph has,  however,  always  required  that  the  seven  years  be
    completed before the date of the application.  There is no  conceivable
    doubt that that requirement could not be met in the present case.   The
    judge's conclusion, and everything that followed from  it,  was  wrong.
    Judge Dawson's failure to appreciate that would  have  required  us  to
    deal with the matter on an evidently wrong basis.

 6. There is a second issue.  As we  have  said,  the  Secretary  of  State
    appealed in relation to the decision under the immigration rules.   The
    appeal was, however, allowed on the basis of article 8  as  well.   The
    Secretary of State did not seek permission to appeal that finding.   Ms
    Petterson told us at the hearing that the Secretary of State would  not
    seek to amend the grounds to include an  appeal  in  relation  to  that
    finding, because in any event the application of s.117B(6) to the facts
    of the claimant's case at the  date  of  any  new  determination  by  a
    Tribunal would, realistically, pose considerable problems for her.   As
    all parties before us agreed, nothing  else  really  matters.   If  the
    First-tier Tribunal judge erred in his conclusions on  the  immigration
    rules, which, for the reasons we have given,  we  think  he  must  have
    done, the error is immaterial in the light of his decision in  relation
    to article 8.  The judge's decision  to  allow  the  claimant's  appeal
    under article 8 stands unappealed.  The claimant  is  entitled  to  the
    appropriate grant of leave in those circumstances.  The  other  members
    of the claimant's family will need to be in contact with the  Secretary
    of State in relation to any appropriate grants to them.

 7. For these reasons we decline to set  aside  the  determination  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal  which  stands  as  a  determination  allowing  the
    claimant's appeal on human rights grounds.








                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL



                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                          Date: 13 July 2015
