
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/44412/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                    |       Decision & Reasons         |
|                                    |Promulgated                       |
|On 28 April 2017                    |       On 3 May 2017              |
|                                    |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                MAHDI TOUATI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr H Ndubuisis, of Drummond Miller LLP
For the Respondent:        Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. No anonymity direction was made previously in respect of this  Appellant.
Having considered all the circumstances and evidence I do  not  consider  it
necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge D C Clapham promulgated on 22 August  2016,  which  dismissed
the Appellant's appeal.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 2 July 1989 and is a national  of  Algeria.  On
20 May 2014 the Appellant applied  for  a  European  Economic  Area  ("EEA")
residence card as a family member  of  an  EEA  national  exercising  treaty
rights in the UK. The appellant says that he married a  Polish  national  on
10 March 2014.

4. On 21 October  2014  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application because the respondent believes that the appellant and  the  EEA
national have entered into a marriage of convenience.


The Judge's Decision

5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge David C  Clapham  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision. Grounds of appeal were  lodged  and  on  17  February
2017 Judge Scott Baker gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

      3. The appeal had initially been dismissed  by  way  of  determination
      promulgated on 8 May 2015. Application for permission  to  appeal  was
      sought and by order dated 18 December 2015 the appeal was remitted for
      hearing de novo


      4. The decision from the Judge in this remitted appeal relied  heavily
      on the terms of the immigration officer's  report  and  he  failed  to
      engage with the evidence submitted previously by the  appellant  which
      was paginated in a bundle amounting to 356 pages.


      5. Accordingly the decision discloses an arguable error of law in that
      the FTT Judge had failed to consider all of the evidence before him.


      6. Permission is granted.

The Hearing

6. (a) Mr Ndubuisi, for the appellant moved the grounds of appeal.  He  told
me that at [20] and [21] of the  decision  the  Judge  placed  unquestioning
reliance on the immigration officer's report,  without  considering  all  of
the evidence relied on by the appellant. He told me that the Judge  made  no
attempt to  critically  assess  the  quality  of  the  immigration  officers
report. He  told  me  that  at  [22]  the  Judge  says  that  he  takes  the
immigration officers report at "face value". That, he told me, amounts to  a
lack of judicial enquiry, and is a material error in law.

(b) Mr Ndubuisi told me that this case centres on consideration  of  whether
or not the appellant entered into a marriage  of  convenience.  He  told  me
that there were several sources of evidence and  that  in  addition  to  the
appellant's oral evidence there were three inventories  of  productions.  He
told me that if the Judge had carried out a balanced assessment  of  all  of
the evidence, and not simply accepted the  immigration  officers  report  at
face value, a different conclusion may have been reached.

(c) Mr Ndubuisi conceded that there is  inadequate  evidence  that  the  EEA
national was exercising treaty rights at the date of decision.  He  told  me
that the appellant and EEA national have now divorced. He told me there  are
two critical questions to be answered. The  first  is  whether  or  not  the
marriage was a marriage of convenience. The second question  is  whether  or
not the EEA national was exercising treaty rights of movement.  He  told  me
that the appellant accepts that his appeal will be dismissed  because  there
is no reliable evidence that the EEA national is  exercising  treaty  rights
of movement, but urged me to find a material error of  law  in  relation  to
the Judge's decision in  relation  to  whether  or  not  the  appellant  has
entered into a marriage of convenience, to set the  Judge's  decision  aside
and then to substitute my own decision  dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal
because  the  appellant  cannot  demonstrate  that  the  EEA  national   was
exercising treaty rights of movement.

7. For the respondent, Mr Govan told me that the decision does  not  contain
an error, material or otherwise.  He  told  me  that  even  if  I  find  the
decision is flawed insofar as it relates to the  quality  of  marriage,  the
dismissal of  the  appellant's  appeal  would  still  stand  because  it  is
accepted that the Judge's decision  in  relation  to  the  EEA  national  is
correct. He argued that there cannot be a  material  error  of  law  if  the
decision remains the same. He argued that the appellant is trying to  attack
part only of the decision, which has no impact whatsoever on the  conclusion
reached by the Judge. In any event, he told me that it was for the Judge  to
determine what weight should be placed on the immigration  officers  report.
That is what the Judge did, so that that is no error of law. He urged me  to
dismiss the appeal and allow the Judge's decision to stand.

Analysis

8. In Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage of convenience) Greece  [2012]  UKUT
00038(IAC) the Tribunal held that "Although neither the  Directive  nor  the
Regulations define it, as  a  matter  of  ordinary  parlance  and  the  past
experience of the UK's  Immigration  Rules  and  case  law,  a  marriage  of
convenience in this context  is  a  marriage  contracted  for  the  sole  or
decisive purpose of gaining admission to the host state. A durable  marriage
with  children  and  co-habitation  is  quite  inconsistent  with   such   a
definition".

9. In Agho v SSHD 2015 EWCA Civ 1198 it was held  that  where  an  applicant
sought an EEA residence card on the basis that he  was  married  to  an  EEA
national, he  simply  had  to  produce  his  marriage  certificate  and  his
spouse's passport. As a matter of principle, a spouse  established  a  prima
facie case that he was the family member of an  EEA  national  by  providing
the marriage certificate and his sponsor's passport. The  legal  burden  was
on the Secretary of State to show  that  any  marriage  thus  proved  was  a
marriage of convenience  and  that  burden  was  not  discharged  merely  by
showing 'reasonable suspicion'. The evidential burden  might  shift  to  the
applicant by proof of facts that justified the inference that  the  marriage
was not genuine. The facts giving rise to the inference included  a  failure
to answer a  request  for  documentary  proof  of  the  genuineness  of  the
marriage where grounds for suspicion had been raised.

10. In Rosa [2016] EWCA Civ 14 it was held that the Secretary of  State  had
the legal burden of proving that an otherwise valid marriage was a  marriage
of convenience so as to justify refusing  an  application  for  a  residence
card. If the Secretary of State adduced evidence capable of suggesting  that
the  marriage  was  not  genuine,  the  evidential  burden  shifted  to  the
applicant.
11. It is common ground that the central part of the  respondent's  evidence
is a report from immigration officers. What is argued for the  appellant  is
that the Judge did not analyse the evidence produced for  the  appellant  to
demonstrate that his marriage was genuine. The immigration  officers  report
is sufficient to suggest that the marriage was  not  genuine,  so  that  the
evidential burden shifted to the appellant.

12. The appellant relied on his witness statement, a witness statement  from
the EEA national and a witness statement from the  EEA  national's  brother.
The appellant attended the hearing alone, so that it was only the  appellant
who adopted the terms  of  his  witness  statement,  and  it  was  only  the
appellant who was offered for cross-examination. At [22]  of  the  decision,
the Judge explains that he  places  little  weight  on  the  EEA  national's
brothers evidence because the EEA national's brother did not give evidence.

13. The second inventory of productions for the appellant contains  vouching
of the appellant's income  and  financial  position.  It  contains  the  EEA
national's payslips from April 2015 and September 2015.

14. The first inventory of productions contains 357 pages, but few of  those
pages relate to the marriage between the EEA  national  and  the  appellant.
There are cards from the EEA national  sponsor  address  to  the  appellant,
together with invitations from the EEA national's brother addressed  to  the
appellant and the EEA national, and then a sequence of  photographs  of  the
appellant and EEA national together, and photographs of the bedroom  visited
by immigration officers.

15. There  is  very  little  in  the  documentary  evidence  which  directly
addresses the  quality  and  sincerity  of  the  marriage  between  the  EEA
national and the appellant. In the face of  the  documentary  evidence,  and
the absence of  the  EEA  national  and  her  brother,  the  Judge  had  the
unchallenged evidence that the marriage between the  appellant  and  sponsor
had broken down by the date of hearing.

16. At 20 the Judge realistically declares

      I have to deal with the evidence as it is

He then goes on to explain why he attaches weight the  immigration  officers
report.

17. In Green (Article 8 - new rules) [2013] UKUT 254  (IAC)   the  Tribunal
said that

      Giving weight to a factor one way or another is for the fact  finding
      Tribunal and the assignment of weight will rarely  give  rise  to  an
      error of law.

18. At [20] and [21] of the  decision  the  Judge  explains  why  he  places
weight on the immigration officers report.  At  [25]  of  the  decision  the
Judge explains why he prefers the evidence of the  immigration  officers  to
the evidence presented by the appellant.

19. In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC)   the
Tribunal held that (i) Although there is  a  legal  duty  to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

20. At [26] the Judge sets consideration of the quality  and  sincerity  the
marriage to one side, and explains that because that  is  no  evidence  that
the EEA national was exercising treaty rights at the  date  of  hearing,  he
dismisses the appeal

21. The decision does not contain an error of law. It is for  the  Judge  to
decide what weight to place on the  evidence.  The  Judge  explains  in  the
decision why he prefers the evidence of  the  immigration  officers  to  the
evidence lead for the appellant. There is no justifiable  criticism  of  the
fact-finding exercise. The Judge directed  himself  correctly  in  law.  The
Judge sets  out  adequate  reasons  for  reaching  the  conclusion  that  he
reaches. The decision reached by the Judge  is  well  within  the  range  of
reasonable conclusions available to the Judge.

22. In any event, the determinative issue in this case  is  whether  or  not
the EEA national was exercising treaty rights of movement  at  the  date  of
decision. Mr Ndubuisi agreed that there is no  error  of  law  contained  in
[26] and [27] of the decision and  that  those  to  paragraphs  support  the
conclusion reached by the Judge. As a result, all parties agree that if  the
discussion about marriage of convenience was removed from the decision,  the
conclusion reached by  the  Judge  would  remain  the  same  and  is  beyond
challenge. Even if I am wrong and the decision contains  an  error  of  law,
that the error cannot be material because it has no  impact  on  the  First-
tier Judge's decision to dismiss the appeal.

23. In this case, there  is  no  misdirection  in  law  &  the  fact-finding
exercise is beyond criticism.  The decision is not  tainted  by  a  material
error of law. The Judge's decision, when read as a whole, sets out  findings
that are sustainable and sufficiently detailed.



CONCLUSION

24. No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

25. The appeal  is  dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.

Signed                 Paul Doyle
  Date 1 May 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
