
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44313/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th December 2015                 |On 5th January 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                             MUHAMMAD JALIL KHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Jones, Counsel, instructed by Farani Javid
                    Taylor Associates
For the Respondent:    Miss A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan whose date of birth is  recorded
    as 8th June 1983.   On  13th  February  2014  he  made  application  to
    regularise his status in the United Kingdom  having  regard  his  claim
    that there would be a violation of his human rights were he  to  return
    to Pakistan (and not Ghana) as set out at paragraph 1 of  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal now under appeal.  The  Secretary  of  State
    refused the application having regard to Appendix FM  paragraph  276ADE
    and the wider application of Article 8.   The  Appellant's  appeal  was
    brought and heard on 29th April 2015 at Hatton Cross.

 2. It was part of the Appellant's case that he was now in  a  relationship
    with Fozia Khan and that he would be at  risk  on  return  to  Pakistan
    because, although he was an overstayer, when in  Pakistan  in  December
    2001 he was kidnapped,  beaten  and  held  for  ten  days.   Those  who
    attacked him demanded money from his family.  After  ten  days  he  was
    found by the police and returned to his family after being  treated  in
    hospital for his injuries. This is set  out  at  paragraph  21  of  the
    decision of Judge Monaghan. It was also acknowledged at paragraph 21 of
    the Decision and Reasons that the Appellant was  scared  to  return  to
    Pakistan.

 3. The judge considered the various issues  without  the  Appellant  being
    represented and without a Presenting Officer present and concluded that
    the appeal was to be dismissed both under Articles  3  and  8  ECHR;  I
    refer to paragraph 50.  It seems clear from reading the decision  as  a
    whole that  the  judge  had  regard  to  the  medical  conditions  when
    considering Article 3 rather than any risk to the Appellant.

 4. Not content with the decision of the judge, by notice  dated  22nd  May
    2015 the Appellant sought permission to appeal and on 3rd  August  2015
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hollingworth  granted  permission  but
    quite rightly the judge pointed to an arguable error occurring  because
    the judge, the judge hearing the case, had not  made  the  decision  in
    respect of the Appellant's Article 3 arguments relating to the fear  on
    return as distinct from the medical conditions.

 5. It is important to note that although Fozia Khan was not accepted as  a
    credible witness the Appellant was.  Absent from the decision  was  any
    consideration of whether or not the  Appellant  remained  at  any  risk
    consequent upon what had occurred all  those  years  ago  when  he  was
    kidnapped.  In other words, although the judge accepted that there  was
    a subjective fear of return to Pakistan, the  judge  having  found  the
    Appellant credible there is no sufficient examination by the  judge  of
    whether such fear was  objectively  well-founded.   If  it  were,  then
    having  regard  the  appropriate  standard  it  is  possible  that  the
    Appellant was entitled to succeed not only under  Article  3  but  also
    arguably under Article 8 because of the third  test  in  Razgar  [2004]
    UKHL 27, which requires an assessment of whether  the  decision  is  in
    accordance with the law.

 6. Miss Everett quite fairly had little to offer by way of submissions  on
    the point.  In my judgement there has been a material error of  law  in
    that consideration of the issue may have produced a different result.

 7. There was some discussion as to whether the matter should remain in the
    Upper Tribunal on the basis that there was a very narrow issue now left
    to be resolved but Miss Jones was not in a position to proceed  despite
    clear directions but I accept as she submitted that there are issues of
    funding and it is not always possible to obtain funding  speculatively.
    In these circumstances having regard  to  paragraph  7  of  the  Senior
    President's Practice Statement of 2012

Notice of Decision

 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and is set aside to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal

 9. No anonymity direction is made.

Directions

10. The findings of the First-tier Tribunal shall be preserved with respect
    to those issues already determined but for the avoidance of doubt  that
    the appellant was found credible does  not  mean  that  the  First-tier
    Judge hearing the remitted  appeal  will  necessarily  be  required  to
    accept whatever the appellant has to say about his objective fears,  if
    any.

11. The issue will be confined to  the  extent  to  which  if  at  all  the
    appellant's Articles 3 and 8 rights would be  violated  by  any  return
    after consideration of his evidence if any, relating to those fears.

12. No interpreter will be required.

13. For the avoidance of doubt the appellant has made clear  that  he  does
    not claim to be a refugee on the basis that  no  Convention  reason  is
    engaged.

14. Case to be heard at Taylor House.

15. Not before Judge Monaghan.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker

