
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44242/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 29th May 2014                                |On 17th June 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                            SAMSON OLADAYO AREMU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Ms S Ong, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Nigeria, born on 1st May  1984.   On
    27th November 2011 he applied for a residence card as  confirmation  of
    his right to reside in the UK as the spouse of Sadia Ismaham  Sahraoul,
    an EU citizen exercising Treaty rights in the UK.  That application was
    refused for the reasons given in a Notice of Decision dated 5th  August
    2013.  The Appellant appealed and his appeal was decided on the  papers
    by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Clapham (the Judge) on 20th January
    2014.   She  dismissed  the  appeal  for  the  reasons  given  in   her
    Determination of that date, but at an earlier hearing of this appeal  I
    decided that the Judge erred in law in coming to that conclusion and  I
    set aside her decision.

 2. The case comes before me today to remake the decision of the Judge.

 3. At the hearing  there  was  no  appearance  by  or  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant.  I decided to proceed with the hearing under the  provisions
    of Rule 38 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008.   I
    was satisfied that the Appellant had been notified of  the  hearing  in
    accordance with those Rules, and I believed it was in the interests  of
    justice to proceed with the hearing.

 4. At the hearing, I heard a brief submission from Ms Ong which  is  noted
    in the Record of Proceedings and need not be set out here.

 5. I set aside the decision of the Judge because he  had  failed  to  take
    into account evidence contained in a bundle submitted by the  Appellant
    and received prior to the decision of the Judge.   There  has  been  no
    subsequent evidence.  When making my finding of  an  error  of  law,  I
    commented that the Appellant needed to  adduce  evidence  to  meet  the
    requirements of the decision in  Kareem  (Proxy  marriages  -  EU  law)
    [2014] UKUT 00024 (IAC).  No such evidence has been received.

 6. The Appellant and his wife  claimed  that  they  married  according  to
    Nigerian native law and custom  at  Lagos  on  13th  July  2011.   They
    produced a marriage certificate to that  effect.   Their  evidence  may
    well be credible, but for that marriage to entitle the Appellant  to  a
    residence card he must establish its validity for  European  Union  law
    purposes as required by the decision in Kareem.  The Appellant has  not
    discharged this burden.

 7. Notwithstanding this failure, the Appellant might still qualify  for  a
    residence card if he can show a durable  relationship  between  himself
    and the Sponsor as required  by  Regulation  8(5)  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.  There  are  now  before  me
    brief statements from the Appellant and his claimed wife that they live
    together at an address in London.  No further information is  given  as
    to the length and nature of their relationship.  This evidence does not
    have the benefit of being tested by  cross-examination.   I  find  that
    that evidence is insufficient to discharge the burden of proof  on  the
    balance of probabilities, and I am therefore not satisfied  that  there
    is a durable relationship between the Appellant and the Sponsor.

Decision

I remake the decision of the Judge by dismissing the appeal.



Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  and  I  find  no
reason to do so.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
