
[pic]
IAC-HW-MP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44231/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30th September 2015               |On 28th October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                              MRS KULSUMA AKTER
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance on behalf of the Appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr L. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, born on  6th  December  1990.
    She appeals against the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Quinn,
    sitting at Richmond on 9th April 2015, who dismissed her appeal against
    a decision of the Respondent.  That decision dated  16th  October  2014
    was to refuse to  grant  the  Appellant  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier
    (General) Student dependant and to refuse to issue her with a biometric
    residence permit.

2.   The Appellant's husband, Mr Mohammed  Nurul  Afsar  ("Mr  Afsar"),  was
    granted leave to remain as a Tier 1  (Post-Study  Work)  Migrant  valid
    until 14th August 2014 having applied for that leave on 3rd April 2012.
     The Appellant entered the United Kingdom on 15th February 2014 as  her
    husband's dependant, six months before his leave was due to expire.  On
    13th August 2014, the day before expiry, she applied for a variation of
    leave to remain, this time as a Tier  4  (General)  Student  dependant.
    The refusal of that application by the Respondent on 16th October  2014
    has given rise to the present proceedings.  Mr Afsar who made  his  own
    application at  the  same  time  as  the  Appellant  was  sponsored  by
    Birmingham College of Law and Management on a course which was  to  run
    from 1st September 2014 to 30th December 2015.  He was not funded by an
    official financial Sponsor.

The Explanation for Refusal

3.   The Respondent's refused the Appellant's application for  variation  of
    leave  because  the  Appellant  failed  to  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 319C(i) of the Immigration  Rules.   Her  husband's  previous
    leave was not as a Tier 4 (General) Student and his course of study was
    less than six months in length.  The  Appellant's  previous  leave  was
    therefore not as the partner of a Tier 4 (General) Student  or  student
    undertaking a course of study longer than six months either.

The Relevant Immigration Rules

4.   Besides having to comply with the general grounds  for  refusal  (which
    are not relevant in this case) paragraph 319C(b) provides  for  certain
    general  requirements  which  dependents  must  meet.   The   dependant
    applicant must be (inter alia) the spouse of a  person  who  has  valid
    leave to enter or remain as a relevant points-based system  migrant  or
    is at the same time being granted leave to remain as a relevant points-
    based system migrant or has indefinite leave to remain  as  a  relevant
    points-based system migrant where the applicant is applying for further
    leave to remain and was last granted leave as the spouse of  that  same
    relevant points-based system migrant at a time  when  that  person  had
    leave under another category of the Immigration Rules.   The  paragraph
    then goes on to set out various requirements as to the  genuineness  of
    the relationship which are not in issue in this case.

5.   Sub-paragraph (i) of paragraph 319C provides that  where  the  relevant
    points-based system migrant (in this case the Appellant's  husband,  Mr
    Afsar) has been granted leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier
    4 (General) Student he must be a government-sponsored  student  who  is
    applying for or who has been granted entry clearance or leave to remain
    to undertake a course of study longer than six months.

6.   The important point at issue in this case is what is said  at  sub-sub-
    paragraph (ii) of sub-paragraph (i). This provides  that  the  relevant
    points-based system migrant (in this case Mr  Afsar)  must  himself  be
    applying for or have been granted entry clearance or leave to remain in
    order to undertake a course of study  at  postgraduate  level  that  is
    twelve months or longer in duration. He must also  be  sponsored  by  a
    Sponsor who is a recognised body or a body in receipt  of  funding  and
    must either be applying for or had been granted leave to  remain  as  a
    Tier 4 (General) Student or must meet certain other  conditions.  Those
    are that he must be applying for leave to remain to undertake a  course
    of study that is longer than six months and either have leave to remain
    as a Tier 4 (General) Student to undertake a  course  of  study  longer
    than six months or have last had  leave  to  remain  within  the  three
    months preceding the application as a Tier 4 (General) Student or as  a
    student to undertake a course of study longer than  six  months.   What
    the Appellant must satisfy is that she must have leave to remain as the
    spouse of a Tier 4 (General) Student or a student with leave to  remain
    to undertake a course of study longer than six months or have last  had
    leave to remain within the three months preceding  the  application  of
    her husband as a Tier 4 (General) Student or as a student to  undertake
    a course of study longer than six months and both she and  her  husband
    must be applying at the same time.

7.   The paragraph is not entirely easy to read  containing  as  it  does  a
    number of  potentially  confusing  sub-paragraphs  but  in  effect  the
    requirement is that the Appellant's husband had  himself  to  have  had
    leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student and had  to  be  applying
    himself for leave to remain to undertake a course of study longer  than
    six months.  The Appellant must have had leave to remain as the partner
    of a Tier 4 (General) Student (which she did not because Mr  Afsar  had
    leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study  Work)  Migrant.  Alternatively
    she required leave to remain as the spouse of a student with  leave  to
    remain to undertake a course of study longer than six months. Mr  Afsar
    did not have that because he had only made an application on  the  same
    date as the Appellant which had not therefore been granted at the  time
    that the Appellant's application  was  made.   The  overall  effect  of
    paragraph 319C is to raise serious barriers to a non-Tier  4  (General)
    Student Migrant and their dependant changing  to  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student Migrant and dependant as the Appellant  and  her  husband  were
    seeking to do in this case.

The Hearing at First Instance

8.   The matter came before Judge Quinn on 9th April 2015 when there was  no
    appearance on behalf of the Appellant.  The Judge had a letter from the
    Appellant's representatives dated 8th April 2015 which he  referred  to
    it at paragraph 6 of his determination. The letter stated "we shall not
    attend the hearing and request the appeal to  be  considered  on  paper
    only".  In the light of that  the  Judge  proceeded  to  determine  the
    matter after receiving brief submissions from the Presenting Officer.

9.   In his determination the Judge summarised  the  remaining  contents  of
    the letter of 8th April at paragraph 5 of his determination:

         "... it was claimed that the removal of the Appellant from  the  UK
         would be disproportionate in the context of the legitimate  aim  of
         control of immigration and I took this to be  an  Article  8  claim
         although no other grounds were set out".

    In fact what the letter of 8th April had said at paragraph 2 was:

         "The main issue in this case is only one.   The  Appellant  applied
         for leave to remain as the dependent partner of a Tier 4  (General)
         Student which was  refused  on  the  ground  that  the  Appellant's
         partner  is  not  a  government-sponsored  student   and   is   not
         undertaking a course of study  with  a  Sponsor  who  is  either  a
         recognised body or a higher education institution.   The  Appellant
         submits  that  she  meets  all  requirements  under  the   relevant
         Immigration Rule as a previous dependant.  In support of the appeal
         we particularly refer to paragraphs 5  to  10  of  the  grounds  of
         appeal, we urge the grounds to be considered adequately."

    The reference in the Appellant's letter to paragraphs 5 to  10  of  the
    grounds of appeal against the  Respondent's  decision  dealt  with  the
    "switching" point (which I have referred to above,  see  paragraph  7).
    The remainder of the letter then dealt as the Judge summarised with the
    claim  under  Article  8   which   as   he   correctly   observed   was
    unparticularised.

10.  Judge Quinn dismissed the appeal stating at paragraph 25:

         "The Appellant wanted the Rules interpreted in  a  way  that  would
         permit her to remain.   Her  fallback  position  was  that  it  was
         unreasonable and irrational for the Respondent to  require  her  to
         leave the UK and be separated from her husband.  I thought that the
         Rules set out the position quite clearly".

    The Judge continued at paragraph 26 that the Appellant had only been in
    the United Kingdom since 2014 and had  come  as  a  dependant  with  no
    reasonable expectation that she would be allowed to  remain.   He  gave
    little weight to the time that she had spent in the United  Kingdom  as
    her situation was always precarious  under  the  leave  that  had  been
    granted to  her.   Mr  Afsar  was  a  student  who  had  no  legitimate
    expectation he would be allowed to remain in the United Kingdom  beyond
    the period of his study.  The Appellant did not meet  paragraph  276ADE
    and there were no exceptional circumstances that required consideration
    of the case outside the Rules.  The Appellant had failed  to  discharge
    the burden of proof to show that her removal would be  disproportionate
    to the legitimate public end sought to be achieved and he dismissed the
    appeal.

The Onward Appeal

11.  The Appellant appealed that decision arguing that the Judge had  failed
    to take into account the representations made in the letter  dated  8th
    April 2015 (which as I have indicated in turn relied on the grounds  of
    appeal against the original  respondent's  decision).  The  grounds  of
    appeal acknowledged that the Rules had been amended from  October  2013
    to make sure that points-based system dependants would not have  to  be
    unnecessarily separated  from  their  partners  in  order  to  make  an
    application from abroad.  The Appellant's case in effect was  that  she
    would have been granted further leave to remain and not be  refused  if
    she had last been granted  leave  to  remain  or  enter  as  a  Tier  4
    Migrant's dependant.  As she was not last granted leave as a  dependant
    of a Tier 4 Migrant the present refusal of her application as a Tier  4
    dependant was  irrational,  inconsistent  and  contrary  to  the  other
    requirements of the Rules.

12.  The grounds cited a decision of the High Court in  the  case  of  Zhang
    [2013] EWHC 891, a judicial review  decision.   Zhang  focused  on  the
    effect under Article 8 of the requirements of what was then the wording
    of paragraph 319C(h)(i).  Mr Justice Turner held that  the  application
    of a blanket requirement to leave the  country  imposed  by  that  sub-
    paragraph was unsustainable.  It was not consistent with the  ratio  of
    the decision in Chikwamba.  He added:

         "I am not prepared to make a formal declaration on the matter.   It
         is not the function of the court to re-draft the Rules but I  would
         predict  that  the  Secretary  of  State  would  in   future   face
         difficulties in enforcing requirement (h)(i) as presently worded in
         all but the small number of cases in which Article 8 is engaged".

13.  The  application  for  permission  to  appeal  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Shimmin on the papers on 25th June  2015.   In  granting
    permission to appeal he stated that it was arguable that at  paragraphs
    24 and 25 of the decision the Judge had failed to address or adequately
    address the detailed submissions set out in the grounds of appeal.  The
    remaining ground (that it  would  be  disproportionate  to  remove  the
    Appellant while her husband was still lawfully present  in  the  United
    Kingdom) was less meritorious but was not rejected.

14.  The Respondent replied to the grant of permission by letter  dated  3rd
    July 2015 stating that Judge Quinn had directed himself  appropriately.
    The Appellant did not meet the requirements of the Rules as her husband
    did not have the required status.  At the date of hearing she had  been
    in the United Kingdom for a bare thirteen months and could not  succeed
    under the provisions for Article  8.   No  properly  directed  Tribunal
    could have found compelling circumstances to allow the  appeal  outside
    the Rules.

The Hearing Before Me

15.  The matter was called on for hearing on 30th September 2015 when  there
    was no attendance on the part of  the  Respondent.   In  a  very  brief
    submission the Presenting Officer indicated that he relied on the  Rule
    24 reply.  On the same day the Tribunal at the  Arnhem  Support  Centre
    received written submissions from the Appellant's solicitors dated 29th
    September regarding this appeal.  Although this document was not passed
    on to the Field House Hearing  Centre  until  the  following  day,  1st
    October 2015, I nevertheless have taken it into account in preparing my
    decision in this matter.  The letter states that neither the  Appellant
    nor her legal representatives proposed to attend the  hearing  on  30th
    September to save costs and  requested  the  Tribunal  "to  decide  the
    permission to appeal matter on papers".  The Tribunal was urged to find
    a material error  of  law  and  either  allow  the  Appellant's  appeal
    outright or to remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a
    different First-tier Tribunal Judge.

16.  The substance of the letter (which enclosed a copy of the  decision  of
    Mr Justice Turner in the case of Zhang) was that following the decision
    in Zhang the Home Office had amended the  Immigration  Rules  to  allow
    dependants to apply from within the United Kingdom provided  they  were
    not here illegally as visitors or on temporary admission  or  temporary
    release but they  would  still  need  to  satisfy  all  other  existing
    requirements.  The letter argued that the Minister's announcement  gave
    rise to a legitimate  expectation  that  as  an  existing  points-based
    system spouse the Appellant would  continue  to  be  granted  leave  to
    remain as the spouse of her husband.  Alternatively it was unreasonable
    for the  Respondent  not  to  exercise  discretion  in  favour  of  the
    Appellant.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge also ought to have  exercised
    judicial discretion and made findings in the light of the  Respondent's
    duty of common law fairness.

Findings

17.  The difficulty with the Appellant's argument in this case is  that  the
    relevant section  of  paragraph  319C  which  is  the  subject  of  the
    Appellant's complaint, (sub-paragraph (h)) was amended in October  2013
    by HC 628 subject to savings for applications made  before  that  date.
    As the application in this case was made in August 2014  those  savings
    cannot apply.  In short Judge Quinn was dealing with a  decision  under
    the Immigration Rules which postdated the decision of Mr Justice Turner
    in Zhang.  The provision of paragraph 319C which Mr Justice Turner  was
    concerned about was very different to the Rules as they  are  presently
    constituted.  When Mr Justice Turner examined 319C(h)(i) on 18th  April
    2013 in the High Court the requirement which a dependant applicant  had
    to satisfy was that they must have or have last been granted  leave  as
    the partner of a relevant points-based system migrant.  In the case  of
    Zhang the claimant had been granted leave previously not as  a  partner
    but under the general category and was therefore precluded from  making
    an application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom.   Mr  Justice
    Turner held that it was disproportionate under Article 8 to require the
    claimant in that case to return to China to make  an  application  from
    there to come back to the United Kingdom to join her  husband  who  was
    already here.  Separation of about two months that  this  would  entail
    was contrary to Article 8.

18.  As I have indicated and as has been accepted by the  Appellant  in  her
    grounds of onward appeal before me the Rules were  changed  in  October
    2013.  What the appellant seeks to  argue  is  that  the  Rules  remain
    irrational after the change.   That  contention  is  not  supported  by
    authority.  Zhang referred to a different wording of the Rules, not the
    one which I have to consider.

19.  What the October 2013 changes did was to  narrow  the  scope  of  those
    persons who could not apply for further leave to remain.  If  Mr  Afsar
    had had leave to remain as  a  Tier  4  Migrant  then  the  Appellant's
    application for further leave to remain would have succeeded.  In short
    the blanket ban on partners applying in country for  further  leave  to
    remain  had  been  lifted,  the  ban  which  Mr  Justice  Turner  found
    objectionable, and replaced with a more specific  ban  on  partners  of
    persons  switching  categories.  I  see  no  reason  why  that  amended
    provision should be considered  to  give  rise  to  a  disproportionate
    result under Article 8.

20.  In any event  there  is  a  further  difficulty  with  the  Appellant's
    argument that the Respondent's decision is procedurally  unfair  and/or
    irrational and/or breaches Article 8 in that the provisions of  Article
    8 have been amended by statute since the decision of the High Court  in
    Zhang.  The new provisions contained  in  Section  117A  to  D  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 inserted  therein  by  the
    Immigration Act 2014 were very much in the forefront of  Judge  Quinn's
    mind when considering the Article 8 provisions.  The Appellant's status
    was precarious and as such any private and/or family life which she may
    have established in the relatively short time she  was  in  the  United
    Kingdom could only have little weight attached to it.  Against that she
    could not meet the Immigration Rules. There were substantial grounds on
    the other side of the argument that the decision in this case to refuse
    her leave to remain was proportionate.  I can see nothing irrational or
    procedurally unfair in the decision of  the  Respondent  in  this  case
    which followed the provisions of the amended  Immigration  Rules  which
    applied to this Appellant.

21.  Permission to appeal was granted because it  was  arguable  that  Judge
    Quinn  had  not  taken   into   account   the   Appellant's   case   on
    proportionality in the light of the  criticism  of  the  previous  Rule
    under 319C made by Mr Justice Turner in Zhang.  I am not  at  all  sure
    that Judge Quinn had in fact overlooked the contents  of  the  argument
    made in the letter of 8th April 2015.  He referred specifically to  the
    letter at paragraph 5 of his  determination  and  at  paragraph  25  in
    referring to the Appellant's  fallback  position  was  aware  that  the
    Appellant was seeking to interpret paragraph 319C in a way  that  would
    permit her to remain. He was well aware that the  Appellant  sought  to
    argue that it was unreasonable and irrational  for  the  Respondent  to
    require her to leave the United  Kingdom  and  be  separated  from  her
    husband.

22.  The Appellant's principal argument was based on a misconception of  the
    status of paragraph 319C  which  had  been  amended  after  Mr  Justice
    Turner's criticisms of it. It was not a material error of law for Judge
    Quinn to fail to deal with the Appellant's arguments since they had  no
    validity for the reasons  I  have  set  out  above.   I  have  set  the
    Appellant's case out because permission to appeal was granted  and  the
    Appellant  is  entitled  to  know  why  her  onward  appeal  has   been
    unsuccessful. However given that the argument itself was a false one it
    was not a material error of law for the Judge to deal with  the  matter
    in the way that he did. The Judge's conclusions as to Article 8 outside
    the Rules are unimpeachable. He predicated them on the assumption  that
    the Appellant did not meet the Rules and  that  was  correct.  He  then
    analysed the claim on the basis of current statute law requirement  and
    jurisprudence. It  was  open  to  him  to  find  as  he  did  that  any
    interference caused by the Respondent's decision was  proportionate.  I
    therefore dismiss the Appellant's onward appeal.





Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I  dismiss  the  Appellant's  onward  appeal  against  that
decision.

Appellant's appeal dismissed.

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 27th day of October 2015

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed this 27th day of October 2015

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft

