
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44657/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 January 2016                   |On 11 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                           PASCHAL CHIBUIKE OKORO
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. P. Hayward of Counsel, instructed by Jemek
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Moore promulgated on 16 July 2015 in  which  he  refused
    the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision to  refuse  to
    issue an EEA residence card as confirmation of his right to  reside  in
    the UK.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:
         "While the judge  dealt  with  the  evidence  in  detail  and  made
         detailed findings on the facts, he appears to have  overlooked  the
         fact that this was an appeal governed by the 2006 Regulations.   It
         is not clear from the decision whether  the  Judge  considered  the
         Regulations at all,  far  less  that  he  considered  the  relevant
         jurisprudence pertaining to EEA applications."

 3. At the hearing  I  heard  submissions  from  both  representatives.   I
    reserved my decision which I now set out with reasons.

Submissions

 4. Mr. Hayward relied on his skeleton argument.   He  submitted  that  the
    judge had failed to apply the correct framework  when  approaching  the
    issue of a marriage of convenience.  He accepted  that  the  judge  had
    acknowledged the EEA context, but he had approached the law without any
    direction.  It was necessary for the judge to  direct  himself  to  the
    relevant questions, which he had not done, and it was not clear that he
    knew what law he was addressing.

 5. In relation to the interview records, the Appellant had asked  for  the
    tapes of the interviews, but these had not been provided,  despite  the
    direction made by the Tribunal.  It was possible that  there  had  been
    transcription errors.  The status of the document with which  they  had
    been provided was not clear.  It  was  not  a  transcript,  but  was  a
    document listing the  interview  questions  with  the  answers  of  the
    Appellant and his wife set out in table form.  Further, the notes taken
    by the immigration officers who raided the marriage  ceremony  had  not
    been produced.

 6. Of the 196 questions put to the Appellant and his wife, the  judge  had
    taken a selection which  were  the  most  adverse.   In  their  witness
    statements the Appellant and his wife had addressed  these  in  detail.
    Some of the  answers  to  the  196  questions  asked  were  capable  of
    supporting the relationship, but the judge had seized  on  the  adverse
    answers.  Set against this, the evidence of the witnesses was bound  to
    be important, but there had been a failure  properly  to  consider  the
    evidence of the witnesses, namely the Appellant's  brother-in-law,  his
    step-daughter, his relative, and the letter from the Appellant's wife's
    mother.  No findings  had  been  made  regarding  the  content  of  the
    evidence of the Appellant's friend, nor the mother-in-law's  statement.
    It was not fair of the judge to state that the evidence of the brother-
    in-law did not assist much, nor that the step-daughter's  evidence  was
    limited.

 7. In addition to the failure to deal with the evidence of  the  witnesses
    fairly, the documentary evidence which showed that they had been living
    together since 2010 had not been taken into account.

 8. I was referred to the cases of Papajorgji (EEA  spouse  -  marriage  of
    convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC), Agho [2015] EWCA Civ 1198,
    and Rosa [2016] EWCA Civ 14.  The  judge  had  not  considered  whether
    there was evidence of cohabitation.  He had  not  considered  what  the
    primary purpose of the marriage was.  Rosa did not call  into  question
    the correctness of Papajorgji.  Instead of looking at the  totality  of
    the evidence,  the  judge  had  looked  at  what  was  adverse  to  the
    Appellant.

 9. In summary the evidence had been unfairly treated, and the evidence  of
    the witnesses and the documentary evidence had been overlooked.

10. Ms Fijiwala submitted that there were no errors in  the  decision.   It
    was clear that the Respondent  had  discharged  the  burden  of  proof.
    There had not been an interpreter present for the immigration officers'
    visit, but there had been an interpreter present  for  the  interviews.
    The judge was entitled to place weight on the  transcript.   The  judge
    accepted that a full transcript had been provided.  The  weight  to  be
    given to the report of the immigration officers' visit was a matter for
    the judge.  He stated in [33] that the weight to be attached to it  was
    diminished.  The judge did not accept the submission that the interview
    had been "forceful".  This was an attempt to reargue the same points as
    were before the judge.

11. In relation to the legal question of the marriage of convenience, I was
    referred to paragraph [40] of  Rosa.   The  judge  was  aware  of  this
    throughout.  The case fell on all fours with Rosa.  At  paragraph  [41]
    the judge did not accept the explanation of the Appellant's wife's poor
    memory.  He was entitled to give weight to the inconsistencies  in  the
    oral evidence.  Even though there was evidence  of  cohabitation,  they
    could  have  been  in  separate  rooms.   There  were   inconsistencies
    regarding salary and the loan set out in [36].  There were  significant
    discrepancies which were sufficient to discharge the  burden  of  proof
    and shift it to the Appellant.  On the body of evidence before him, the
    judge was entitled to find that  it  was  a  marriage  of  convenience.
    There were no errors, despite the lack of the tapes.

12. In response Mr. Hayward submitted that at paragraph [7] the  judge  had
    clearly misdirected himself.  The constant re-iteration of "genuine and
    subsisting" was not synonymous with what he had to decide.   There  was
    no accurate analysis of the  evidence,  and  there  had  been  a  clear
    misdirection regarding the burden.  Ms Fijiwala had not  addressed  the
    failure to take into account the evidence  of  the  witnesses  and  the
    documentary evidence.  It  was  not  possible  to  say  that  the  same
    conclusion would have been reached if the judge had considered  all  of
    the evidence.  There was no full  transcript  of  the  interview.   The
    tapes were necessary to  see  whether  the  document  provided  by  the
    Respondent was accurate or not.

Error of law

13. The judge states in paragraph  [2]  that  the  appeal  is  against  the
    decision to refuse to issue a residence card, by reference to  the  EEA
    Regulations 2006.  In paragraph [8] he sets out the  relevant  part  of
    Regulation 2.  However in paragraph [7] he states "The burden of  proof
    is on the Appellant to satisfy me that the decision of  the  Respondent
    was on the balance of probabilities against the weight of evidence".  I
    find that this is a material misdirection, as this is not  the  correct
    burden of proof in marriage of convenience cases.

14. I find that, while the judge refers  to  the  EEA  Regulations  at  the
    outset, and quotes the relevant regulation, this  is  not  enough.   He
    must  show  that  he  has  approached  the  question  of  marriage   of
    convenience in the correct way, and I find that he has not done so.  He
    has incorrectly stated that the burden lies on  the  Appellant,  rather
    than the correct position which is that only when  the  Respondent  has
    shown that there are sufficient grounds to justify a suspicion that the
    marriage is one of convenience does the burden shift to the  Appellant.
    I was referred to paragraph [13] of Agho which confirms this  position.



15. It was also submitted that his references to "genuine  and  subsisting"
    indicated that, despite citing the  Regulations,  he  had  applied  the
    incorrect test.  Paragraph [40] of Rosa is clear  in  relation  to  the
    phrase "genuine and subsisting".
         "It  has  no  place  in  relation  to  the  issue  of  marriage  of
         convenience on an  application  under  regulation  17  of  the  EEA
         Regulations, where the relevant question is  whether  the  marriage
         was "concluded ... with the sole aim of circumventing the rules  on
         entry and residence of third-country nationals  and  obtaining  for
         the third-country national  a  residence  permit  or  authority  to
         reside in a Member State" (see paragraph 10 above)."

16. I find that the re-iteration of "genuine and subsisting" indicates that
    the judge was  not  clear  as  to  the  relevant  law  to  be  applied,
    especially given his misdirection as to the burden of proof.

17. In relation to whether this error  is  material,  it  is  necessary  to
    consider the judge's treatment of the evidence, and I find  that  there
    are errors of law in his treatment of the evidence.

18. In relation to the issue of the interview tapes, directions were  given
    at a previous hearing that the tapes of the interviews be  provided  to
    the Appellant's solicitors.  In paragraph [30] the  judge  states  that
    the failure of the Respondent  to  comply  with  these  directions  "is
    strictly related to the tapes, since a full extract  (typed)  had  been
    provided".  However I find that this is not the  case.   The  Appellant
    requested a copy of  the  tapes  in  order  to  ascertain  whether  the
    transcript of the replies as set out in the reasons for refusal  letter
    was accurate.  The  document  provided  by  the  Respondent  is  not  a
    transcript, or a "full extract", but is in fact a  table  of  questions
    and answers, part of which is  set  out  in  the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter.  The judge was not provided with a transcript of the interviews
    carried out with the Appellant and his wife.

19. The same issue arises with the table of answers provided for the appeal
    hearing as arises with the extract produced in the reasons for  refusal
    letter.  I find  that  when  the  judge  states  that  the  failure  is
    "strictly related to the tapes", this is not the  case.   The  document
    that he had in front of him was not a full transcript of  the  contents
    of the tapes.  By stating that a full extract of  the  tapes  has  been
    provided, the judge has failed  to  acknowledge  the  concerns  of  the
    Appellant that the extract in the reasons for refusal letter was not an
    accurate reflection of the answers given at interview.  He  has  failed
    fully to realise why the tapes were requested.

20. I find that the judge then placed significant reliance on  the  answers
    given at interview while failing to acknowledge that the Appellant  had
    concerns with the translation of the interview as set out in  the  form
    provided by the Respondent.

21. Further the judge has placed weight on the report  of  the  immigration
    officers who raided  the  marriage  ceremony.   In  paragraph  [31]  he
    acknowledges that no Russian interpreter was present, but  states  that
    the report "adds some small further weight"  to  his  findings.   Given
    that he finds that it adds weight to his findings that the marriage  is
    one of convenience, it is relevant that the  immigration  officers  did
    not prevent the  wedding  from  going  ahead.   However,  he  makes  no
    reference to the fact  that  these  immigration  officers  allowed  the
    wedding to proceed.

22.  In  relation  to  documentary  evidence  provided   as   evidence   of
    cohabitation, the judge sets out in paragraph [28] the evidence he  has
    taken into account in reaching his decision.  He does not  mention  any
    documentary evidence.  In paragraph [34] of his findings  he  addresses
    the issue of where the Appellant and his wife have lived, but again  he
    does not refer to any documentary evidence.  The  documentary  evidence
    which was provided included bank  statements,  hospital  documents  and
    HMRC documents covering the period from 2010  to  2014.   There  is  no
    analysis of this evidence in the context of cohabitation.

23. In relation to the evidence of  the  witnesses,  the  judge  states  in
    paragraph [28] that  he  has  "borne  in  mind"  the  evidence  of  the
    witnesses.  In paragraph [31]  he  states  that  the  evidence  of  Mr.
    Rusianas Dolgosciolvas, the brother-in-law of  the  Appellant,  was  of
    "limited value", but he does not give any reasons.  The letter provided
    by Mr. Dolgosciolvas is not referred to  at  all.   He  refers  to  the
    evidence of the step-daughter of the Appellant as "limited", but  again
    gives no reasons.  He does not set out in any detail  the  evidence  of
    the Appellant's step-daughter or why he considers this to be "limited".
     In paragraph [24] the judge refers to the evidence of  Mr.  Chukwuyere
    Amaechi, but he does not mention it at all in his findings.  The letter
    from the Appellant's mother-in-law is not referred to either.

24. In considering whether or not a marriage is one of convenience,  it  is
    necessary to look at the totality  of  the  evidence.   The  judge  has
    failed to give reasons as to why he  considered  the  evidence  of  the
    witnesses to be of limited value, and/or he has failed to address  this
    evidence at all.

25. I find that the judge has compounded his error of  incorrectly  placing
    the burden of proof on the Appellant by failing to take account of  all
    of the evidence provided.  I find that  he  has  failed  to  take  into
    account the evidence of the witnesses, and/or failed  to  give  reasons
    for why he considers their evidence to  be  limited.   I  find  he  has
    failed to take into account the documentary  evidence  of  cohabitation
    provided by the Appellant.   He  has  placed  weight  on  the  document
    provided which contains the answers given  at  interview,  but  he  has
    wrongly found this to be a full transcript of the interviews.   I  find
    that these are material errors of law.

Notice of decision

The decision involves the making of an error on a point of law and I set  it
aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.


Signed        Date 8 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

