
IAC-AH-DN-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44794/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 8th May 2015                          |On 20th May 2015                    |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     E B
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Sarwar of Counsel instructed by J M Wilson
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Freer promulgated on 16th September 2014.

 2. The Appellant is a male Jamaican citizen born 24th  November  1981  who
    applied for leave to remain in the United Kingdom as the  spouse  of  a
    British citizen, N J, to whom I shall refer as the Sponsor.

 3. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom with a visitor's visa valid
    until 24th September 2002.  He overstayed.  The Appellant  subsequently
    met the Sponsor, who he married on 23rd March 2005.

 4. On 12th May 2010 the Appellant applied  for  leave  to  remain  as  the
    spouse of a British citizen, which application was refused on 6th  July
    2010 with no right of appeal.  At the Appellant's request the  decision
    was reconsidered, but the refusal was maintained on 27th July 2010.

 5. On 16th March 2011 a further application for leave to remain was  made,
    providing fresh information in relation to the  Appellant  and  Sponsor
    undertaking IVF treatment in the United Kingdom.  This application  was
    refused on 9th May 2011 without a right of appeal.

 6. A reconsideration request was made on 13th February 2012  and  on  27th
    September  2013  the  Appellant  submitted  further  information.   The
    Respondent refused this application on 8th October  2013,  and  made  a
    decision to remove the Appellant from the United Kingdom.  The  reasons
    for this decision are contained in a letter dated 8th October 2013.

 7. The Respondent considered the application with reference to Appendix FM
    of the Immigration Rules  and  accepted  that  it  was  appropriate  to
    consider EX.1(b).  It was accepted that the Appellant had a genuine and
    subsisting relationship with a British citizen, but it was not accepted
    that there were insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  with  that
    partner continuing outside the United Kingdom.

 8. The Respondent did not accept that the Appellant satisfied any  of  the
    criteria set out in  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules  in
    relation to his private life.

 9. The Respondent considered that the  couple  could  reside  together  in
    Jamaica, in the  absence  of  insurmountable  obstacles,  or  that  the
    Sponsor could remain in the United Kingdom,  and  the  Appellant  could
    return to Jamaica and make an application for entry clearance in  order
    to satisfy the requirements of Appendix FM.  No  application  had  been
    made by the Appellant in relation to  Appendix  FM,  as  the  Appellant
    relied only upon Article 8 of the 1950 European  Convention  (the  1950
    Convention) outside the Immigration Rules.

10. In relation to Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules, the  Respondent
    did  not  accept  that  there  were  any  compassionate  or  compelling
    circumstances to justify  a  grant  of  leave  to  remain  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.

11. The Appellant's appeal was heard by Judge Freer on 11th September  2014
    and dismissed under the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

12. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,
    and the appeal came before me on 21st January 2015.  In brief summary I
    found  that  the  judge  had  not  considered  the  Immigration  Rules,
    recording that it was agreed that the  application  could  not  succeed
    under the rules.  Mr Sarwar confirmed that the appeal before the First-
    tier Tribunal had been based solely on Article 8 outside the  rules  as
    the application had been made prior to 9th July 2012.  The  judge,  not
    having considered the Immigration  Rules,  found  that  there  were  no
    compelling reasons to consider Article 8 outside the rules, although he
    went on to consider section 117B of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act) which was an error in that there  is  no
    requirement to consider section  117B  unless  Article  8(2)  is  being
    considered directly, which the judge had already decided against.

13. I found that the judge had  erred  by  not  carrying  out  an  adequate
    consideration of proportionality either under the Immigration Rules, or
    under Article 8 outside  the  rules.   The  judge  had  considered  and
    analysed the case law but as accepted  by  the  Respondent,  there  was
    little evidence that the facts of this case had  been  applied  to  the
    legal principles, which was an error of law.  Therefore the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal was set aside.

14. Full details of the application for permission, the grant of permission
    by Judge Nicholson, and my reasons for finding  an  error  of  law  are
    contained in my decision dated 26th January 2015.  The decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal was set aside, but the findings that the Sponsor is
    a British citizen present and settled in the United Kingdom,  and  that
    the parties married  on  23rd  March  2005,  and  have  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship were preserved.  The hearing was  adjourned  so
    that further evidence could be given.

Re-making the Decision

Preliminary Issues

15. I ascertained that I had received  all  documentation  upon  which  the
    parties intended to rely, and that each party had served the other with
    any documentation upon which reliance was to be placed.

16. In addition to the documents that were before the First-tier  Tribunal,
    I received from Mr Sarwar further evidence of the Sponsor's  salary  in
    the form of a wage slip dated 27th April  2015.   I  received  from  Mr
    Mills, a document confirming the  visa  processing  times  in  Jamaica,
    together with case law, Singh and Khalid [2015] EWCA Civ 74, Naseem and
    Others [2014] UKUT 00025 (IAC), R (on  the  application  of  Chen)  IJR
    [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC), and the Queen on application  of  Agyarko  and
    Others [2015] EWCA Civ 440.

17. Mr Sarwar confirmed that in the light  of  Singh  and  Khalid,  it  was
    accepted that the Respondent was entitled to consider Appendix  FM  and
    paragraph 276ADE, even though the application for leave to  remain  had
    been made before 9th July 2012, when those provisions  were  introduced
    into the Immigration Rules.  Mr Sarwar  confirmed  that  the  Appellant
    relied upon EX.1(b) and Article 8 outside the rules.

18. I retired briefly  to  enable  Mr  Sarwar  to  consider  the  case  law
    submitted  by  Mr  Mills,   and   when   the   hearing   resumed   both
    representatives indicated that they were ready to proceed and there was
    no application for an adjournment.

Oral Evidence

19. I firstly heard evidence from the Appellant  who  adopted  his  witness
    statement dated 11th September 2014.  I then heard  evidence  from  the
    Sponsor who adopted two witness statements both  dated  11th  September
    2014.

20. Both the Appellant and Sponsor were questioned by  the  representatives
    and I  have  recorded  all  questions  and  answers  in  my  Record  of
    Proceedings and it is not necessary to repeat them in full here.

21. In summary the Appellant stated in his witness statement that  he  came
    to the United Kingdom in March 2002 aged 19.  He  met  the  Sponsor  in
    October 2003 and they started a relationship, and married on 23rd March
    2005 and have been living together since that date.

22. Both want a child but there has been a difficulty in  conceiving.   The
    Sponsor underwent IVF treatment in 2010, and again in 2011,  which  was
    unsuccessful.  The couple  plan  to  pay  for  another  course  of  IVF
    treatment.

23. The Appellant has no close relatives in Jamaica, his  mother  lives  in
    Canada and his grandmother in the United States.  The Appellant  stated
    that the Sponsor would not be able to  work  in  Jamaica  and  the  IVF
    treatment is needed in the United Kingdom because specialised treatment
    is required as he is a Hepatitis B carrier.

24. In his oral evidence the Appellant had said that the Sponsor had  tried
    to find out if IVF treatment for people with Hepatitis B was  available
    in Jamaica by emailing a hospital but there had been no response.   The
    Appellant stated that when in the  United  Kingdom  he  had  done  some
    labouring and cleaning work.  He did not think that there would be work
    available in Jamaica.  He  has  no  near  relatives  in  Jamaica.   The
    Appellant confirmed that the first round of IVF treatment had been paid
    for by the NHS but he was not sure about the second round.

25. The Sponsor in her witness statement stated that if the couple  had  to
    go to Jamaica they would have no employment, no income,  and  no  home.
    She did not believe they would be able to  have  IVF  treatment  there.
    She confirmed that she had undergone two IVF treatments both  of  which
    had been unsuccessful.  She described in her statement  the  suggestion
    that she could go and live in Jamaica  as  preposterous,  pointing  out
    that the employment prospects would be extremely  poor  and  she  would
    need a work permit which could not be obtained unless she  already  had
    an offer of employment.

26. In her oral evidence the Sponsor explained that no attempt was made  to
    regularise the Appellant's immigration status as "we just did  not  get
    round to doing it."  The Sponsor believed that she had  had  her  first
    round of IVF treatment in 2007, and the second in 2010 but she was  not
    sure of the dates.  She confirmed that both  rounds  of  treatment  had
    been paid for by the NHS.  The couple were trying  to  save  up  for  a
    further round of treatment.

27. The Sponsor confirmed that she works in IT administration for  the  NHS
    and has been doing this for approximately eleven years.   She  did  not
    think that this work experience would assist her in finding  employment
    in Jamaica and the IT systems would be different.  The Sponsor said  it
    made sense for the couple to remain in the United Kingdom and have  IVF
    treatment, as the Sponsor has employment here and they have a home.

The Respondent's Submissions

28. Mr Mills relied upon the reasons for refusal letter dated  8th  October
    2013.  I was asked to find that the evidence did not  demonstrate  that
    there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  couple  relocating  to
    Jamaica.  Mr Mills submitted that the threshold is higher than the test
    of reasonableness.  I was asked to note that the  Appellant  had  found
    employment in the United Kingdom, and there was no reason why he  could
    not do so in Jamaica,  and  the  Sponsor  had  transferable  employment
    skills.

29. The Appellant had not produced evidence to indicate that IVF  treatment
    would not be available in Jamaica.  Mr Mills submitted that the  First-
    tier Tribunal had been correct to find that there was no duty to  grant
    leave to remain  in  this  country  so  that  IVF  treatment  would  be
    available, and relied upon the Queen (on the  application  of  Erimako)
    [2008] EWHC 312.

30. In relation to Article  8  outside  the  rules  Mr  Mills  referred  to
    paragraph 28 of Agyarko, and submitted that the  Appellant  could  only
    succeed if the case was for some reason exceptional.  I  was  asked  to
    find that there were no compelling or exceptional features, and to note
    that the evidence given by the Sponsor and Appellant was that the  last
    cycle of IVF was in 2010, and there had  been  no  further  attempt  to
    undergo IVF treatment privately.

31. In considering Article 8 outside the rules I was  reminded  of  section
    117B(4) of the 2002 Act in that little weight should be given to family
    life established when the Appellant is in this country unlawfully.

32. In relation to the Appellant leaving the  United  Kingdom  to  make  an
    entry clearance application, and the Sponsor remaining in this country,
    Mr Mills referred to Chen submitting that it is for  the  Appellant  to
    produce   evidence   that   temporary   separation    will    interfere
    disproportionately with family life.  I was asked to note that  90%  of
    visas were processed in Jamaica within 60 days.  This would  not  delay
    IVF treatment.  Mr Mills explained that it was not suggested  that  the
    Appellant leave the United Kingdom simply for the sake of procedure, to
    make an entry clearance application from abroad, as in this case  there
    had been no application made under Appendix FM, and such an application
    was appropriate to ascertain whether the financial  requirements  could
    be met.

The Appellant's Submissions

33.  In  relation  to  EX.1(b)  Mr  Sarwar   submitted   that   there   are
    insurmountable obstacles  to  the  couple  living  outside  the  United
    Kingdom,  those  being  the  lack  of  family  connections,   financial
    considerations, and lack  of  employment  in  Jamaica.   These  factors
    underpin the difficulty that the couple would have  in  undergoing  IVF
    treatment in Jamaica.

34. I was asked to find both the Appellant and  Sponsor  credible,  and  to
    take into account the nature of the Sponsor's employment, in  that  she
    had given evidence that different IT systems would be used  in  Jamaica
    to those used in the United Kingdom, and therefore she would  not  have
    transferable skills.

35. In answer to the suggestion by Mr Mills that even if  the  couple  were
    only able to obtain relatively menial jobs, this would  not  amount  to
    insurmountable obstacles to relocation in Jamaica,  Mr  Sarwar  pointed
    out that they could not undertake such  low  paid  employment,  because
    they needed to pay for IVF treatment.

36. I was referred to an NHS document prepared on 13th December 2011  which
    indicated at page 7 that there were only three facilities in the United
    Kingdom that could undertake IVF where an individual has  Hepatitis  B.
    I was therefore asked to find that such specialised treatment would not
    be available in Jamaica.

37. Mr Sarwar explained that no further IVF treatment had been commenced in
    the last five years, because the  couple  were  saving  to  enable  the
    necessary funds to be available.

38. Mr Sarwar indicated that documentary evidence proved that  the  Sponsor
    earned �20,147 per annum, and therefore the financial  requirements  of
    Appendix FM would be satisfied.

39. I was therefore asked to find that insurmountable obstacles existed  to
    relocation in Jamaica and therefore the appeal should be allowed  under
    EX.1(b).  In the alternative,  Mr  Sarwar  submitted  that  there  were
    exceptional circumstances that justified a grant  of  leave  to  remain
    under Article 8 of the 1950 Convention, those being the  need  for  the
    couple to undertake IVF treatment.

40. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

41. I have taken into account all the evidence, both oral  and  documentary
    that has been placed before me, and taken into account the  submissions
    made by both representatives.  I have considered the  evidence  in  the
    round, and taken into  account  that  in  considering  the  Immigration
    Rules, such as EX.1(b) the burden of proof is on the Appellant, and the
    standard of proof is a balance of probability.

42. I set out below EX.1(b) together with EX.2;

         EX.1(b)  The applicant has a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
                with a partner who is in the UK and is  a  British  citizen,
                settled in the UK  or  in  the  UK  with  refugee  leave  or
                humanitarian  protection,  and  there   are   insurmountable
                obstacles  to  family  life  with  that  partner  continuing
                outside the UK.

         EX.2     For the  purposes  of  paragraph  EX.1(b)  "insurmountable
                obstacles" means the  very  significant  difficulties  which
                would  be  faced  by  the  applicant  or  their  partner  in
                continuing their family life together  outside  the  UK  and
                which could not be overcome or  would  entail  very  serious
                hardship for the applicant or their partner.

43. I accept the immigration history in this case, in  that  the  Appellant
    arrived in the United Kingdom in 2002 as a visitor  and  remained  here
    illegally thereafter,  and  married  the  Sponsor,  who  is  a  British
    citizen, on 23rd March 2005.

44. I accept that the Sponsor was born in the United Kingdom  and  has  not
    visited  Jamaica.   I  accept  that  the  couple  have  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship as husband and wife.

45. I find that the Sponsor knew that the Appellant had no legal status  in
    this country when they married.  When asked  about  this  in  her  oral
    evidence, the Sponsor did  not  explicitly  accept  this,  but  I  note
    (paragraph 16 of the First-tier Tribunal  decision)  that  when  giving
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, the Sponsor  agreed  that  she
    was aware of the Appellant's immigration status when she  married  him.
    I find that to be the case.  The couple made no attempt  to  regularise
    the Appellant's status following their marriage, until  an  application
    was made on 12th May 2010, just over five years after the marriage.

46. I accept that the Appellant is a Hepatitis  B  carrier,  and  that  the
    Sponsor has undergone two cycles  of  IVF  treatment  without  success.
    Neither the Appellant or Sponsor were  sure  when  the  last  cycle  of
    treatment had taken place, but in my view the evidence  indicates  that
    it was in 2011.  The phrase "insurmountable obstacles"  is  defined  in
    EX.2 as being very significant difficulties which could not be overcome
    or would entail very serious hardship for the parties.  I set out below
    paragraphs 21 and 22 (in part) of Agyarko;

         "21.  The  phrase  "insurmountable  obstacles"  as  used  in   this
             paragraph of the Rules clearly imposes a  high  hurdle  to  be
             overcome by an applicant for leave to remain under the  Rules.
             The test is significantly more demanding than a mere  test  of
             whether it would be reasonable to expect a couple to  continue
             their family life outside the United Kingdom.

         22.  The phrase as used in the Rules is intended to have  the  same
             meaning as in the Strasbourg jurisprudence.  It is clear  that
             the ECtHR regards it as a  formulation  imposing  a  stringent
             test in respect of that factor, as is illustrated by  Jeunesse
             v Netherlands (see para [117]); there were  no  insurmountable
             obstacles to the family settling in Suriname, even though  the
             applicant and her family would experience hardship  if  forced
             to do so."

47. The Court of Appeal in paragraph 23 of Agyarko confirmed that  although
    the term "insurmountable obstacles" involves a stringent test, it  must
    be interpreted in a sensible and practical, rather  than  in  a  purely
    literal way.  In paragraph 25 the court found the  mere  fact  that  an
    individual is a British citizen, has lived all his life in  the  United
    Kingdom and has employment here, and hence might find it difficult  and
    might be reluctant to relocate to Ghana to continue family life,  could
    not constitute insurmountable obstacles to his doing so.

48. In this case the Sponsor is British, and was born here, has lived  here
    all her life and has employment here.  She might find it  difficult  to
    relocate  to  Jamaica,  but  this  without  more  does  not  amount  to
    insurmountable obstacles.

49. There is a health  service  in  Jamaica,  and  the  Appellant  has  not
    provided evidence to prove that he  and  the  Sponsor  would  not  have
    access to that health service.  No evidence has been submitted to prove
    whether IVF treatment would be available.  In  any  event,  I  conclude
    that  the  decision  in  Erimako,  although  not  binding,  is   strong
    persuasive authority to confirm that the Respondent is not under a duty
    to grant leave to remain even for a limited period so that a couple can
    undergo IVF treatment.

50. The Sponsor would not experience language difficulties if she relocated
    to Jamaica.  The Sponsor was aware when she married the Appellant  that
    he had no legal status in  this  country.   While  I  accept  that  the
    Sponsor and Appellant would have no close relatives  in  Jamaica,  they
    are both adults, and the Appellant has been able to find employment  in
    the United Kingdom even though he has had no legal status here.  I find
    that the Sponsor  does  have  transferable  employment  skills,  having
    worked in IT for the NHS for the last eleven years.

51. In conclusion, in relation to EX.1(b) I find that although  the  couple
    may experience some difficulty if they have  to  relocate  to  Jamaica,
    there are no insurmountable obstacles to them  doing  so.   The  appeal
    therefore cannot succeed under EX.1(b).

52. It was not suggested that the Appellant could succeed with  his  appeal
    under paragraph 276ADE in relation to his private life, and I so  find.
    The Appellant is 33 years of age and has  not  resided  in  the  United
    Kingdom continuously for at least twenty years and therefore he  cannot
    succeed under paragraph 276ADE(iii).  It was not suggested  that  there
    would be very significant obstacles to the Appellant's integration back
    into Jamaica if he had to leave the United Kingdom, and  I  agree  that
    there would be no such obstacles, and therefore  the  Appellant  cannot
    succeed under paragraph 276ADE(vi).

53. I now consider Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules and in doing  so
    take into account the principles which are summarised in  paragraph  28
    of Agyarko which I set out below;

         "28. So far as concerns Mrs Agyarko's claim  under  Article  8  for
             leave to remain outside the Rules, since her family  life  was
             established with knowledge that she had no right to be in  the
             United Kingdom and was therefore precarious  in  the  relevant
             sense, it is only if her case is exceptional for  some  reason
             that she will be able to establish a violation of  Article  8:
             see Nagre, paras [39]  -  [41];  SS  (Congo),  para  [29]  and
             Jeunesse v Netherlands, paras [108], [114] and [112]."

54. I have followed the five stage approach advocated in Razgar [2004] UKHL
    27.  I find that Article 8 is engaged, as the Appellant has established
    a family and private life in the  United  Kingdom.   I  find  that  the
    proposed  interference  with  that  family  and  private  life  is   in
    accordance  with  the  law,  as  the  Appellant  cannot   satisfy   the
    Immigration Rules in order to be granted leave to remain.

55. I find that the proposed interference is necessary in the interests  of
    maintaining  effective  immigration  control,  which  is  necessary  to
    protect the economic well-being of the country,  and  I  then  have  to
    conduct  a  balancing  exercise,  to  ascertain  whether  the  proposed
    interference is proportionate to the legitimate public end sought to be
    achieved.  The decision in Beoku-Betts [2008] UKHL  39,  means  that  I
    must consider the private and family life of the Sponsor as well as the
    Appellant.

56. In assessing proportionality, I take into account  the  wishes  of  the
    Appellant and Sponsor to live in the United Kingdom, and the fact  that
    the Sponsor is a British citizen who has lived here  since  birth,  and
    the Appellant has been resident here since  2002.   I  also  take  into
    account that the Sponsor's close family members reside in this country,
    and that she has long-standing employment.  I also  take  into  account
    that the couple have undergone  IVF  treatment,  and  wish  to  undergo
    further treatment in the future.  I have to take into  account  section
    117B of the 2002 Act, which confirms that the maintenance of  effective
    immigration controls is in  the  public  interest.   I  note  that  the
    appellant can speak  English,  and  that  the  Sponsor  is  financially
    independent.

57. Section 117B(4) states;

         'Little weight should be given to -

             (a)  private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualified partner;

         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.'

58. I therefore attach little weight to the Appellant's private  life,  and
    his relationship with the Sponsor, who is a qualifying partner, because
    this has been formed when  the  Appellant  has  been  in  this  country
    unlawfully.

59. I find that the weight to be attached to the maintenance  of  effective
    immigration control, outweighs the weight to be placed upon the  wishes
    of the Appellant and Sponsor to remain living together  in  the  United
    Kingdom, despite the fact that  they  cannot  satisfy  the  Immigration
    Rules.

60. I have considered the suggestion made in the refusal letter, that as an
    alternative to the couple relocating to Jamaica, the  Appellant  should
    return to Jamaica and make an application for entry  clearance  as  the
    spouse of a British citizen.  I do not  find  that  the  principles  in
    Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40 assist the Appellant in this case.   This  was
    considered by the Upper Tribunal in Chen and it  was  decided  in  very
    brief summary, that while there may be situations where  there  are  no
    insurmountable obstacles to  family  life  being  enjoyed  outside  the
    United Kingdom, but temporary separation to  enable  an  individual  to
    make an application for entry clearance may be disproportionate, it  is
    for the individual to place before the Secretary of State evidence that
    such  temporary  separation  will  interfere  disproportionately   with
    protected rights.  The Upper Tribunal decided  that  it  would  not  be
    enough to rely solely upon the case law concerning Chikwamba.

61. In this appeal, I do not find that evidence has been submitted to prove
    that requiring the Appellant  to  leave  to  make  an  entry  clearance
    application from Jamaica would be disproportionate.  This is not a case
    where this course of action is being suggested simply for the  sake  of
    procedure.  In this case, the Appellant has not made an application for
    leave to remain under Appendix FM, which would involve  satisfying  the
    requirement for the Sponsor to have a minimum  income  requirement,  or
    appropriate savings, and the necessary evidence provided to prove this.
     As no such application has been made, I find this is a  cogent  reason
    for requiring the Appellant to return to Jamaica to make an application
    for entry clearance, and I conclude that it would be proportionate  for
    him to do so.  The likelihood or otherwise of him being  able  to  meet
    the requirements of the rules for entry clearance  is  not  a  relevant
    consideration, as confirmed by SB (Bangladesh) v SSHD [2007]  EWCA  Civ
    28.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and  was
set aside.  I substitute a fresh decision.

The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules.

The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity  direction  and  I  continue  that
order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008.


Signed        Date 12th May 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award


Signed        Date 12th May 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
