

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA447952014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 7 June 2016                             |On 10th June 2016              |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER

                                   Between

                           NKIRU FRANCISCA EWURUM
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Slater of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

    1. The Respondent refused the  Appellant's  application  for  leave  to
       remain on 31 October 2014. Her appeal was  dismissed  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Kanagaratnam ("the Judge") following a hearing  on  4
       September 2015.

The grant of permission


    2. Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb granted permission to  appeal  (29  April
       2016), in essence, stating that it is arguable that  the  Judge  did
       not consider relevant evidence relating to domestic violence.

Discussion


    3. Mr Walker, despite the rule 24 notice, accepted  the  aforementioned
       and that this amounted to a material error of law. He conceded  that
       depending on the factual matrix that was accepted, and assuming  all
       relevant facts were considered, compelling circumstances could exist
       such as to mean that Article 8 was engaged, and that those facts (if
       accepted) could meet the reasonableness test required by Article  8.
       He conceded that the decision could not stand and the  mater  should
       be remitted to the reheard de novo  by  a  Judge  other  than  Judge
       Kanagaratnam in the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo.  Given  these
       concessions, with which I  agreed  and  given  Mr  Slater's  helpful
       submissions, it is un-necessary for me to recite any of the facts as
       they will need to be determined afresh.


    4. There was a material error of law. I set the decision aside.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

      I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

    The matter shall be remitted to the Fust-tier Tribunal for  a  de  novo
    hearing to be heard by a Judge other than Judge Kanagaratnam.




Signed:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
7 June 2016
