
[pic]
IAC-AH-sc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/44251/2014
                                                               ia/44658/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford IAC                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 March 2016                              |On 13 April 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY

                                   Between

                    MR Muhammad Rafique (first appellant)
                     MR Muhammad ASIM (second appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Janjua, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwncyz, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   The appellants applied for leave as First-tier (Entrepreneur)  Migrants
    on the points-based scheme.

2.   Their application was refused by the  respondent  on  21  October  2014
    having conducted an interview.  However, the appellants  satisfied  the
    requirements of the points-based  scheme  in  that  they  achieved  the
    necessary points for the Appendix A attributes.

3.   The refusal to give the appellants  the  leave  that  they  sought  was
    appealed under Section 82 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 ("2002 Act").  The appeal  came  before  Judge  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Cox ("the  Immigration  Judge")  sitting  at  Bradford  on  29
    January  2015.   The  Immigration  Judge  having  heard  evidence   and
    submissions by the parties decided to dismiss  the  appellants'  appeal
    against  the  respondent's  refusal.   The  appellants  appealed   that
    decision to the Upper Tribunal.

The Upper Tribunal Proceedings

4.   The appellants state in their grounds  that  the  necessary  attributes
    for the entrepreneur scheme were satisfied and the  judge  should  have
    allowed the appeal based on his own conclusions at  paragraph  38.   At
    paragraph 38 the Presenting Officer had  not  challenged  an  important
    aspect of their evidence namely the bank statements they had  produced.
    The grounds go on to state that the Immigration  Judge  had  mistakenly
    concluded that the appellants had entered disguised employment with the
    company they had set up when this conclusion was  not  justified  as  a
    matter of law as well as a matter of fact.  Their permission to  appeal
    application was dated 27 February 2015.

5.   The application for  permission  to  appeal  was  considered  by  Judge
    Wellesley-Cole on 16 April 2015.  Judge Wellesley-Cole noted  that  the
    application had been under paragraph 245DD(i) of the Immigration Rules,
    that the appellants had a business  plan,  had  given  their  financial
    details and had undertaken market research.  Furthermore, it was  noted
    that the important evidence referred to at paragraph 38 of the decision
    had not been challenged.  Therefore, arguably,  the  Immigration  Judge
    ought to have accepted their income status.  They were not, it appeared
    to Judge Wellesley-Cole when  she  granted  permission  to  appeal,  in
    disguised employment.  Furthermore, the Immigration Judge  appeared  to
    have applied the wrong standard of proof.   The  correct  standard  was
    that of a balance of probabilities.  The finding  that  the  appellants
    were in fact in contracts of employment went against the weight of  the
    evidence.

Conclusions

6.   At the hearing I have heard submissions by  both  representatives.   Mr
    Janjua maintained that the business was a genuine one and  no  part  of
    the initial refusal by the Secretary of State had said to the contrary.
     The appellants had been awarded their full points yet the  Immigration
    Judge had gone on to dismiss the appeal.

7.   Mr Diwncyz sought to maintain the decision on the  basis  that  adverse
    credibility  findings   had   been   included   within   the   decision
    notwithstanding the Secretary of State's broadly accepting their  case.
    Mr Janjua went on to say that the Immigration Judge's findings had been
    largely speculative as was demonstrated by a consideration of paragraph
    56 of his decision.   At  that  paragraph  the  Immigration  Judge  had
    considered the nature of the work as letting agents  and  made  adverse
    findings about credibility which Mr Janjua said were not justified.

8.   In conclusion, the Immigration  Judge  appears  to  have  made  adverse
    findings which were not justified by the evidence in  the  case  before
    him.  As Judge Wellesley-Cole said the standard of proof was that of  a
    balance of probabilities.  If that standard was  applied  the  evidence
    produced appeared to be satisfactory as was found by the  Secretary  of
    State  broadly  prior  to  the  interview   he   conducted.    In   the
    circumstances the adverse findings by the Immigration  Judge  were  not
    justified by the evidence.   Accordingly,  I  find  that  there  was  a
    material error in the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the
    decision will be set aside and I substitute the decision of  the  Upper
    Tribunal which is to allow the appeal against the Secretary of  State's
    refusal of leave to remain as Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrants under  the
    points-based scheme.

9.   There is no anonymity direction in this case.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award but have decided to make no fee award


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

