
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/44125/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Taylor House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 October 2015                    |On 9 October 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                              RAJA NASEER AHMED
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Rashid of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

      1. The respondent notified the appellant of her decision to refuse  to
         issue an EEA residence card as confirmation of a right of residence
         under  European  Community  law  as  the  spouse  of  Maria  Amalia
         Fernandes Roque, a Portuguese national exercising treat  rights  in
         the United Kingdom, on 23 October 2014.  His  appeal  against  that
         decision was dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Swinnerton
         ("the Judge") following a hearing on 22 May 2015. This is an appeal
         against that decision.

      2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly granted permission  to  appeal  (27
         August 2015) only on the grounds that;

         "... it is arguable, as the applicant contends, that  the  Tribunal
         has not demonstrated that it applied the  burden  and  standard  of
         proof relevant to "sham"  marriage  cases  (an  initial  evidential
         burden being upon the respondent) and/or that it failed to  make  a
         clear finding that the marriage was one of  convenience  which  had
         been  entered  into  for  the  sole  purpose  of  facilitating  the
         appellant's residence in the UK."

Respondent's reply

      3.  The  respondent  contends  (3  September  2015)  that  there  were
         reasonable grounds for suspecting that  the  marriage  was  one  of
         convenience and that there were clear findings made.

Discussion

    Ground 1 - applied the wrong burden and standard of proof

      4. The Judge stated [27];

         "The burden is on the respondent to adduce evidence which  supports
         the belief that the marriage is one of convenience on a balance  of
         probabilities."

      5. Mr Rashid conceded that the Judge had identified the correct burden
         and standard of proof and nothing in the decision indicates that it
         was not applied correctly.

      6. In my judgement there was therefore no material error of law in the
         decision in the application of the burden and standard of proof.

    Ground 2 - failed to make clear findings

      7. The Judge recorded that;

         [5] "... the appellant attended a marriage interview...without  his
         wife whose whereabouts he did not know."

         [7] "...the appellant was not able to spell his  wife's  name,  did
         not where his wife had worked and could not provide  evidence  that
         he had lived with his wife."

         [8] "...a certificate  of  approval  to  marry  Miss  Maria  Amalia
         Fernandes Roque...was issued on 18 May 2009. On 27 May  2009,  nine
         days later, the appellant's EEA  national  sponsor  applied  for  a
         certificate of approval to marry another Pakistani national."

      8. The Judge found the following;

         [29] "The appellant ...married his wife...on  27  May  2009  having
         known her for about 5 months...His  wife  left  in  July  2012  and
         divorce proceedings were commenced on 14 August 2014."

         [30] "...The appellant's wife did not appear as a named  tenant  in
         any of the tenancy agreements, including the period  from  2009  to
         2012 when the appellant was stated to be living with  his  wife  at
         that address."

         [32] "The evidence...as to the nature of his relationship with" his
         wife "was not credible. The Tribunal did  not  find  credible  that
         having known his wife for more than three and a half years prior to
         her leaving, he would not have been aware of where  she  worked  or
         ever have visited her family."

         [33] "The appellant speaks little English and  he  would  have  had
         significant difficulties communicating with  his  wife  given  that
         English was the stated language of communication between them."

         [34] "The Tribunal noted that the  appellant  did  not  finish  his
         schooling but did not find credible that  he  would  be  unable  to
         spell his wife's name or remember her date of birth."

      9. It was submitted by Mr Rashid that there was  evidence  before  the
         Tribunal that the interview was not complete and  that  there  were
         issues with the interpreter. There was no presenting officer at the
         hearing and  therefore  no  cross  examination.  He  mentioned  the
         interpreting problems at the interview. He said  in  his  interview
         that he did not know the name of the shoe shop.

     10. I pointed out to Mr Rashid that in his  interview  it  is  recorded
         (q15) that the appellant was asked;

             "where was your wife working when you last saw her".

             He is recorded as having said "In a (sic) shopping in  Ilford.
             I don't know the shop. It was a shoe shop.  I  don't  remember
             its name."

             He continued (q20) "I never said she worked in a shoe shop.  I
             said I saw her in there. I didn't know  she  worked  there  or
             lived there", and

             (q21) "I told you 3 times she never worked at a shoe  shop.  I
             don't know where she worked. She said it's not my problem."

             In response to the question (q22) "So for 3 years of  marriage
             you never knew where your wife worked or  what  she  did?"  he
             said "yes, she never told me".

     11. I pointed out the appellant's solicitor letter (26 August 2014)  in
         support  of  the  application  that  was   contained   within   the
         respondent's bundle;

             "The Applicant tried to find her and reached the  place  where
             she was working but the employer informed him that she did not
             come to work."

     12. Mr Rashid repeated that there were issues with the interpreter.  He
         questioned the accuracy of  the  interview  record.  The  appellant
         correctly identified the month and year of his wife's birth.  There
         is a lack of a finding as whether it was a marriage of  convenience
         as opposed to whether the  relationship  was  genuine.  There  were
         inadequate reasons.

     13. Mr Nath submitted that if there was never a genuine relationship it
         was a  marriage  of  convenience.  The  findings  had  to  be  read
         together. The lack of a presenting officer at the hearing  was  not
         relevant as the Judge had to assess the evidence and make  findings
         which he did. The interview record discloses the confusing  answers
         from the appellant as to where his wife worked.

     14. I agree with Mr Nath's submissions. The absence of  the  presenting
         officer  does  not  diminish  the  Judges  responsibility  to  make
         findings on the evidence and apply the law correctly.

     15. The whole thrust of Mr Rashid's submission rests  on  the  accuracy
         and completeness of the interview. The submission is  misconceived.
         The  appellant's  solicitor  had   written,   presumably   on   his
         instructions, that "The Applicant tried to find her and reached the
         place where she was working but the employer informed him that  she
         did not come to work". That contradicts the appellant's evidence at
         the hearing that he did not know exactly where she worked, and  the
         answers recorded in his interview (q21/22).

     16. However the Judge has not found against the appellant on the  basis
         of these discrepancies. He based his findings  on  the  appellant's
         oral evidence and q21/22 of the interview. In  those  circumstances
         the Judges finding [32] that it was not credible that "having known
         his wife for more than three and a half years prior to her leaving,
         he would not have been aware of where she worked" was open  to  the
         Judge. That being the case, it was open to the Judge to  find  that
         the assertion he makes in his oral evidence and interview  (q21-22)
         that he did not know where she worked, when added to those recorded
         at [30, 33, and 34], can only mean that  the  reason  for  him  not
         knowing where she worked was that [35] they "did not have a genuine
         relationship" and, as submitted by Mr Nath,  that  consequently  it
         was a marriage of convenience.

     17. In my judgement there was therefore no material error of law in the
         decision.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set aside the decision.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
9 October 2015
