
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44486/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 29 May 2014                                  |On 14 August 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                              Merhedia Ubiebor
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Jones, instructed by MA Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer to the respondent, Merhedia Ubiebor, as  the  "appellant"
    and  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  as  the
    "respondent" (as they were respectively before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The concise grounds of appeal set  out  both  the  background  to  this
    matter and also the basis upon which the respondent seeks to  challenge
    the determination of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Oakley)  which,  on
    17 March 2014, allowed the appeal of the appellant. In his analysis  at
    [18] Judge Oakley noted:

         On 17 November 2009 reconsideration was requested and eventually on
         12 March 2012 the respondent agreed to a full reconsideration  upon
         the appellant agreeing to withdraw his pre-action Protocol  letter.
         On 21 March 2012 the respondent requested further evidence in order
         to conduct a full consideration of the application.

 3. At [24], the judge found:

         Although the appellant's application  was  refused  on  15  October
         2009, the respondent agreed to a full reconsideration in March 2012
         and therefore his application was pending  until  determination  of
         the reconsideration.  However, before his application  was  finally
         determined on 12 April 2012  the  appellant  applied  to  vary  his
         application to a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant.  His application
         was refused  on  28  December  2012.   However  by  that  time  the
         appellant  had  accrued  twelve  years'  lawful  residence  on   19
         September 2012.

 4. These paragraphs in the determination take  us  to  the  crux  of  this
    appeal  in  the  Upper  Tribunal,  namely  the  legal  status  of   the
    "reconsideration" of the decision (or the application by the appellant)
    which had led to the appellant being refused leave to  remain  with  no
    right of appeal.  The  "pre-action  Protocol  letter"  relates  to  the
    appellant's proposed intention to seek  permission  to  bring  judicial
    review proceedings in respect of the respondent's  decision  to  refuse
    him further leave to remain without any right of appeal.  The letter of
    13 March 2012 sent to the appellant's representatives by the respondent
    records that "your client's case will now be  fully  reconsidered."   A
    further letter of 21 March 2012 requested further information "in order
    for me to conduct a full reconsideration in your client's application."
     That "reconsideration" was overtaken  by  events  when  the  appellant
    sought to vary his application for leave to remain but the fact remains
    that there was no reversal of the respondent's  previous  decisions  to
    refuse the appellant's applications on the basis that  the  appellant's
    application of 3 September 2009 had been  invalid  and  the  subsequent
    (valid) application had been made at a time when the appellant  had  no
    leave to remain (and, therefore, the refusal of  the  application  gave
    rise to no appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal).   I  find  that  Judge
    Oakley has erred at [24] by concluding that the respondent's  agreement
    to "reconsider" on the condition the appellant withdrew his application
    for judicial review either reversed the respondent's previous decisions
    or extended the appellant's leave to remain  retrospectively  beyond  3
    September 2009.  Nowhere in the correspondence does it state  that  the
    appellant's "application was pending until  the  determination  of  the
    reconsideration." [determination, 24]. It follows that Judge Oakley was
    wrong to conclude that the appellant had made a  sequence  of  in  time
    applications to extend his leave which, in  turn,  meant  that  he  had
    accrued ten years' lawful and uninterrupted residence.

 5. I agree also with the respondent that the case of  Basnet  [2012]  UKUT
    00113 (IAC) is of little assistance to the appellant.  The  appellant's
    application of 3 September 2009 was properly rejected  as  invalid  for
    two reasons, namely the failure to make payment and the  submission  of
    invalid photographs.  Those reasons for rejecting  the  application  do
    not appear to be disputed.  Basnet is concerned with determining  which
    party may have the burden  of  proving  that  an  application  was  not
    accompanied  by  a  fee  and  criticises  the  respondent's  system  of
    processing payments sent to her with postal applications; it  does  not
    have any application in this case given its particular facts.

 6. I set aside the determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  have
    remade the decision.  In the light  of  my  findings  and  observations
    above, the appellant's appeal against the immigration decision dated 11
    October 2013 is dismissed.

DECISION

 7. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside.   I  remade
    the decision.  The appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision
    dated 11 October 2013 is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 1 August 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

