
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44463/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 1 August 2016                              |On 15 August 2016              |
|                                              |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

                                    H.B.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Raza of Counsel instructed by Pure Legal
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. In my error of law decision in this appeal set out on 13  June  2016  I
    made an anonymity direction under Rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  That direction remains in force.

Error on a Point of Law

 2. In my decision of 13 June 2016 I  summarised  the  background  to  this
    appeal and gave reasons for concluding that the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge contained an error on a point of law such  that  it
    should be set aside  and  remade  on  the  limited  basis  to  which  I
    referred.  I now quote the relevant parts of that decision:

    "Background

          1. On 18th November  2015  Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier
             Tribunal J M Lewis gave permission to the appellant to  appeal
             against the decision of Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier
             Tribunal McClure in which  he  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the
             appellant under the Immigration  Rules  and  on  human  rights
             grounds against the decision of the respondent taken  on  27th
             October 2014 to refuse leave to remain applying the provisions
             of Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of the  Immigration  Rules
             and to remove under Section 10 of the Immigration  and  Asylum
             Act 1999.

          2. It should be noted that,  in  the  same  decision,  Designated
             Judge McClure  allowed  the  appeals  of  the  sister  of  the
             appellant in this  case  and  her  two  minor  children.   The
             appeals of those appellants were allowed under Appendix FM and
             paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration   Rules.    That   was
             principally for the reason that it would not be reasonable  to
             expect the child appellants to leave the United Kingdom having
             been here for more than seven years and  their  mother  had  a
             subsisting  parental  relationship   with   them.    All   the
             appellants are citizens of Pakistan.

          3. When granting permission, Designated Judge  Lewis  noted  that
             the appellant in  this  appeal  was  not  the  father  of  the
             children but the brother of their mother and so  an  uncle  to
             the children.  At paragraphs 61 to  68  of  the  decision  the
             Designated Judge had accepted  that  the  appellant  played  a
             material part in the lives of the children to whom he was akin
             to a father figure and that family life existed between all of
             them.  However, although the Designated Judge  had  considered
             the circumstances of  the  appellant  before  concluding  that
             interference with his family life was  proportionate,  he  had
             not considered the impact of the appellant's  removal  on  the
             other  three  appellants,   especially   the   two   children.
             Designated Judge Lewis thought this to be an arguable error.

    The Hearing and Submissions

          4. At the  hearing  Mr  Ahmed  confirmed  that  the  grounds  and
             contents of  the  permission  were  relied  upon.   Whilst  he
             accepted that the decision was detailed, he  emphasised  that,
             having found the existence of private and family life  between
             all of the appellants, it was  incumbent  upon  the  judge  to
             consider the impact of removal, particularly on the  children.
             He contended that there was nothing in the  decision  to  show
             that this had been done.

          5. Ms Johnstone drew my attention to paragraphs 61 and 63 of  the
             decision which, she submitted, showed  adequate  consideration
             of proportionality  issues  and  the  impact  upon  the  other
             appellants.  In particular the judge  made  reference  to  the
             financial consequences  of  the  appellant's  departure  which
             would make his sister and her children reliant upon government
             support and the family would not be able to  afford  the  fees
             for extra education that had been enjoyed in the past.

          6. Mr Ahmed concluded by indicating that the judge had focused on
             the fact that the appellant was not the father of the children
             instead of considering the best interests for all of them.

          7. Both representatives suggested that, if an  error  was  found,
             then any re-making of the decision in relation  to  the  human
             rights claim outside the Rules should continue  in  the  Upper
             Tribunal.

    Conclusions

          8.  The  decision  of   the   Designated   Judge   is   certainly
             comprehensive and thoughtful carefully distinguishing  between
             the circumstances of each group of  parties  involved  notably
             the appellant is the subject of the application in this  case.
             The sole issue is whether  or  not  the  judge  gave  adequate
             consideration to  the  effect  which  the  departure  of  this
             appellant would have on his sister and her  children,  bearing
             in mind that the judge had given cogent reasons for concluding
             that a family life existed  between  all  of  them.   In  that
             respect the judge applies the  Court  of  Appeal  decision  in
             Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ  31  on  the  basis  that  there  was
             something  more  than  the  normal  blood  ties  between  them
             particularly since the appellant appeared to have been  giving
             support through illegal working.

          9. Although the judge properly excluded the  application  of  the
             Immigration Rules for the appellant, he moved to consider  the
             human rights  claim  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  without
             identifying any compelling circumstances which  might  justify
             leave to remain on the basis recommended in SS (Congo)  [2015]
             EWCA Civ 387.  However, that omission might not be fatal where
             the judge had given comprehensive consideration to any factors
             which might support the human rights claim but, unfortunately,
             it appears that he did not because he omitted to  have  regard
             to the impact of removal on the other members  of  the  family
             group, on the  basis  required  by  Beoku-Betts  [2008]  UKHL.
             Although the judge does give consideration  to  the  financial
             impact of the  appellant's  removal  and  the  judge  directed
             himself to take into consideration the best interests  of  the
             two minor children, there is no specific consideration in  the
             decision of the effect of his removal on the  relationship  of
             both those children and their  mother.   This  is  a  material
             error which requires the  re-making  of  the  appeal  on  that
             narrow basis.

         10. As the judge's conclusion that a family  life  exists  between
             the appellant and the other former appellants is to stand,  it
             is appropriate that the re-making of this appeal  should  take
             place at a resumed hearing in the Upper Tribunal at which  the
             appellant will be  permitted  to  adduce  evidence  about  the
             effect of his removal upon his sister and her children.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error on a point of
    law such that it should be re-made on the limited basis referred to  in
    the preceding paragraph ..."

Remaking the decision

   3. At the resumed hearing in the Upper Tribunal  before  me  on  the  1st
      August 2016 I heard submissions from  representatives  concerning  the
      issue of the impact of removal of the appellant on  other  members  of
      his family group taking into consideration that the first Judge  found
      the existence of a family and private life and that  the  respondent's
      refusal decision significantly  interfered  with  that  life.  It  was
      agreed that my consideration of human rights issues would  be  outside
      the Immigration Rules.

   4. Representatives also agreed that the main issue for  my  consideration
      was that set out in Section 117B(6) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
      and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended) as to whether  or  not  it  would  be
      reasonable to expect the  children  with  whom  the  appellant  has  a
      parental relationship to leave the United Kingdom.

   5. It was pointed out to me that  the  appellant's  sister  and  her  two
      daughters have all been granted leave to remain in the United  Kingdom
      following the success of their  joint  appeal  before  the  First-tier
      Judge who had, nevertheless, dismissed the appeal of the appellant  in
      these proceedings.

   6. The children all qualify under the seven year  provision  set  out  in
      Section 117D(1) of the 2002 Act.  Mr Raza submitted that it would  not
      be reasonable to expect the children of the family  relationship  with
      the appellant to return to  Pakistan,  their  best  interests  clearly
      being to remain in the United Kingdom.  My attention was drawn to  the
      letters from each of the children in the consolidated bundle submitted
      by representatives on 26 July 2016 which set out the extent  of  their
      daily relationship with the appellant.  He also drew attention to  the
      detailed letter of support from the head  teacher  of  the  children's
      school on Pages 40 and 41.

   7. Mr Raza emphasised that the appellant was the de facto father and only
      male role  model  for  the  children.   He  contended  that  the  best
      interests of the children were clearly for  the  appellant  to  remain
      with them as he had done in  the  last  eleven  years  in  the  United
      Kingdom.  He acknowledged that family life had been  established  when
      the appellant's status was precarious because he had no leave  but  he
      considered that the strength of family  and  private  life  outweighed
      this.

   8. Mr McVeety helpfully acknowledged that the  first  Judge  had  already
      found, when concluding the existence of family life, that it would not
      be reasonable to expect the children to leave the United Kingdom  when
      applying the  provisions  of  Section  EX.1  of  Appendix  FM  of  the
      Immigration Rules before allowing their appeal.  He acknowledged  that
      it had  also  been  shown,  before  the  First-tier  Judge,  that  the
      Appellant was the de facto father of the children.

Conclusions

   9. After I had heard  submissions  and  taking  account  of  the  helpful
      acknowledgements made by Mr McVeety, I announced that  I  would  allow
      the appeal of the appellant on human rights grounds and  now  give  my
      brief reasons for doing so.

  10. All the important factors required to enable me to allow  this  appeal
      on human rights  grounds  are  present.  In  particular  it  has  been
      established that the appellant has a family life with his  sister  and
      her nieces which has  existed  for  at  least  eleven  years  in  this
      country.

  11.  He  has  clearly  established  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
      relationship with the children following the breakdown of the sister's
      marriage even if he is not their natural father.  The statement of the
      appellant which commences on page 1 of the  consolidated  bundle  sets
      out the extent of involvement of the appellant in  the  emotional  and
      practical upbringing of the two children. It is also evident, from the
      letters from the children that their uncle is  regarded  as  a  father
      figure who has extensive involvement in their daily lives.   There  is
      no relationship with their natural father. The head of the  children's
      school has written in some detail about the extent and  value  of  the
      appellant's relationship with his nieces.

  12. It is also my conclusion that the best interests of the  children  are
      to remain with their mother and the appellant in the  United  Kingdom.
      As Section 117B of the 2002 Act specifies, the  public  interest  does
      not require  a  person's  removal  whether  there  is  a  genuine  and
      subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child and it  would
      not be reasonable to expect the child to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.
      That is precisely the position here.  Although the Article 8 balancing
      act requires consideration of the appellant's immigration history I am
      not satisfied, having regard to the  specific  provisions  of  Section
      117B that this can outweigh the appellant's strong  relationship  with
      his nieces and their mother.  On this basis and having regard  to  the
      helpful acknowledgements made by Mr McVeety for the Home  Office  this
      appeal can be allowed on human rights grounds.

Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal in relation to  this  appellant
    showed an error on a point of law.   I  set  aside  that  decision  and
    remake it to allow the appeal on human rights grounds.


Fees Award

    Although I have allowed this appeal  it  was  not  possible  to  do  so
    without  the                          additional  information  provided
    after the leave application. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an
    award in respect of the successful appeals by  the  appellant's  sister
    and children, either.  In these circumstances I do not consider  a  fee
    award to be appropriate.




Signed                              Date 15/08/2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
