
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44945/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Field House             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 June 2019                      |On 8 July 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Sheikh Faraz Umer
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G O'Ceallaigh, Counsel, instructed by AWS
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  (hereafter  SSHD)
         appeals against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Flynn (the judge) who, in a decision promulgated  on  22  September
         2015, allowed  the  appeal  of  Mr  Sheikh  Faraz  Umer  (hereafter
         claimant) against the SSHD's decision of 22 October 2014 to  remove
         him pursuant to s.10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999  as  a
         person who used deception in seeking leave to remain.


Background

      2. The claimant is a national of Pakistan, born on 28 April  1991.  He
         entered the UK on 10 March 2011 as a Tier 4 (General)  Student.  He
         was granted further leave to remain in the same capacity  until  27
         January 2014. On that date he made an application for further leave
         to remain, again as a Tier 4 (General) Student. In support of  this
         application  the  claimant  submitted  a  TOEIC  English   language
         certificate from Education Testing Services (ETS). In a solicitor's
         letter dated 22 July 2014 the claimant then sought leave to  remain
         under Article 8, although it does not appear  that  the  judge  was
         aware of this application, or that any attempt was  made  to  bring
         this application to her attention. There is no evidence  before  me
         that the SSHD engaged with this application or considered it  as  a
         variation of the previous application.


      3. On 22 October 2014 the SSHD decided to cancel the claimant's  leave
         and to remove him as a person who used deception in his application
         for further leave to remain. The SSHD claimed that ETS had a record
         of his speaking test and, using voice verification software,  found
         there  was  "significant  evidence"  that   his   certificate   was
         fraudulently obtained using a proxy test-taker. His score from  the
         test undertaken on 1 August 2012 at the Premier  Language  Training
         Centre was cancelled.


      4. Under the statutory appeals regime in place  at  the  date  of  the
         SSHD's decision the claimant had a right  of  appeal  against  that
         decision (s.82(1)(g) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
         2002 (the 2002 Act)). The claimant could however only appeal  while
         in the UK if he had made a human rights claim in the UK (s.92(4)(a)
         of the 2002 Act).

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      5. The appeal came before the judge at a hearing on  10  August  2015.
         The judge determined a preliminary issue as to whether the claimant
         had an in-country right of appeal in  his  favour  (at  [12]).  The
         judge then heard oral evidence from the  claimant,  which  included
         the reasons why chose to  do  his  test  at  the  Premier  Language
         Training College and  his  description  of  taking  the  test,  and
         considered the claimant's written statement contained in a  27-page
         bundle of documents. The bundle of  documents  included  a  further
         TOEIC Speaking and Writing Official Score  Report  dated  2  August
         2014, an IELTS English language test dated 1 July 2010, a Statement
         of Marks relating to the  claimant  and  issued  by  the  Board  of
         Intermediate Education Karachi on 17 March  2011,  a  South  Thames
         College 'Good Student Award' dated 25 November 2011, a letter dated
         27 September 2013 from the College of Advanced Studies, and further
         documentation of the claimant's academic  achievements.  The  judge
         heard additional oral evidence from Adnan Nazir, a  friend  of  the
         claimant.

      6. Having summarised evidence and the parties' submissions  the  judge
         then set out her conclusions. The judge referred to the evidence of
         deception upon which the SSHD relied and set out extracts from  the
         'generic' statements of  Rebecca  Collings,  Peter  Millington  and
         Michael Sartorius. The judge found that the claimant's reasons  for
         taking the  test  at  the  particular  centre  were  plausible  and
         considered it significant that the claimant had attained good marks
         in other English language tests, including an IELTS test  dated  19
         June 2010, which was taken over 2 years before the  ETS  test.  The
         judge relied on other English language tests taken by the  claimant
         and noted that he gave his evidence in  English  and  was  able  to
         understand  and  answer  some  complicated  questions.  The   judge
         expressed concern that the generic statements lacked  any  specific
         details of the voice analysis method employed by ETS, or details of
         the training of the ETS assessors, or  details  of  the  number  of
         false positives that had been identified.  The  judge  acknowledged
         the number of invalid test results from the College but found there
         was a strong risk of confirmation bias. The judge found,  in  light
         of the claimant's evidence that about 10 people took  the  test  at
         the same time in relatively small room, that  it  was  more  likely
         than not that the examination conditions were the reason  his  test
         result was invalidated. The judge concluded,  indicating  that  she
         had looked at the evidence in the round, that the  SSHD  failed  to
         provide sufficient  evidence  to  demonstrate  on  the  balance  of
         probabilities that the claimant  used  deception.  The  appeal  was
         consequently allowed under the "immigration rules".

The challenge to the judge's decision

      7. The initial grounds were twofold. It was first contended  that  the
         judge erred in law in  concluding  that  she  had  jurisdiction  to
         entertain the appeal. The second ground contended  that  the  judge
         failed to give adequate reasons for concluding that  the  SSHD  had
         not discharged the burden of proving deception and that she  failed
         to give due consideration to the SSHD's evidence. It was  submitted
         that  the  witness  statements,   when   cumulatively   considered,
         extensively detailed investigations undertaken  by  ETS,  and  that
         there may have been reasons why a person  who  was  able  to  speak
         English to the  required  level  would  nevertheless  use  a  proxy
         tester. Permission was initially granted only on the first  ground,
         but the Upper Tribunal decided, "in the interests of  consistency",
         that the SSHD may also challenge the second ground dealing with the
         judge's approach to the evidence.

      8. A previous Upper Tribunal decision promulgated on 6 May 2016  found
         that the First-tier Tribunal had no jurisdiction to  entertain  the
         appeal  and  concluded  that  there  had  been  no  valid   appeal.
         Understandably, there was no engagement with the 2nd ground.  In  a
         decision dated 27 April 2018 but sealed on 9 May 2018 the Court  of
         Appeal granted permission to appeal  and  invited  the  parties  to
         agree that the appeal should be allowed and remitted to  the  Upper
         Tribunal on the basis that the claimant had made an Article 8 claim
         in his solicitor's letter of 22 July 2014 and that  the  First-tier
         Tribunal therefore had jurisdiction. In an order sealed on 26 April
         2019 it was agreed by consent that the appeal  be  allowed  as  the
         Upper Tribunal (and the First-tier Tribunal)  had  jurisdiction  to
         consider the appeals and that the case was  remitted  back  to  the
         Upper Tribunal to consider the second ground.

      9. At the 'error of law' hearing on 11 June 2019 Mr Clarke  relied  on
         the only remaining ground and submitted,  in  reliance  on  SM  and
         Qadir v Secretary of State for the Home Department (ETS -  Evidence
         - Burden of Proof)  [2016]  UKUT  00229  (IAC),  that  the  generic
         evidence and the ETS spreadsheet constituted sufficient evidence to
         discharge the evidential burden on the SSHD, and that in concluding
         otherwise at [12], the judge misdirected herself in law. If, as her
         starting point in her assessment of  whether  a  proxy  tester  was
         used, the judge did not accept that the  evidence  upon  which  the
         SSHD relied  was  capable  of  demonstrating  deception,  then  her
         subsequent analysis was wrong in law because she failed  to  attach
         adequate weight to the  SSHD's  evidence.  Mr  Clarke  additionally
         submitted that the  judge  attached  inappropriate  weight  to  the
         claimant's English proficiency.

     10. Mr O'Ceallaigh submitted that the judge's approach to the issue  of
         jurisdiction  was  different  to   her   subsequent   approach   in
         determining whether a proxy tester was used and that it was unclear
         what standard the judge applied when determining  jurisdiction.  He
         submitted  that  the  judge  undertook  a  separate  assessment  of
         deception in her conclusions and placed appropriate reliance on the
         SSHD's evidence but was entitled to conclude, having looked at  the
         evidence before her 'in the round' and for the reasons given,  that
         the claimant was a credible witness who did not use a proxy tester.

Discussion

     11. In making her preliminary decision regarding jurisdiction the judge
         referred to the 'generic' statements from Rebecca  Collings,  Peter
         Millington and Michael Sartorius and an ETS spreadsheet relating to
         the claimant. The judge's reasoning on the jurisdictional issue  is
         confused. She considered the ETS spreadsheet  and  found  this  was
         "not  sufficient  evidence"  of  deception  and  decided  that  the
         claimant enjoyed an in-country right of appeal. The  issue  whether
         the claimant was entitled to an  in-country  right  of  appeal  was
         however dependent on whether he made a human rights  claim  to  the
         respondent. It was not dependent on the  quality  of  the  evidence
         going to the issue of deception. This was a point accepted by  both
         representatives at the error of law hearing before me. I agree with
         Mr O'Ceallaigh that it  is  unclear  what  standard  of  proof  was
         applied by the judge when determining  the  issue  of  jurisdiction
         with reference to the allegation of deception. The structure of the
         decision,  in  which  the  judge  first  considered  the  issue  of
         jurisdiction with reference to the  SSHD's  evidence  on  deception
         before engaging in a much fuller assessment of the SSHD's  evidence
         against the  claimant's  evidence,  suggests  that  she  adopted  a
         different standard when assessing the  issue  of  jurisdiction.  If
         this was not the case, and she was not initially persuaded that the
         SSHD's evidence was capable of demonstrating deception, there would
         have been no reason for  her  to  have  undertaken  any  subsequent
         assessment.


     12. The decision in SM and Qadir, which held that the  SSHD's  evidence
         discharged the  initial  evidential  burden  thereby  requiring  an
         individual to advance a reasonable explanation which, if  accepted,
         would cause the burden of proof to boomerang back to the SSHD,  had
         not been promulgated at  the  date  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
         decision. It is not therefore surprising that  the  judge  did  not
         adopt this approach. Failure  to  adopt  this  approach  would  not
         however constitute an error of  law  if  the  judge,  in  practice,
         approached the  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the  SSHD's  evidence
         required a reasonable explanation from the claimant and  the  judge
         properly considered this explanation and its supporting evidence.

     13. Having carefully examined the decision  I  am  satisfied  that  the
         judge did adopt this approach. The judge correctly identified  that
         the SSHD bore the  burden  of  proving  deception  and  then  fully
         engaged with the evidence upon which the SSHD relied,  setting  out
         relevant extracts from the statements of Ms Collings, Mr Millington
         and Mr Sartorius  in  some  detail  while  accurately  highlighting
         certain deficiencies in that evidence. The judge took full  account
         of the SSHD's evidence, including the  ETS  spreadsheet  [31],  and
         accorded that evidence appropriate weight. The judge  was  entitled
         to find that the claimant's explanation for taking his test at  the
         Premier Language Training College was plausible (he took  the  test
         there because it was near to him  and  because  the  College  could
         offer him the earliest date), and properly took  into  account  the
         claimant's description of the circumstances in which  he  took  his
         test.

     14. The judge was rationally entitled  to  accord  weight  to  previous
         English language tests taken by the claimant.  The  judge  did  not
         approach this evidence as  being  determinative  of  the  issue  of
         deception. The fact that the claimant had previously attained  good
         marks in English language tests before his alleged use of  a  proxy
         tester was clearly a relevant factor in determining  an  allegation
         of deception. The judge was also entitled to rely on a letter dated
         27 September 2013 from the College of Advanced Studies stating that
         the claimant's English language and communication skills were  very
         high and competent,  and  her  own  assessment  of  the  claimant's
         proficiency in English. Whilst I appreciate that in MA (ETS - TOEIC
         testing) [2016] UKUT 450 (IAC) the Tribunal  indicated  that  there
         may be a variety of reasons why someone proficient in  English  may
         wish to use a proxy  tester,  no  such  reasons  were  advanced  in
         respect of this  particular  claimant,  either  at  the  First-tier
         Tribunal hearing or at the  'error  of  law'  hearing.  In  MA  the
         Tribunal had already concluded that the Appellant in that case  had
         engaged in deception. The Tribunal found  there  were  "significant
         gaps" and "notable discrepancies" in the Appellant's evidence,  and
         that his account was "vague and hesitant". No such finding was made
         in the present case. MA is not authority for the proposition that a
         judge, having found that an individual was, at all material  times,
         sufficiently proficient in English, is then obliged to speculate as
         to why that person may nevertheless have had  a  reason  to  use  a
         proxy test-taker.


     15. I am satisfied, for the reasons given,  that  the  judge  carefully
         considered the evidence relied on by both parties and that she  was
         entitled to conclude, having found the claimant to  be  a  credible
         witness, that he did not use a proxy tester. The judge's conclusion
         that the SSHD failed  to  discharge  the  burden  of  proving  that
         deception was used was rationally open to her and was not  infected
         by an error of law.

     16. I am however concerned that the judge allowed the appeal under  the
         immigration rules. The decision under challenge was not made  under
         the immigration rules. It was made under s.10  of  the  Immigration
         and Asylum Act 1999 on the basis that the appellant used  deception
         in an application for Leave  To  Remain.  The  judge's  sustainable
         findings in reality rendered the s.10 decision "not  in  accordance
         with the law", another ground of appeal available to the First-tier
         Tribunal under the previous appeals regime (s.84(1)(e) of the  2002
         Act).

     17. This was not an issue ventilated by the parties at the error of law
         hearing. I considered whether it was necessary  to  invite  further
         submissions from the parties on this point  but,  in  light  of  my
         findings above, I did not  consider  it  necessary.  The  point  is
         narrow and straightforward. The judge  was  not  entitled  to  have
         allowed the appeal under the immigration rules and, to this limited
         extent, she erred on a point of law. In these circumstances  I  set
         the judge's  decision  aside  and  proceed  to  remake  the  appeal
         allowing it on the basis that the SSHD's decision is otherwise  not
         in accordance with the law. The consequence of my decision is  that
         the claimant's application,  whether  it  be  a  Tier  4  (General)
         Student application or an Article 8  human  rights  claim,  remains
         pending.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error  on  a  point  of
law and is set aside. The decision is re-made  allowing  the  appeal  of  Mr
Umer.

[pic]
Signed                                  Date: 4 July 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
