

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/44531/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 20 July 2016                       |On 21 July 2016                   |
|                                      |                                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN

                                   Between


                           MOHAMMAD IDRIS HOSSAIN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B. Danial, Counsel instructed by SEB Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N. Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed against  the  respondent's  decision  dated  17
    October 2014 to refuse leave to remain as a Tier  4  (General)  Student
    Migrant on the ground that a bank statement submitted in support of the
    application had "been confirmed as false by the issuing authority".

2.    The appeal was listed for  hearing  on  2  July  2015.  The  appellant
    attended the hearing but  it  was  adjourned  because  no  respondent's
    bundle had been served in accordance with directions. The Tribunal made
    a further direction that the respondent serve the bundle  within  seven
    days of the hearing. However, the  bundle  was  not  served  until  the
    morning of the relisted hearing on 1 December 2015. This was the  first
    time that the respondent disclosed the evidence relied upon to  support
    the reasons for refusal.

3.    The appellant instructed a legal representative to assist him  at  the
    hearing on 1 December 2015 but he says that he was unable to attend the
    hearing because he was too unwell to do so. A  brief  letter  dated  30
    November 2015 from Dr Mustafa at the IPSA Medical Clinic  was  produced
    to support an adjournment request. The letter stated that the appellant
    had been seen as an acute emergency for severe back pain on that  date.
    Dr Mustafa stated that he advised that the appellant was not  medically
    fit to attend court due to severe pain. Although the letter  was  brief
    it contains the full contact details of the clinic as well as a summary
    of Dr Mustafa's qualifications and his GMC number.

4.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Devittie ("the judge")  gave  the  following
    reasons for refusing to adjourn the appeal:

      "9.   I declined the application for  an  adjournment  because  I  was
           satisfied that the appellant's  claim  that  he  was  unable  to
           attend the hearing due to ill health was false.

              i) The letter from his doctor is remarkable for  its  brevity.
                 It does not state the cause of his condition; it  does  not
                 give the prognosis; it does not provide any medical history
                 to do with appellant's condition; it does not state whether
                 there  have  been  previous  consultations  for  the   same
                 condition - nor, does it say when the appellant's condition
                 is likely to improve such that he will be  able  to  attend
                 the hearing.
             ii) The onus rests on  an  appellant  to  present  evidence  in
                 support of an application for an adjournment, to show  that
                 he is medically unfit to attend the hearing.  The  evidence
                 presented in this case  is  entirely  unsatisfactory,  such
                 that I do not attach weight to it.
            iii) The appellant has failed, almost a year after  the  initial
                 letter of refusal, to present any evidence to  controverted
                 the clear and cogent evidence presented by  the  respondent
                 to support  the  allegation  that  the  bank  statement  is
                 forged.  This  tends  to  reinforce  my  belief  that   the
                 appellant  seeks  an  adjournment  merely  as  a  means  of
                 delaying a  decision  on  the  substantive  merits  of  his
                 appeal."

5.    The judge went on to  dismiss  the  appeal  on  the  ground  that  the
    Document Verification Report supported the respondent's claim that  the
    bank statement was forged.  He  noted  that  the  appellant  had  ample
    opportunity to approach the bank for evidence to rebut the allegation.

6.     The  appellant  applied  for  permission  to  appeal  on  grounds  of
    fairness. The appellant's representatives  attached  a  further  letter
    from Dr Mustafa dated 28 December 2015, which expanded on the advice he
    gave in his earlier letter. He confirmed that he saw the  appellant  on
    30 November 2015 when he came in as an acute emergency for severe  back
    pain. He started him on a strong analgesia  as  well  as  anti-relaxant
    medication which he said often  has  side  effects  of  drowsiness  and
    nausea. He advised him not to travel and to rest. Dr Mustafa  confirmed
    he had seen the appellant for a follow-up appointment that day and  had
    been told that there were issues with the previous note. He stated that
    if any further clarification was required the clinic could be contacted
    on the number given.

Decision and reasons

7.    After having considered the grounds of appeal  and  oral  arguments  I
    satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making  of
    an error on a point of law.

8.    The judge was entitled to assess what weight could  be  given  to  the
    initial letter written by Dr Mustafa on 30 November 2015 but the detail
    he appeared to require seems to be excessive given that  there  was  no
    evidence to suggest that the appellant  did  not  wish  to  pursue  his
    appeal or was simply seeking to delay matters. The  appellant  attended
    the hearing on 2 July 2015. He instructed  a  legal  representative  to
    represent him at the resumed hearing on 1 December 2015. It is the case
    that the appellant had the barebones of the allegation put  to  him  in
    the original reasons for refusal letter and could  have  done  more  to
    seek to authenticate the bank statement while waiting for  the  appeal.
    However, it seems that the judge failed to take into account  the  fact
    that the Document Verification Report used to  support  the  allegation
    was deemed sufficiently important to adjourn the previous hearing.  The
    respondent failed to comply with the further  direction  to  serve  the
    bundle within seven days of the hearing on 2  July  2015,  and  instead
    only served the bundle on the morning of the resumed hearing.  Even  if
    the judge had concerns about the reliability of  the  medical  evidence
    produced in support of the adjournment request, in the absence  of  any
    evidence to suggest that he did not seek  to  pursue  the  appeal,  the
    combined effect of the appellant's absence and the late  submission  of
    evidence that he should have been given fair opportunity to respond  to
    renders the decision unfair and therefore amounts to an error  of  law:
    see Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418

9.    The appellant has now produced a further letter from the  bank,  which
    the respondent has not yet had an opportunity to consider. While  I  am
    conscious of the delays that have already occurred  in  this  case  the
    consequence of my finding is that the appeal has to be remitted to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing. In the interim the  respondent
    will be able to make further enquiries.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

I set aside the decision and remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

Signed   [pic]   Date  20 July 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
