
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/44094/2014
                                                               IA/44096/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 December 2015                  |On 15 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                     MB
                                     SG
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr B Singh, Counsel instructed by Malik Law Chambers
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

1.   The appellants are nationals of Grenada.  MB was born on 31 March  1980
    and SG was born on 9 November 1980.  They are partners and they have  a
    son, KB, who was born on 9 December 2010.  Like his parents,  KB  is  a
    citizen of Grenada.

2.   MB came to the UK in 2002 and he was granted a right  of  residence  as
    the spouse of an EEA national until 5 April 2008.   He  was  granted  a
    residence card on 15 October 2009 which expired on 15 October 2014.  He
    applied for a  residence  card  under  Regulation  10(5)  of  the  2006
    Regulations on 8 September 2013, but this was refused by the  Secretary
    of State on 20 December 2013.

3.   SG came to the UK in August 2002 as a visitor and then she was  granted
    leave as a student on a number of occasions until 31 January 2010.   On
    8 January 2010 she applied to vary her leave as a Tier 4 Student.   The
    application was refused and her appeal was dismissed on 4 August  2010.
    She made subsequent applications, one as a student and  the  second  on
    human rights grounds both of which were  refused  without  a  right  of
    appeal.  She made an application to the respondent  to  reconsider  and
    this resulted in a decision of 6 November 2013 which gave her  a  right
    of appeal. Her appeal came before a First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  on  20
    February 2014 who adjourned it to link with MB's appeal.  Their appeals
    were ultimately heard on 24 July 2014 by  Judge  Oxlade  and  dismissed
    under the EEA Regulations and Article 8.

4.   The appellants made  further  submissions  on  2  October  2014  and  a
    further decision was generated on 22 October 2014  which  gave  them  a
    further right of  appeal.   It  is  this  decision  against  which  the
    appellants appealed and which  came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Coll, who dismissed the appeals under Article 8 in a  decision
    which was promulgation on 17 June 2015 following a hearing  on  13  May
    2015. Permission was granted to the appellants by Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal P J M Hollingworth.  Thus the matter came before me.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

5.   Judge Coll heard evidence from the appellant SG and her mother. MB  was
    present at the hearing, but did not give oral evidence. He had  made  a
    statement of evidence which the judge took into account.

6.   The judge quoted extensively from the decision  of  Judge  Oxlade,  who
    had dismissed the appeals less than a year prior  to  the  hearing  and
    applied the guidance in Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT  00702.   There  is  no
    challenge to the application of the guidance in Devaseelan.

7.   Judge Oxlade ("the first judge") made extensive  findings  in  relation
    to Article 8 and recorded in his decision that the appellants  had  not
    argued that they met  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules and, in any event, had they done so it  would  be  an
    uphill struggle for SG to argue that she had no ties to Grenada.

8.   The first judge found that the child's world  centred  on  his  parents
    and he would follow them wherever they go without  difficulty,  and  it
    would not be unreasonable for him to go  with  them  to  Grenada.   The
    judge found that the appellants had a substantial private life here  in
    the UK and that they had established a family life with the grandmother
    with whom they live.

9.   The case before the first judge and Judge Coll  was  presented  on  the
    basis that SG was her grandmother's carer.  The first judge found  that
    the grandmother had overstated her dependence on SG.  The  first  judge
    found that if the appellants were not living with the  grandmother  and
    should they return to Grenada there would be suitable  arrangements  in
    place to care for her here.

10.  The first judge considered the child's private life but noted  that  he
    had not started school and there was no evidence that he had a  private
    life outside his immediate family.  The first judge  found  that  there
    was family life here in the UK with SG's grandmother that departure  of
    the  appellants  to  Grenada  would  lead  to  upheaval  in  her   care
    arrangements, but that the appellants had no expectation of being  able
    to remain in the UK permanently.   SG's  immigration  status  here  was
    precarious and although the judge accepted that  there  was  dependence
    (between SG and  her  grandmother),  it  was  not  to  the  extent  the
    witnesses put forward.

11.  The first judge concluded that the best interests  of  the  child  were
    not a "terribly strong factor in this case, in view of the age  of  the
    child".  The judge concluded that although SG may not be able  to  live
    with her family in Grenada it cannot be said that there are no ties nor
    that the couple have been away for so long that they would not be  able
    to settle back there and that although there would  be  disturbance  to
    their lives it would be temporary until they were settled.

12.  Judge  Coll  had  the  benefit  of  hearing  oral  evidence  from  SG's
    grandmother, VG, and concluded that SG  was  endeavouring  to  paint  a
    picture to show that it would be almost impossible for the  grandmother
    to cope without her and  impossible  for  the  family  to  relocate  to
    Grenada.

13.  The judge took into account the recent evidence, not before  the  first
    judge, relating to the son who by then was attending nursery,  and  the
    medical evidence relating to VG. The judge that VG did not suffer  from
    three new health conditions (as asserted by the appellants)  and  found
    that her condition had not materially  changed  for  reasons  that  are
    recorded at paragraphs 69, 70, 71 and 72 of  the  decision.  The  first
    judge found, that the claimed dependence was overstated and judge  Coll
    found that it had only marginally increased. In relation to  the  child
    the judge accepted that he attended  nursery  full-time  but  concluded
    that there was no material change in circumstances since  the  decision
    of the first judge for reasons which are recorded at paragraph 66.



The Grounds of Appeal and Oral Submissions

14.  The first ground of appeal is that the judge did not properly  consider
    Article 8 in accordance with R v SSHD ex parte Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27
    and in the context of Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31.   The  second
    ground asserts that the judge  failed  to  have  proper  regard  to  ZH
    (Tanzania) v SSHD  [2011]  UKSC  4  and  Section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

15.  I heard submissions from  both  representatives.   Mr  Singh  submitted
    that in his view what the judge had done  was  to  simply  dismiss  the
    appeal under Article 8  because  the  appellants  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules and this amounts to an  error  of  law.   The
    judge failed to consider all of the evidence in relation  to  the  best
    interests of the child.

16.  Mr Singh argued that the judge failed to take  into  account  that  the
    family could not return  to  Grenada  because  they  do  not  have  any
    connections there.  There would be no  accommodation  and  uncertainty,
    which would not be in the best interests of the child.  The  assessment
    of the children's best interests was inadequate.  The judge,  according
    to Mr Singh, did not acknowledge the  difficulties  for  the  child  of
    integrating into Grenada and the uncertainty which he would  experience
    having completed two and a half terms of nursery school here in the UK.

Conclusions

17.  Ground 1 in my view is wholly misconceived.  It  was  not  argued  that
    the appellants  in  this  case  could  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules and indeed they could not do so  by  a  wide  margin.
    The judge did not consider that this was conclusive of the  outcome  of
    the appeal as Mr Singh suggested.  The judge properly directed  himself
    extensively in relation to Article 8 (see paragraphs 32 to 40).  It  is
    clear having considered the decision  as  a  whole,  that  the  outcome
    turned on whether or not the interference to  the  appellants'  private
    and family life was proportionate and there was no need for  the  judge
    to deal specifically with each and every step of the Razgar guidance.

18.  Significantly the judge did not accept the relationship between SG  and
    her grandmother to involve the level of dependency as they claimed  and
    there is no challenge to this finding.  The judge did not refer to  the
    case of Kugathas but from the decision it is clear that the judge, like
    the first judge, found that there was family life, but the issue turned
    on proportionality.  The failure to mention Kugathas does not amount to
    a material error of law.

19.  I asked Mr Singh to identify the evidence  that  the  judge  failed  to
    take into account in this regard to  the  child's  best  interests.  He
    referred to  school  achievement  awards  and  documentation  from  the
    school.  I referred him to paragraph 66 of the decision which indicated
    to me that in fact  the  judge  had  taken  into  account  the  further
    evidence that was not before the First-tier Tribunal and  to  which  Mr
    Singh referred. Mr Singh was unable to refer me to  any  evidence  that
    the judge failed to  take  into  account  or  matters  that  the  judge
    erroneously took into account in relation  to  proportionality  or  the
    best interests of the child.  The judge clearly found that there was no
    reason to depart from the decision of the first judge  in  relation  to
    the best interests of the child having taken into account the  evidence
    that was not before the  first  judge.    It  is  unarguable  that  the
    evidence  established  anything  other  than  that  the  child's   best
    interests were to remain with his parents, whether  in  the  UK  or  in
    Grenada, having considered his age, circumstances and nationality.

20.  Mr Singh raised matters which  were  not  in  the  grounds  of  appeal,
    namely that the judge did not take into account difficulties  regarding
    integration in Grenada but there was no  basis  for  this.   The  judge
    considered the evidence submitted in  relation  to  Grenada's  economic
    situation at paragraphs 64 and 65 and made findings at paragraph 60  in
    relation to the SG's family in Grenada.

21.  The grounds do not establish that the judge made an error  of  law.   I
    have taken into account paragraph 84 where the judge stated  that  "the
    second appellant's claim is dependent  on  the  success  of  the  first
    appellant" and therefore her appeal can only fail.  I am  not  entirely
    sure what the judge had in mind because both partied  were  appellants.
    This is not in any event material to the outcome of the appeal.

22.  The judge properly assessed proportionality.  It  has  not  been  shown
    that there was any procedural error in relation to Article  8  and  the
    consideration of Article 8 outside of the Immigration  Rules.  If  this
    were the case, it was not material to the outcome. It is  difficult  to
    see  how  the  judge  on  the  evidence  and  having  properly  applied
    Devaseelan could have reached a different.

Notice of Decision

There is no error of law. The decision of the judge is  maintained  and  the
appellants' appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 14 January 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

