
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44637/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 19th September 2014                          |On 8th October 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                        MISS STACIAN VERONICA GILBERT
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Lane, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born on  29th  August  1980.   On
    18th September 2012 the  Appellant  applied  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of  her  private  life,  long
    residence,  medical  and  compassionate  grounds.   The  Appellant  had
    originally arrived in the  United  Kingdom  on  30th  July  1998.   Her
    immigration history thereinafter is set out in considerable  detail  in
    the first main paragraph of a  reasons  for  refusal  letter  that  was
    issued to the Appellant on 27th August 2013.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Archer  sitting  at  Taylor  House  on  26th  June  2014.   In  a
    determination promulgated on 11th July 2014 the Appellant's appeal  was
    dismissed under the Immigration Rules but was allowed under  Article  8
    of the European Convention of Human Rights.

 3. The Secretary of State lodged Grounds of Appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    on 21st July 2014.  Those grounds contended

      i) That the  judge  had  erred  in  his  purported  identification  of
         compelling circumstances  not  sufficiently  recognised  under  the
         Rules.

     ii) That the judge had erred  in  law  by  not  having  regard  to  the
         requirements of the  Rules  as  a  relevant  consideration  in  the
         proportionality evaluation.

    iii) The judge had erred in law  by  failing  to  have  regard,  in  the
         proportionality exercise,  to  the  public  interest  in  effective
         immigration control.

 4. On 31st July 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Cox granted  permission  to
    appeal.   No  Rule  24  response  has   been   filed   by   the   legal
    representatives of the Appellant.

 5. Miss Gilbert appears by her instructed Counsel Mr Lane.  The  Secretary
    of State appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Miss Everett.  I
    acknowledge that this is an appeal by the Secretary of  State  but  for
    the purpose of continuity within the litigation the Secretary of  State
    will be referred to hereinafter as the Respondent and Miss Gilbert will
    remain for the purpose of this determination as the Appellant.

Preliminary Issue

 6. Mr Lane seeks to raise a preliminary  issue  in  the  proceedings.   He
    produces to the Tribunal a new birth certificate  dated  1st  September
    2014 in which the Appellant's  father  has  been  added  to  the  birth
    certificate pursuant to a court order.  He takes me  to  the  statutory
    authority of Section 65 of the Immigration Act 2014 which modifies  the
    persons who are previously unable to acquire  citizenship  due  to  the
    fact that the natural father was not married to the mother.  He submits
    that under that Section as soon as that Section of the Act  is  brought
    into force the Appellant would be  in  a  position  to  register  as  a
    British citizen.

 7. He also takes me to the authority of R (On the Application of  Johnson)
    v the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2014]  EWHC  2386
    (Admin).  He submits that whilst that was a deportation case the  issue
    was principally the same and Dinghams J  considered  the  issue  as  to
    whether or not there was discretion in  refusing  nationality  where  a
    claimant was illegitimate and the High Court found  that  there  was  a
    discretion under Article 14 which would combine with Article 8  and  it
    was left thereinafter as to the advocates how to proceed.

 8. Mr Lane submits that the Appellant now finds herself in a very  similar
    position and that these are factors I should take into account  in  the
    event I found there was any merit in the appeal made by  the  Secretary
    of State.

Submissions/Discussions

 9. Miss Everett relies on the Grounds of Appeal and submits that the judge
    has given the wrong level of weight in his determination.  She  submits
    that at paragraphs 26 and 27 of the determination the judge  has  given
    far too much weight to the delay  (which  she  acknowledged  has  taken
    place) in the processing of the  Appellant's  application  for  further
    leave to remain and that the findings he makes at paragraph 28 are  not
    sustainable.  She asked me to find a material error of law and  to  set
    aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

10. Mr Lane responds by pointing out that at paragraphs 16 to 18 the  judge
    has made findings of fact and paragraph 28 of the  determination  takes
    them into account.  He points out that the principles of Razgar are set
    out within paragraph 24 albeit that the case is not specifically  named
    and that it then becomes a matter for the judge to apply the principles
    of proportionality and that  he  has  looked  at  this  and  drawn  his
    conclusions at paragraph  28.   He  has  she  points  out  for  example
    considered the Appellant's medical condition emphasising that  this  is
    an extremely serious condition that could be lethal if she  is  removed
    from the United Kingdom.  The judge has made findings of fact which are
    not challenged and he draws to  my  attention  that  the  Appellant  is
    dependent upon family members in the UK.  He submits that the Appellant
    has a very strong private life in the UK and that this was acknowledged
    by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  and  that  it  would  be  wrong  to
    underestimate her health conditions and her requirement to be with  her
    family and that this is reflected in paragraph  28.   He  submits  that
    there is no error of law in the determination and asked me  to  dismiss
    the appeal.

The Law

11.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

12. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

13. The basis of the Appellant's appeal substantially relies on  the  level
    of weight the judge has given individual issues in this matter  and  it
    is argued by Miss Everett that the judge has not given due  and  proper
    weight to the public interest considerations and  has  given  too  much
    weight to the delay brought about  by  the  Secretary  of  State  as  a
    failure  to  process  the  Appellant's   application.    Providing   an
    Immigration Judge has applied due and proper weight and his decision is
    not perverse it is not the role of the Upper Tribunal to  overturn  his
    decision.  What is clear in this determination is that  the  judge  has
    analysed the  facts  and  thereafter  applied  weight  to  the  various
    factors.  In carrying out that exercise he certainly  does  not  create
    any material error of law in his determination.

14. The judge found all witnesses to be credible.  That is not  challenged.
    He found that the Appellant had been in the UK for almost sixteen years
    and that was not challenged.  The findings of fact that he sets out  at
    paragraphs 17 to 20 are further accepted in particular the  Appellant's
    birth history, her physical disabilities particularly  with  regard  to
    asthma and her private and family life.  He  further  drew  conclusions
    that the Appellant could not succeed under the Immigration Rules.

15. Thereafter the judge went on to apply Article 8 outside the Rules.   He
    has addressed these issues at paragraphs 24 to 28 of his determination.
     He has set out the questions posed in Razgar and  made  findings  that
    the Appellant has a strong degree of private life in the  UK  and  that
    removal would interfere with that.  He has within paragraphs 25, 26 and
    27 addressed the issues of whether the interference would be in  accord
    with the legitimate aim and  has  addressed  proportionality.   He  has
    applied all these factors to the findings of fact  that  he  previously
    made.  I acknowledge that he has made reference to the  delay  that  he
    has not overemphasised the fact of finding  that  the  delay  does  not
    amount to such conspicuous unfairness as  to  constitute  an  abuse  of
    power.  He has then rounded everything together and  found  that  there
    were arguably sufficient compelling circumstances to  allow  the  claim
    outside the Immigration Rules pursuant to Article 8.   Such  conclusion
    is sustainable based upon his findings of fact and  reasons.   In  such
    circumstances having given weight to all the appropriate  issues  there
    is nothing perverse in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    and effectively the arguments of  the  Secretary  of  State  amount  to
    little more than disagreement and an attempt to  re-argue  the  appeal.
    There is no material error

    of law disclosed for all the  above  reasons  and  the  appeal  of  the
    Secretary of State is dismissed and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is maintained.

Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not  disclose  a  material
    error of law.  The appeal of the Secretary  of  State  is  consequently
    dismissed and the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the
    appeal pursuant to Article 8 of the European Convention of Human Rights
    is maintained.

17. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.   No
    application is made to vary that order and none is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

