
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/44248/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 4 February 2016                   |On 17 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                            MUHAMMAD MUBASHIR ALI
                        (ANONYMITY DICTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Iqbal (counsel) instructed by      Pride,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Clayton promulgated  on  8  May  2015,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background

3.    The Appellant was born on 14 June 1983 and is a national of Pakistan.

4.    On 11 November 2014 the Secretary of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application for an EEA residence card (as an extended family member).

The Judge's Decision

5.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal Judge Clayton  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision.

6.    Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 20 October  2015  Upper  Tribunal
Judge Rintoul gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

    "It is arguable that, if First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Clayton  did  not
    permit  an  adjournment  of  the  appeal  to  allow   the   appellant's
    representatives to take instructions on documents served  only  on  the
    day, in breach of directions, that there was a procedural error capable
    of giving rise to an error of law"

The Hearing

7.    (a)   Mr Iqbal, for the appellant told me that he would be relying  on
rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and
Asylum Chamber)  Rules  2014  and  the  case  of  MH  (Respondent's  bundle;
documents not provided) Pakistan [2010] UKUT 168(IAC). He took  me  to  [58]
to [62] of the decision,  where  it  is  recorded  that  documents  produced
during the hearing by the presenting officer were relied on by the Judge  to
make the finding contained in the final sentence of [62] - "I find both  the
appellant and sponsor gave false information in cross-examination"

    (b)     Mr  Iqbal  told  me  that  neither  the   appellant   nor   his
representative were given fair notice of the case that was made against  the
appellant, and allowing the documents to be  received,  although  late,  and
then refusing to allow the  appellant's  representative  an  adjournment  to
take instructions  on  those  documents,  created  inequality  of  arms  and
deprived the appellant of a fair hearing. He reminded me of  the  directions
made in this case for production of documents to be relied on 28 days  prior
to the date of  hearing.  He  told  me  that  the  original  source  of  the
documents was entirely irrelevant. What mattered was that the appellant  had
been ambushed by the production of documents which the Judge  treated  as  a
determinative aspect of the appeal. Mr Iqbal urged me to  set  the  decision
aside and to remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  of  new
because, he argued, the appellant had not been given a fair hearing.

8.    Mr Tarlow, for the respondent, told me  that  the  decision  does  not
contain errors of law, material or otherwise.  He  relied  on  the  rule  24
response dated 6 November  2015  and  took  me  to  [19]  and  [20]  of  the
decision, where the  Judge  records  the  adjournment  application  and  the
refusal of that application. He told me that the findings contained at  [62]
& [63] are findings which were open to the Judge to make. He  told  me  that
this appeal is  simply  an  attempt  to  re-argue  a  case  which  has  been
unsuccessful in the First-tier. He urged me to dismiss the appeal and  allow
the decision to stand.

Analysis

9.    Rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration
and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 says

    "24. - (1)   Except in  appeals  to  which  rule  23  applies,  when  a
           respondent is provided with a copy of a notice  of  appeal,  the
           respondent must provide the Tribunal with-

                (a)    the notice of the decision to  which  the  notice  of
                appeal  relates  and  any  other  document  the   respondent
                provided to the appellant giving reasons for that decision;

                (b)     any  statement  of  evidence  or  application   form
                completed by the appellant;

                (c)    any record of an  interview  with  the  appellant  in
                relation to the decision being appealed;

                (d)    any other unpublished document which is  referred  to
                in a document mentioned in sub-paragraph (a) or relied  upon
                by the respondent; and

                (e)    the notice of any other appealable decision  made  in
                relation to the appellant.

           (2)   The respondent must, if the respondent intends  to  change
           or add to the grounds or reasons relied upon in  the  notice  or
           the other documents referred to in paragraph (1)(a), provide the
           Tribunal and the other parties with a statement of  whether  the
           respondent opposes the appellant's case and the grounds for such
           opposition.

           (3)   The documents listed in paragraph (1)  and  any  statement
           required under paragraph (2) must be provided in writing  within
           28 days of the date on which the Tribunal sent to the respondent
           a copy of the notice of appeal and any accompanying documents or
           information provided under rule 19(6)."

10.   In K (DRC) [2003] UKIAT 00133 the Tribunal said that,  where  a  party
produces a document for the first time at  the  hearing,  it  is  elementary
that it must be copied to the other party who must be given  an  opportunity
to comment on it.  It may be necessary in those circumstances to afford  the
other  party  an  adjournment,  if  that  other  party  would  otherwise  be
prejudiced by the late production of the document.

11.   In Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014]  UKUT  00418  (IAC)  it  was
held that if a Tribunal refuses to accede to an  adjournment  request,  such
decision could, in principle, be  erroneous  in  law  in  several  respects:
these include a failure to take into account  all  material  considerations;
permitting  immaterial  considerations  to  intrude;   denying   the   party
concerned a fair hearing; failing to apply  the  correct  test;  and  acting
irrationally.  In practice, in most cases the question will be  whether  the
refusal deprived the affected party of his right to a fair  hearing.   Where
an adjournment refusal is challenged on fairness grounds,  it  is  important
to recognise that the question for the Upper Tribunal  is  not  whether  the
FtT acted reasonably.  Rather, the test to be applied is that  of  fairness:
was there any deprivation of the affected party's right to a fair hearing?

12.   It is beyond dispute that in this  case  the  notice  of  hearing  was
served in December 2014 and directed the respondent to produce and  intimate
the documents that the respondent intended to rely  on  not  later  than  31
December 2014. The hearing took  place  on  8  May  2015.  The  reasons  for
refusal letter does not make reference to either of the  documents  produced
and now complained of. The reasons for refusal letter does refer  (in  part)
to the appellant's history of applications,

13.   The Judge discusses  the  adjournment  request  and  the  reasons  for
refusal of the adjournment at [19] and [20]. At [20] the Judge records  "the
adjournment was refused on the grounds that nothing had been sprung  on  the
appellant. He must have been fully aware of the contents  of  the  documents
as he had submitted the information to the ECO with his Visa applications."

14.   It is not clear from  the  decision  what  enquiry  was  made  of  the
respondent, nor what reasons  were  offered,  for  the  late  production  of
documents which had been in the respondent's hands  since  at  least  August
2011. It is not clear from the decision  what  opportunity  the  appellant's
advocate had to take instructions on a  document  which  have  potential  to
undermine the appellant's credibility.

15.   The overarching test is one of fairness. The documents now  form  part
of the court file, but on the date of the  hearing  the  appellant  did  not
have fair notice of the extent of the  respondent's  evidence.  The  initial
burden of proof remains with the appellant, but it must have  come  as  some
surprise to find that, as the hearing unfolded, the respondent had  evidence
of a prior inconsistent statement which may be determinative of the  appeal.
On that basis it cannot be said that the appellant had a  fair  hearing.  It
is argued for the appellant that three separate applications were  made  for
adjournment. That is not recorded in the decision.  It  is  clear  from  the
final sentence of [19] that the  application  for  adjournment  came  during
cross-examination. It is at least implied that the new documentary  evidence
was produced in the course of cross-examination. A  brief  adjournment  (say
one hour) may well have been sufficient to  enable  the  appellant  and  his
representative to consider their position, but it is not even  suggested  in
the decision that a brief adjournment to take instructions  was  offered  to
the appellant's representative.

16.   The net effect is there  is  at  least  the  appearance  of  trial  by
ambush. That cannot be said to be a fair procedure to  adopt.  There  is  no
explanation given in the decision for allowing documentary  evidence  to  be
received although late. The timing of  the  production  of  the  documentary
evidence is clearly a failure by the respondent to adhere to rule 24 of  the
procedure rules. No explanation is given from departure from  the  procedure
rules, nor for the departure from the standard directions.

17.   I must find that the decision is tainted by a material error  of  law.
I therefore set the decision aside

18.   I therefore find that the decision is tainted by  material  errors  of
law. The Judge's decision  cannot  stand  and  must  be  set  aside  in  its
entirety. All matters must be determined of new.

REMITTAL TO FT

19.    Under  Part  3  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Practice
Statement of the 25th of September 2012 the case  may  be  remitted  to  the
First Tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

    (a)    the effect of the error has been to deprive a party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other  opportunity  for  that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or



    (b)    the nature or extent of  any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the  overriding  objective  in  rule  2,  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

20.   I find that this case should be remitted  because  the  Appellant  did
not have a fair  hearing  and  was  deprived  of  the  opportunity  to  lead
relevant evidence in rebuttal of the documentary evidence now relied  on  by
the respondent. In this case none of the findings of fact are to stand.

21.   I remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal sitting  at  Taylor
House, before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Clayton.

CONCLUSION

Decision

22.   The decision of the First-tier tribunal is tainted by material  errors
of law.

23.   I set aside the decision. The appeal is remitted  to  the  First  Tier
Tribunal to be determined of new.


Signed      Date 12 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
