
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44009/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 June 2015                       |On 12 June 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVID TAYLOR


                                   Between

                              Mr MD. Reza Kamal
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Rahman, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a 26 year old citizen of Bangladesh  (born  5  October
    1988)  who  has  appealed,  with  permission,  against   the   decision
    (promulgated on 24 October 2014) of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Devlin,
    who dismissed his  appeal  against  the  respondent's  refusal  of  his
    application to remain in the United  Kingdom  on  the  grounds  of  his
    private life under Article 8.  His Article 8 claim included  claims  of
    fear to return to Bangladesh on the basis that he would  be  in  danger
    there.  The claim thus incorporated asylum, humanitarian protection and
    Article 3 claims and the judge dealt fully with those claims as part of
    his decision.  He did not find the appellant's claims  to  be  credible
    [120] - [123] and he went on to dismiss the appellant's claims  on  all
    grounds.

2.   The appellant sought permission to  appeal.   The  application  was  at
    first refused by Designated Judge Coates in the First-tier Tribunal for
    the following reasons:

             "1.  The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh, aged  27,  who
                  appealed against the Respondent's decision to  refuse  his
                  application to remain in the  United  Kingdom  on  private
                  life grounds.   The  application  was  considered  by  the
                  Respondent  under  Paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration
                  Rules.  The appeal was dismissed by Judge  of  the  First-
                  tier Tribunal Devlin on the 24th October 2014.

             2.   Grounds submitted by the Appellant's  representatives  in
                  support of an application for permission to  appeal  begin
                  by asserting that the First-tier Judge erred by not taking
                  into account the Appellant's witness statement as well  as
                  oral evidence.  There  is  no  substance  in  this  ground
                  because,  at  Paragraph  21,  the  Judge  summarises   the
                  Appellant's case  and  expressly  refers  to  his  witness
                  statement.

             3.   The second ground alleges that 'the First-tier Judge  has
                  failed to comply with  common  law  duty  to  act  in  the
                  decision making process'.  That is meaningless.

             4.   The grounds next allege that the First-tier Judge  failed
                  to consider the 'CDS principles'.  Reference is then  made
                  to the decision in CDS (PBS "available" Article 8)  Brazil
                  [2010] UKUT 00305 (IAC).  CDS was a PBS appeal relating to
                  availability of funds.  I fail to see  what  relevance  it
                  has to the appeal under consideration.

             5.    The  next  assertion  is  that  the  First-tier  Judge's
                  determination is 'full of mis-information  and  mistakes'.
                  Reference is then made to inconsistencies in reference  to
                  the name of the Appellant's representative.  I  note  that
                  in the heading of the Decision and Reasons the Appellant's
                  representative  is  said   to   be   'Mr   Chawdhary,   El
                  Solicitors'.  However, at Paragraph 3 the name is given as
                  'Chowdhury',  at  Paragraph  7   the   name   changes   to
                  'Chowdhary' and at  Paragraph  13  there  is  yet  another
                  version, namely 'Chaudhury'.  It is only at Paragraph  20,
                  and thereafter, that the name Rahman appears for the first
                  time.  This, in my view, demonstrates a  regrettable  lack
                  of care in proof reading but  a  typographical  error  (or
                  errors) does not necessarily amount to a material error of
                  law.   The  remainder  of  the   determination   is   well
                  constructed, clearly  written  and  deals  comprehensively
                  with every aspect of the appeal.

             6.   In contrast to the determination, the Appellant's grounds
                  of appeal are poorly drafted and littered with grammatical
                  mistakes.  They are not, I regret to say, of the  standard
                  which one would expect from solicitors practising  in  the
                  United Kingdom.  It is not until the fourth page that  the
                  issue of human rights,  which  is  at  the  core  of  this
                  appeal, is mentioned.  Reference is made to  the  decision
                  in SSHD v Pankina, the  relevance  of  which  escapes  me.
                  Paragraph 13 claims that the First-tier  Judge's  decision
                  interferes  with  the  Appellant's  right  to  respect  to
                  private and family life, yet family life  has  never  been
                  relied on.

             7.   Finally, the  grounds  allege  that  the  decision  under
                  appeal is 'Wednesbury  unreasonable'.   In  my  estimation
                  there is simply  no  basis  in  law  for  making  such  an
                  assertion.  Every aspect  of  the  Appellant's  claim  has
                  received careful and comprehensive  consideration.   Clear
                  findings have been made  which  are  supported  by  cogent
                  reasons.

             8.   The determination discloses no arguable error of law."

3.   The appellant made a further appeal for permission the Upper  Tribunal.
     On 22 April 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge  Lindsley  gave  permission  and
    included the following in her reasons:

             "3.  ... The First-tier Tribunal did make a number  of  errors
             with respect to the representative's name.  More significantly
             at paragraph 131 of the decision there is  reference  made  to
             the appellant being in a relationship with a  Polish  national
             which did not form part of his claim and at paragraph  133  it
             states that the appellant has only been in  the  UK  for  four
             years which is not the case as he entered on 28 December  2007
             and was in the UK with valid leave as a student until 30  July
             2013 when he claimed asylum.

             4.   In the light of these significant errors it  is  arguable
             that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not have  his  mind  on
             the appellant's case when writing his decision and  thus  that
             unfairness has resulted.

             5.   In relation to the protection claim  I  have  noted  that
             paragraphs 19  to  125  of  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
             Tribunal appear to be free of similar errors.   However,  this
             section of the decision is arguably preceded by the references
             to the wrong representative in the  judge's  consideration  of
             the adjournment request (see paragraphs  5,  7  and  13))  and
             followed by the Article 8 claim in respect of which there were
             arguably errors as set out above.  ...  It is further arguable
             that the appellant has not had a  fair  determination  of  his
             protection appeal in that it is difficult to see how it can be
             said that the judge had his mind fully on  the  facts  of  the
             appellant's appeal in relation to part of the case but not the
             remainder."

4.   In making his submissions to me on the issue of error of law Mr  Rahman
    - who it would appear was the representative who appeared on behalf  of
    the appellant at the First-tier Tribunal - relied on the  grounds.   He
    submitted that the appellant did not get a  fair  hearing  because  his
    application for an adjournment had been refused.  The  adjournment  had
    been applied for on the basis, it  was  claimed,  that  the  Presenting
    Officer was rude to the appellant before the commencement in asking him
    why he had not, prior to that hearing, made a  formal  application  for
    asylum.  Further, the judge could not have had his mind on the facts of
    the case when preparing his decision because he referred  to  a  Polish
    girlfriend - there was no Polish girlfriend and no reference to one  in
    any part of the documentation - and he also on  several  occasions  got
    the name of the appellant's representative wrong.   He  also  erred  in
    saying that the appellant had only been in the UK for four  years  when
    he had been here for seven years.  All of that  rendered  the  decision
    unsafe.

5.   In reply Mr Tufan submitted that the judge was entitled not to  adjourn
    the hearing and  had  given  clear  and  sustainable  reasons  for  his
    refusal.   As  to  the  errors  in  the   name   of   the   appellant's
    representative (only in the early part of the decision) that was  minor
    and made no material difference to the outcome of the case.   The  same
    could be said for his slip in saying that the appellant had been in the
    UK for only four years rather than seven years.

6.   The reference to the Polish girlfriend  was  clearly  wrong.   It  was,
    however, included in only one paragraph [131] of the decision.  It  had
    presumably come from a previous template or decision of the  judge  and
    clearly should not have been included.   But  in  reality  it  made  no
    difference whatever to the comprehensive and detailed reasons that  the
    judge had given on the facts of this case for dismissing the appeal  on
    all grounds.  Indeed, it was submitted that if the appellant had had  a
    Polish girlfriend (which he did not) it might have added  to  his  case
    rather than detract from it.   Paragraph  131  of  the  decision  could
    therefore safely be deleted and the remainder of the decision stood  on
    its own.

7.   I reserved my decision and have since re-read the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's decision and, indeed, all the evidence  that  was  before  him.
    There is no doubt that the judge got  a  number  of  matters  factually
    wrong but I am not persuaded that any of those matters  amounted  to  a
    material error of law such that the decision should be set aside.   All
    the factual errors which are referred to above  could  and  undoubtedly
    should have been corrected by the judge had he properly  and  carefully
    proofread his decision before submitting it for  promulgation.   It  is
    certainly highly regrettable that he did not do so.

8.   But there is nothing in his decision which leaves me  to  believe  that
    he did not have his mind on the relevant  facts  of  this  case  as  it
    related to the appellant and  the  appellant's  claims.   Certainly  he
    should have got the name of the appellant's  representative  right  but
    that does not go to the essence of the claim.  Nor  does  the  apparent
    slip in referring to four years' residence in the UK rather than  seven
    years.  The reference to a Polish girlfriend is more serious but  again
    it  was  one  discrete  paragraph   which   the   appellant   and   his
    representatives would immediately have known had  nothing  to  do  with
    him.  All these errors would have been capable of correction under  the
    slip Rule - had the judge been asked promptly - because  the  extensive
    and careful reasons given by the judge on the substantive issues raised
    by the appellant were clearly within the reasonable  framework  of  his
    findings having regard to the evidence that had been put before him  at
    the hearing.

9.    I  deal  finally,  and  briefly,  with  the  ground  relating  to  the
    adjournment request that had been refused.  The judge was told  of  the
    circumstances and gave full reasons for refusing the adjournment at [5]
    - [18].  The judge  found  the  adjournment  request  to  be  based  on
    "spurious" grounds.  It might  perhaps  have  been  different  had  the
    appellant not been  legally  represented  but  it  is  clear  from  the
    decision itself that the judge was satisfied  that  the  appellant  was
    well enough and able to give detailed oral evidence in support  of  his
    claim.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain any  material  error
of law such that it should be set aside.  The decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction has been sought and none is made.



Designated Judge David Taylor
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
11 June 2015
