

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
                     Appeal Number:
Immigration and Asylum Chamber
      IA/44947/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House              |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 16 March 2016                  |On 1 April 2016                   |
|                                  |                                  |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?

                                   Between

                                     A H
                                       Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                        Respondent
                          Determination and Reasons

Representation
For the Appellant:               Mr A Miah, Counsel
For the Respondent:            Mr C Avery,  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
                       Officer

Anonymity

   1.       The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)
      of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (procedure) Rules  2005.  There
      being no request to the contrary, I continue that  order  pursuant  to
      rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.
Details of appellant and basis of claim

   2.       This appeal comes before me following my decision to  set  aside
      the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Callow dated 28 April  2014.
      The reasons for that decision are  set  out  in  a  separate  document
      promulgated in July 2014.

   3.       The appellant is a Lebanese national born on 7  March  1983.  He
      challenges the decision of the respondent on 18 October 2013 to refuse
      to extend the discretionary leave he had been  granted  as  the  civil
      partner of a  Syrian  national  who  had  also  received  a  grant  of
      discretionary leave on the  same  basis  and  who  had  also  made  an
      application for further leave. Although the applicant maintained  that
      an intimate relationship still existed  between  them,  he  could  not
      produce any documentary  evidence  of  cohabitation  and  his  partner
      notified the respondent that the relationship  had  broken  down  when
      making his own application which appears to have  been  on  the  basis
      that he had completed ten years of lawful residence in  the  UK.   The
      respondent concluded that there had been a change in his circumstances
      and refused the application. She also took the view that the applicant
      could safely return to Lebanon.

   4.       The respondent does not, however, appear to have  disputed  that
      the appellant was gay. When the matter came before me on 23 July  2014
      (not  2013  as  my  determination  erroneously  records),  that  claim
      remained unchallenged as did Judge Callow's finding  that  people  who
      lived an openly gay life in Lebanon  were  liable  to  persecution.  I
      subsequently gave directions  that  there  were  three  issues  to  be
      determined: (1) whether the appellant would live openly as a  gay  man
      in Lebanon and if not, why; (2) whether he lived openly in the UK  and
      if not, why; and (3) whether his relationship with his  partner  could
      continue after his removal.

The Hearing

   5.         At the hearing, I heard oral  evidence  in  English  from  the
      appellant and his witness, RA, with  whom  he  entered  into  a  civil
      partnership on 30 July 2008.

   6.       The appellant adopted his witness statement which he stated  was
      recently prepared. He gave an address in Ealing as his  residence.  He
      was then tendered for cross examination.

   7.       In response to questions from Mr Avery, the appellant  confirmed
      his written statement that his family would not accept him and that he
      had to hide his sexual orientation from them. When asked  whether  his
      family were aware of his sexuality he said his brother  was  the  only
      family member who was aware.  When asked  whether  he  may  have  told
      others, the appellant replied that after a threatening email from  his
      brother in 2013, he had not had any contact with his  family.  He  was
      unsure about whether they knew about his sexuality.

   8.       The appellant  was  referred  to  the  answer  he  gave  at  his
      screening interview when he had said that his family was aware of  his
      sexuality. He explained to the court that he had meant that  he  would
      not be accepted in his area. He stated that he would be unable to live
      anywhere in Lebanon  because  he  would  be  found  anywhere  he  went
      including Beirut. He was asked several  times  what  he  feared  would
      happen to him. After many non specific responses he said: "It  is  our
      religion. They decide what they have to do". He confirmed that he only
      feared his family. His family consisted of  his  parents,  a  brother,
      four paternal uncles and seven maternal aunts and their  families.  He
      said that they would find him if he returned to Lebanon. It  would  be
      easy for a gun to be given to someone to finish his life. He  said  it
      was a closed life there and his family would  know  whatever  he  did.
      When asked whether he had any fears apart from his family, he  replied
      that a fear of his family was enough.

   9.       The appellant was asked about whether he would go to  gay  clubs
      in Lebanon if he had no family. He replied he did  not  know  of  any.
      When he was asked whether he would go if there were clubs, he replied:
      "Life is not to go to the club. Even here I do not go to clubs much. I
      stay at home with my partner. Why do I have to go there?"

  10.       The appellant  confirmed  that  he  had  entered  into  a  civil
      partnership with RA in 2008 and that they were currently cohabiting at
      their residence in Ealing and had been doing so since RA returned from
      Syria last year  after  an  eight  month  visit.  Prior  to  that  the
      appellant had lived at a Willesden Green address since 2011.

  11.       The appellant was asked about the break up of the  relationship.
      He explained that this occurred in 2011 because of an issue over their
      immigration applications. He said he had sent his application in first
      whereas his partner had felt they should send their applications in at
      the  same  time.  They  had  both  been  granted  discretionary  leave
      previously due to their relationship. On  this  occasion  his  partner
      applied for indefinite leave to remain due  to  having  completed  ten
      years of  lawful  residence.   The  appellant  stated,  however,  that
      despite living apart, they had continued their relationship throughout
      that period. They resumed cohabitation ten months ago because they had
      sorted out their problems. Despite those problems, however,  they  had
      retained their "connection" with each other.

  12.       The appellant confirmed that  he  had  friends  from  a  similar
      background to his and they accepted his sexuality.  He  had  no  issue
      with disclosing his sexuality to them.

  13.       The appellant was asked whether he had attended gay clubs whilst
      living apart from his partner. He said he had been once. It was not  a
      regular past time.

  14.       He said that he  was  employed.  When  asked  whether  his  work
      colleagues were aware of his sexuality, he said he  did  not  talk  to
      them about it. He did not ask them  if  they  knew  and  when  it  was
      pointed out to him that he had maintained in his statement  that  they
      knew, he questioned how they would know. His statement  was  shown  to
      him. He then said they might know. He said they supported him.

  15.       The appellant said he went to  work  at  7  a.m.  He  worked  in
      Knightsbridge as a chef, five days a week. He got  home  after  5.  He
      travelled on the Piccadilly line. He was off last Friday. His  partner
      was a manager at a restaurant in Westfield. He worked last Friday  and
      was home around 9 p.m. That completed cross-examination.

  16.       In re-examination the appellant said he did not have issues over
      his sexuality with his work colleagues. There had been one man he  had
      had an issue with but he had left. He said that his partner  had  also
      been refused discretionary leave but after making  an  application  on
      long residence grounds, he was successful. The applicant was  shown  a
      copy of his screening  interview  and  asked  what  he  had  meant  by
      'family'. He remained silent. He was asked which members of his family
      were aware of his relationship. He said his brother knew. He then said
      that all his family probably knew.  His  father  was  a  butcher.  His
      brother was a supermarket manager but was now in  Africa.  His  uncles
      all worked in shops or  restaurants.  In  their  free  time  they  had
      involvement with Hezbollah and Harket Amal as those groups operated in
      his home area. They would not accept his sexuality. He had  not  moved
      in with his partner in order to assist his appeal.

  17.       In  reply  to  questions  I  then  put  for  clarification,  the
      appellant confirmed that he feared Hezbollah and Harket Amal  as  well
      as his family. He had not had any gay relationships in Lebanon because
      "you can't speak about that".  He  would  not  be  able  to  have  any
      relationships if he returned. He had not discussed the future with  RA
      but if he had to return to Lebanon, he would kill himself. His partner
      would not go to live there.

  18.       I asked the appellant to describe an average week of his life to
      me. He said he and his partner went to work. On days  off  they  would
      stay at home and watch television. They liked football. He  would  not
      be able to have a private life like this in Lebanon as men  could  not
      live together.

  19.       I asked the appellant why he lived separately from  his  partner
      if they had remained a couple. He said that the contract on the  house
      had run out. They could have found other  accommodation  together  but
      decided to take a break.  He  had  had  other  relationships  but  his
      partner  was  the  only  serious  one.  He  had  decided  on  a  civil
      partnership because they loved each other.

  20.       The appellant confirmed he had not had contact with  his  family
      since receipt of the email from his brother in October  2013.  When  I
      pointed out to him that he had said in his screening interview that he
      spoke to his sister, he agreed he had three sisters but  said  he  had
      not been asked this question and he did not speak to them. He had  not
      had an interpreter at the interview.

  21.       Mr Avery had a question arising.  He  asked  the  appellant  the
      whereabouts of his brother and was told  he  had  been  in  Mozambique
      since around 2011. Mr Miah had no questions arising.

  22.       I then heard evidence from RA, a Syrian national. He adopted his
      witness statement, confirmed the contents were true and  was  tendered
      for cross examination.

  23.       The witness confirmed that he and the appellant had broken up in
      2013 for 2-3 years. They got back together in February 2015  after  he
      had returned from Syria because they liked each other  and  had  known
      each other since 2008. The witness was asked several times for a  more
      specific reason for the decision to resume  cohabitation.  He  replied
      they had always been in contact and they loved each other. He had  not
      had any other relationships whilst apart from the  appellant.  He  had
      spent almost 8 months in Syria.

  24.       The witness was asked whether he had ever been in touch with the
      appellant's family. He replied that he had, sometimes. He spoke to his
      parents over the phone. The last occasion was after  Ramadan  to  wish
      them for Eid. He did not know if the appellant spoke to  his  parents.
      He could not recall  if  they  had  asked  about  the  appellant.  The
      conversation had been brief. He did not know when  the  appellant  had
      last spoken to his family. The appellant had a problem with his family
      but the witness did not  know  what  the  problem  was.  He  said  the
      appellant was very sensitive. He had never spoken to  the  appellant's
      brother. The appellant had introduced him to his  parents  as  a  work
      colleague when he first spoke to them. He called them  on  celebratory
      events. He was known to them as the appellant's friend. They may  have
      asked after the appellant. The appellant had never told him why he did
      not speak to his family. He, the witness, had  never  encountered  any
      problems with them.

  25.       The witness said he did not want to go and live in  Lebanon.  It
      was not a free country. He had been there for a week  on  his  way  to
      Syria.

  26.       The witness confirmed he worked as a restaurant manager. He  had
      been employed for the last ten years. He worked a  five  day  week  at
      Westfield. He had returned home from work around  8  or  9  p.m.  last
      Friday.  That completed cross-examination.

  27.       In re-examination the witness was asked why he  had  called  the
      appellant's parents. He said he just called to say hello.  They  asked
      who was calling and he told them.

  28.       In response to my questions  the  witness  stated  that  he  was
      unsure whether the appellant's parents knew about their  relationship.
      I asked whether they knew he and the appellant cohabited. After a long
      silence, the witness said he was unsure but thought they did.  He said
      the appellant may have told them. They had never discussed it. His own
      family did not know. He was aware that  the  appellant  had  told  his
      brother about them. He could not recall whether this had  been  whilst
      they were living together. He was asked about the brother's  reaction.
      After a long silence he said that it had been bad.

  29.       I asked what had led to the break up of  the  relationship.  The
      witness said there was nothing specific but  that  the  appellant  was
      very stressed about his  work  and  about  people  knowing  about  his
      sexuality. He said that during their separation they were sometimes in
      contact over  the  phone.  I  informed  him  that  the  appellant  had
      maintained that they were still a couple. The witness then  said  they
      did sometimes see each other. He did not remember if they had a sexual
      relationship. He thought not. They decided to resume  living  together
      because they liked each other. He said that if the appellant left  the
      UK their relationship could not continue. He said that  they  normally
      spent their time working, watching TV, cooking and sometimes going  to
      the cinema. They met at the beginning of 2008.

  30.       Neither Mr Avery nor Mr Miah had any questions arising and  that
      completed the oral evidence.

  31.       After the lunch break, I  heard  submissions.  These  are  fully
      recorded in  my  record  of  proceedings  and  summarised  below.  The
      appellant and his partner were nor in attendance for the submissions.

  32.       For the respondent, Mr Avery submitted  that  the  evidence  had
      given rise to credibility issues as both  witnesses  were  very  vague
      about their relationship. He submitted that this was no  more  than  a
      convenient arrangement. They had both been  unclear  as  to  why  they
      broke up, why they reconciled and what the nature of the  relationship
      had been in the interim. There was also the strange  evidence  of  the
      contact with the appellant's family. The witness  did  not  appear  to
      have any inkling that the appellant had claimed he was in fear of  his
      family and therefore could not return. This also raised concerns  over
      whether the appellant had any genuine fear of them and suggested  that
      there was no issue and that the claim had been fabricated.

  33.       Mr Avery acknowledged that the respondent had accepted that  the
      appellant was gay but argued that the  claimed  relationship  was  not
      ongoing. The appellant led a quiet life in the UK. Even when not  with
      his partner, he did not go to clubs. If he  continued  with  the  same
      lifestyle in Lebanon as he did here, that would not cause any problems
      for him. His evidence about his work colleagues was  inconsistent  and
      it was difficult to ascertain why he was fearful. Whilst homosexuality
      was illegal in Lebanon, the law was not enforced, there were  activist
      LGBT groups and society was more accepting of LGBT persons that it had
      been. The appellant had failed to establish he would  be  at  risk  of
      persecution  if  he  conducted  himself  there   as   he   did   here.
      Discrimination  did  not  amount  to  persecution.  He  had  made   an
      application to the respondent as a partner via the ten year route  but
      computer records showed there were some  gaps  in  leave.  The  matter
      would be considered after this determination had been promulgated. The
      appeal should be dismissed.

  34.       Mr  Miah,  in  his  submissions,  asked  that  I  make  positive
      credibility findings. He submitted that the appellant  was  a  refugee
      within the terms of the convention being a member of a  social  group.
      He said both witnesses had given largely consistent evidence  and  had
      put forward their own reasons for the problems in their  relationship.
      This was not a sham marriage. They gave consistent  evidence  on  what
      time the appellant's partner had returned home from work last  Friday.
      This suggested that they knew each other very well.

  35.       There was no dispute that the appellant was gay  and  the  issue
      was the risk to him on return. The relationship only went to the issue
      of article 8. The witness had been polite in calling  the  appellant's
      parents. He said they could not live in Lebanon and he raised an issue
      over a fear of the authorities in his statement. With  regard  to  the
      appellant's evidence over contact with his family, there may have been
      confusion over the terminology and tense used. There  was  documentary
      evidence in the bundle to show that both the appellant and his partner
      were registered at the Ealing address. On balance the relationship was
      genuine and would not  be  able  to  continue  if  the  appellant  was
      removed. The appellant and his partner lived openly as  a  gay  couple
      and although they were private people they had been to gay clubs.  The
      appellant feared his family and its connections with extremist groups.
      There was an extensive family network and the appellant would  not  be
      able to return and live openly as a gay man. One  gay  club  was  shut
      down in 2013. This was indicative of the approach of the  authorities.
      The appellant had been in the UK since 2006 and whilst I was not asked
      to make findings under the rules, I was urged to  consider  this  long
      residence as part of the article 8 claim.

  36.       At the conclusion of the hearing  I  reserved  my  determination
      which I now give with reasons. These are not set out in any  order  of
      priority.

Findings and reasons

  37.       There have been delays in the resolution of  this  appeal.  Some
      are due to the appellant and his representatives and some due  to  the
      appeals process  itself,  and  the  challenges  made.  The  First-tier
      Tribunal's decision was  set  aside  in  July  2014.  The  appellant's
      representative sought a resumed hearing so as to enable the  appellant
      and his partner to give oral evidence. On 17 October 2014  the  matter
      once again came before me. As we now know, on that occasion, RA was in
      Syria. Mr Walker and Mr Miah (also representing the appellant on  that
      occasion) jointly  expressed  discomfort  about  the  Tribunal  making
      primary findings on an asylum claim that had never  been  put  to  the
      Secretary of State. I was told that the appellant would make an asylum
      application but would not withdraw this appeal until he had done so as
      to avoid any risk of detention. The matter was therefore adjourned  to
      a CMR hearing on 6 March 2015 but it then transpired that although the
      appellant had claimed asylum on 17 November 2014, he did not intend to
      withdraw the present appeal. That, therefore, had to be  relisted  for
      hearing. Meanwhile, the respondent arranged two substantive interviews
      on 13 April and 5 May 2015, neither of which the  appellant  attended.
      That led to the refusal of asylum on 8 May 2015. No appeal was  lodged
      against that decision and the present appeal is pursued.

  38.       I have had regard to all the evidence both oral and documentary,
      to the submissions and to the lower standard of proof  when  assessing
      the claim and determining the three issues that had  been  agreed  on.
      For reasons that shall become clear,  the  evidence  raised  a  fourth
      issue:  the  genuineness  of  the  claimed  relationship  between  the
      appellant and his partner. Submissions, albeit brief, were  also  made
      on the appellant's private life in the UK and his period of residence.
      In many ways however the issues are intertwined and much is  dependent
      upon the credibility of the appellant and his witness.

  39.       The appellant relied upon  two  bundles;  one  served  for  this
      hearing and one served for a previous hearing. There were also various
      statements/letters from the appellant served at previous hearings. The
      respondent relied upon the appeals bundle, on country material  (which
      I set out below) and on the appellant's screening interview which  has
      also been served on  at  least  one  previous  occasion.  I  have  the
      previous determinations,  grounds  of  challenge  and  decisions.  The
      respondent previously adduced a decision letter dated 21 October  2013
      in respect of RA whose representatives  were  M  A  Consultants  (also
      representing the appellant). The respondent refused  RA's  application
      for discretionary leave as a partner but granted  a  period  of  leave
      until 21 April 2014 due to the situation in Syria. Home Office records
      show that he then made an application on  long  residency  grounds  in
      February 2014. He obtained ILR in May 2014.

  40.       Neither party referred to or adduced any case law but I have had
      regard to HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31, RT (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC  38  and
      Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 when considering the evidence and claim.

  41.       I acknowledge that the respondent had previously  accepted  that
      the appellant was gay and in a gay relationship with RA and it appears
      that  both  had  relied  on  their   civil   partnership   to   obtain
      discretionary leave.  It was found by Judge Callow, albeit he went  on
      to dismiss the  appeal,  that  the  appellant  would  be  at  risk  of
      persecution in Lebanon were he to live an openly gay life there.  That
      finding has not been challenged at any  stage  by  the  respondent.  I
      therefore proceed to determine this appeal on  the  premise  that  the
      appellant is gay and that between August 2009 and September 2010  when
      two periods  of  discretionary  leave  were  granted,  the  respondent
      accepted that he was in a subsisting  relationship  with  RA.  I  also
      acknowledge Judge Callow's  finding  on  persecution  for  openly  gay
      individuals in Lebanon.

  42.       I have had regard to the country information  submitted  at  the
      various hearings, limited though it is. Given  the  accepted  position
      for openly gay people, it is of limited  assistance.  Nevertheless,  I
      have considered it. The picture provided by the various material is of
      a generally homophobic society but one where attitudes  are  changing,
      at least in Beirut, and where the law on homosexuality  has  not  been
      enforced for decades.   I set out a brief summary of the main evidence
      below. Some was summarized by Judge Callow in his determination.

  43.       The COI Response of 21 November 2012 addresses  the  application
      of the law in Lebanon regarding the persecution of homosexuals. It  is
      confirmed that Article 534 of the Penal Code  criminalizes  "unnatural
      sexual intercourse" which  is  punishable  with  up  to  one  year  of
      imprisonment but reports that in December  2009  a  judge  ruled  that
      homosexual conduct is natural and so does not contradict nature. Other
      cases were also being fought on those lines (and there is reference in
      other material to a similar decision with reference to a woman made in
      2014). It provides information about HELEM  (the  Arabic  acronym  for
      LGBT), an activist group which reports on a  decline  in  interference
      from the state in central Beirut where  the  police  are  said  to  no
      longer raid or attack nightclubs. Gay bars and clubs are  said  to  be
      common and Beirut is described as a haven for gay  men  and  lesbians,
      luring people from throughout the region despite the persistence of  a
      negative stigma.

  44.       The more recent internet report of 15 May 2015 also  reports  on
      Lebanon being more open minded than the rest of  the  Arab  world  but
      notes the conservative attitude  of  most  Lebanese  people.   It  too
      confirms that the law is not commonly  enforced  and  notes  that  the
      Lebanese National Centre for Psychiatry  declared  that  homosexuality
      was not a mental disorder and did not need to be  treated.  HELEM  was
      reported to have organised several public demonstrations, lectures and
      fundraisers. It was acknowledged that  homophobia  was  entrenched  in
      society but that society was becoming more accepting.

  45.       The article from the Human Dignity Trust of 4  March  2014,  the
      Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada report of 9 January 2014 (also
      cited in the Ref World extract) and the BBC  Radio  4  article  of  25
      November 2013 all deal with the  treatment  of  sexual  minorities  in
      Lebanon. The first article reports on the ruling of a  Lebanese  court
      that whilst homosexuality is not the norm, it  is  not  unnatural  and
      therefore technically not illegal. The second confirms  the  vagueness
      of the Penal Code which leaves the  definition  of  "nature"  open  to
      interpretation. It reports that there is a growing acceptance  of  the
      gay community in Beirut and the existence of  gay  clubs,  restaurants
      and bars. However all the reports acknowledge that discrimination  and
      abuse remains prevalent.

  46.       Gay star news confirms that the law has not  been  enforced  for
      decades though public displays of affection are not advised, that  the
      situation for gays has improved significantly and that gay  clubs  and
      bars operate freely. Beirut is described as a gay paradise and  Byblos
      has a gay beach. There are gay travel agents who assist with holidays.



  47.       Having considered all the evidence in the round,  and  with  the
      accepted facts in mind, I deal with the issue of credibility  as  this
      arose during the course of the evidence given by the appellant and RA.
      Both had provided witness statements and both then gave oral evidence.
      I found them both to be largely unreliable witnesses. Questions had to
      be repeated several times in order to  obtain  direct  or  indeed  any
      answers. There were long  periods  of  silence  in  response  to  some
      questions put and contradictions between the evidence  given  by  both
      and also internal inconsistencies in the appellant's  evidence.  I  do
      note that Judge Callow, when making his positive findings, only  heard
      oral evidence from the appellant. The main problems are set out below.

  48.       There is agreement that  the  appellant  and  RA  ceased  living
      together at some point after the second period of discretionary  leave
      was granted  in  September  2010.  However  the  evidence  was  wholly
      inconsistent  as  to  when  and  why  that  occurred,  the  period  of
      separation and the nature of the relationship and  of  contact  during
      that period. To say that it was difficult to ascertain  the  facts  in
      that respect from both witnesses would be an  understatement.  Neither
      gave clear, straight or informative replies. There were  long  periods
      of silence when questions were put and the responses  provided  little
      information yet both confirmed they understood the questions asked  of
      them. The appellant also confirmed at his screening interview that  he
      had understood all the questions put.

  49.       The appellant stated in oral evidence he and RA  stopped  living
      together in 2011. RA said they had ceased to cohabit and had  taken  a
      break in 2013. In his witness statement, RA said they  broke  up  four
      years after 5 March 2008 (i.e.  March  2012).  The  recent  letter  of
      application by the appellant as a partner states  that  the  break  up
      occurred on 10 June 2012. The FLR application form states that RA  had
      been living in Ealing since 7 July  2011.  It  is  contradictory  over
      where the appellant had lived at that time. It is stated that  he  was
      at an address in NW6 from March 2008 for eight months and then  at  an
      address in E4 until 10 June 2012. If the break  up  occurred  on  that
      date in June, it is unclear why RA was  living  in  Ealing  from  July
      2011, almost a whole year without the appellant. Elsewhere on the form
      the appellant claims to have lived in Willesden  Green  from  November
      2011.

  50.       The appellant stated that the reason they decided to live  apart
      was because there was an issue over their immigration applications  in
      that he had sent his in first whereas RA was of  the  view  that  they
      should have been sent together.  He  also  said  the  lease  on  their
      accommodation had come to an end. When RA was asked for a  reason,  he
      stated that it was nothing specific, that the appellant  was  stressed
      about  work  and  about  people  knowing  about  his  sexuality.   The
      explanation about the lease  is  flatly  contradicted  by  other  oral
      evidence.  If  the  separation  was  in  July  2011  and  due  to  the
      termination of a tenancy agreement as claimed in court, it is  unclear
      how the appellant continued to live at the same address and without RA
      for a further eight months.

  51.       The appellant's oral and written evidence was that  despite  the
      cessation of cohabitation, he and RA remained a couple, saw each other
      regularly and continued their  relationship.  His  grounds  of  appeal
      refer to them still loving each other and sharing a bed. His  evidence
      to Judge Callow was that intimacy continued. The refusal letter  makes
      reference to his claim that he still spent nights with RA during their
      period of separation. The recent letter of application also  maintains
      that the  relationship  has  "always  continued".  However  RA's  oral
      evidence contradicted all of this. He said that they  "sometimes"  had
      contact over the phone. When the appellant's evidence was put  to  him
      he stated that they did sometimes see each  other.  When  asked  about
      whether they had maintained intimate relations, he initially  said  he
      could not remember and then said they had not.

  52.       The evidence was equally unsatisfactory about what prompted  the
      decision to resume cohabitation. Neither could give any  reason  other
      than they had always liked or loved each  other  but  they  could  not
      explain what had changed in their situation and what had led to  their
      cohabitation after a long period apart. They denied it had anything to
      do with the appeals process.

  53.       The evidence was also  contradictory  about  when  they  resumed
      cohabitation. The recent letter of  application  to  the  Home  Office
      stated it was in August 2015 but RA's evidence was  that  cohabitation
      resumed in February 2015 and the appellant said in oral evidence  that
      it was ten months ago, i.e. May  2015.  The  documentary  evidence  of
      cohabitation is very sparse and internally inconsistent. I  only  have
      copies and have not seen the originals. There is a utility  bill  from
      EDF in both names described as "your first electricity and  gas  bill"
      covering the period between 31 July and 21 September 2015. There is  a
      letter dated 15 September 2015 confirming RA's employment  and  giving
      his address as Hamilton Road in Ealing. His pay slips which cover  the
      period between February and August 2015 show  the  Ealing  address  as
      does his bank statement which covers the period from 19 February  2015
      - 1 September 2015. Letters dated 4 and 10 September 2015 confirm  the
      appellant's employment but provide no address for him. His pay  slips,
      however, give the Willesden Green address for the period from March  -
      July 2015. There is only one pay slip (for August 2015) to the  Ealing
      address. The appellant's bank statement for February - September  2015
      show  his  Willesden  Green  address.  They  also  show  several  cash
      withdrawals over this period made in Willesden Green. The appellant is
      frequently overdrawn. Other than the one shared  utility  bill  and  a
      single payslip for August 2015,  I  have  seen  no  other  independent
      evidence of the appellant's residence in Ealing.  Indeed, the evidence
      largely shows him to be at the Willesden Green address over the period
      covered  by  the  documents.  I  have  not  been  provided  with   any
      explanation for this.

  54.       I note that despite notification from the respondent in May 2015
      when asylum was refused that the appellant had no permission to  work,
      he has continued in employment and remains in employment.

  55.       The appellant and RA have also contradicted themselves over when
      they met. The application letter from the appellant's  representatives
      maintain  that  they  have  known  each  other  since  2006  and   the
      application form confirms that however  RA  said  twice  in  his  oral
      evidence that they met in early 2008. This significant discrepancy has
      not been resolved.

  56.       Mr Miah submitted  that  the  consistent  evidence  between  the
      appellant and RA, over what  time  RA  had  returned  from  work  last
      Friday, indicated that they knew each other very well. When  that  one
      factor is considered in  the  context  of  all  the  other  discrepant
      evidence,  I  cannot  find  that  it  establishes  that  they  have  a
      subsisting same sex relationship. I note in reaching my findings  that
      RA was very vague about other matters that one  would  expect  him  to
      know had he  been  in  a  genuine  long  term  relationship  with  the
      appellant. The appellant claimed to fear his family to the extent that
      he claimed he would be killed if he  returned.  There  was  discrepant
      evidence as to whom he actually meant, whether it was just his brother
      or his parents, uncles and other extended family. He also  claimed  to
      have had no contact with any members of his family (although there was
      inconsistent evidence here too) since receiving  a  threatening  email
      from his brother in October 2013. However  RA  spoke  of  calling  the
      appellant's parents for Eid and of seemingly making a point of calling
      them on celebratory events and encountering no problems. There was  no
      suggestion that they  expressed  any  hostility  about  the  appellant
      during these conversations and he did say that he thought  they  asked
      after the appellant in the sense of asking how  he  was.  RA  did  not
      however know if the appellant was  in  contact  with  his  family;  he
      thought there was a problem but did not know what the problem was  and
      he did not know if  they  were  aware  of  their  partnership  or  the
      appellant's sexuality. After some hesitation he  agreed  that  he  was
      aware that the appellant's brother knew and when asked of his reaction
      to the news, he was silent before stating  he  recalled  it  was  bad.
      Given that the appellant and RA are supposed to  be  in  a  long  term
      relationship and that RA was supposed to be supporting the appellant's
      asylum claim, I would expect them to have  discussed  the  appellant's
      fears and problems and for RA to have more than a vague  knowledge  of
      the case. Knowledge of the time  RA  finished  work  one  day  is  not
      indicative of a committed on going relationship  when  all  the  other
      substantial evidential difficulties are considered.

  57.       As mentioned previously, the appellant  was  contradictory  over
      whether his family were aware of his sexuality and over the contact he
      had had with them. In oral evidence he maintained  that  he  had  only
      told his  brother.  At  his  screening  interview  in  November  2014,
      however, he said that his family were aware of his  sexuality  and  so
      did not accept him. He also said that he had not spoken to his parents
      for two years but that he did speak to his sister but the rest of  the
      family were not aware of that contact. Mr Miah asked me to  find  that
      the appellant may have been confused with the term family or may  have
      confused the tense used when speaking of  contact.  I  do  not  accept
      that. The appellant confirmed on completion of the interview  that  he
      had understood all the questions put to him.  The  transcript  of  the
      screening  interview  was  available  to   the   appellant   and   his
      representatives at least since the hearing before Judge Pickup when it
      was filed and possibly since it was conducted as normal practice is to
      provide a copy to the applicant when the  interview  is  complete.  No
      attempts have been made to correct or amend  what  the  appellant  had
      said at that time. I accept he did not have an  interpreter  but  none
      had been requested and he had not requested an interpreter for any  of
      his hearings either. I note also that  the  appellant  speaks  of  his
      family and then separately of his  brother  and  his  parents.  He  is
      plainly aware of the different terms. He also clearly  meant  that  he
      had ongoing contact with his sister after the threats from his brother
      as he made it plain that is family were not  aware  of  this  contact.
      There would have been no point in saying  that  if  contact  with  all
      members of the family had  ceased  some  years  before.  As  Mr  Avery
      submits, this gives rise to questions over the  appellant's  claim  of
      being in fear  of  his  family  and  raises  concerns  over  the  true
      situation regarding the family.

  58.       I have had regard to the email dated 27  October  2013  said  to
      emanate from the appellant's brother. It is  written  in  English.  It
      purports to  be  in  response  to  a  conversation  during  which  the
      appellant disclosed his civil partnership. Given  that  the  appellant
      and RA had been living apart for over a year and a half  or  even  two
      and a half years before  that,  depending  on  which  version  of  the
      evidence is taken into account, I find it difficult to understand  the
      timing of the disclosure. This is even more puzzling when the evidence
      (according to the copies of his three passports  in  the  respondent's
      bundle) is that he had visited Lebanon at least twice after  the  date
      he entered into the civil partnership - in 2010 and 2011. he does  not
      explain why he decided to tell his brother the news  after  the  break
      down of the relationship and at long distance rather than when he  was
      still living with RA, the relationship was fresher and he  could  have
      had  a  more  intimate  discussion  with  his  brother.  I  note  that
      significantly the email was dated  just  days  after  the  appellant's
      application for further leave was refused  on  18  October  2013.  the
      timing of the email  when  taken  into  account  with  all  the  other
      difficulties I have set out with the evidence gives  rise  to  serious
      concerns over whether the truth has been told.

  59.       The appellant stated at his screening interview that he came  to
      the UK because he was gay and had been so for a long time. It was easy
      to do so with a student visa.  Despite  saying  he  could  not  return
      because of that, he has been back to Lebanon at least three times;  in
      2007, 2011 and an unspecified date (according to his 2012  application
      form at 6.12 and 6.13). I note from  the  copies  of  the  appellant's
      passports contained in the respondent's bundle  that  the  unspecified
      date appears to  be  2010.  This  information  does  not  support  the
      information  the  appellant  gave  elsewhere  in   the   pending   FLR
      application form of never having left the  UK  since  his  arrival  in
      2006. More importantly, it does not accord  with  his  claim  that  he
      fears returning to Lebanon because  of  his  sexuality.  He  does  not
      provide any evidence that anything untoward occurred  on  any  of  his
      three visits.

  60.        There  is  also  contradictory  evidence   over   whether   the
      appellant's work colleagues  were  aware  of  his  sexuality.  In  his
      witness statement he claimed that they did know  and  that  they  were
      supportive of  him.  When  asked  about  this  in  oral  evidence  the
      appellant seemed to have  no  idea  of  what  was  maintained  in  his
      statement as he explained he did not talk to them  about  himself  and
      they did not ask. It was only when the matter was pursued and  he  was
      shown the statement that he tried to backtrack and said they may know.
      He also referred in evidence to one colleague who had caused  problems
      for him but who had since left.

  61.       There was a similar problem with what he said about his friends.
      He claimed in his statement and in oral evidence that he  had  friends
      from a similar background and that they were aware  of  his  sexuality
      and had no issue with it. He maintained they had a  different  mindset
      when they came to the UK. However RA said that the appellant tried  to
      keep their relationship from others and the  appellant's  evidence  to
      Judge Callow was that he hid his sexuality from his  friends.  In  his
      undated  letter  to  the  respondent  sent  pursuant   to   his   last
      application, he stated that he  had  not  revealed  the  fact  of  his
      marriage to anyone in  London  or  in  Lebanon.  The  latter  evidence
      contradicts the appellant's subsequent  claim  that  his  brother  had
      known of the relationship prior to the  date  of  the  hearing  before
      Judge Callow.

  62.       Although there is passing reference to a fear of the authorities
      in his statement, the appellant failed to expand upon this in his oral
      evidence, despite being asked several  times  about  whom  he  feared.
      Numerous questions on the nature and source of his fear were put;  his
      answer was that he feared his family and that should be enough. It was
      only after the issue was pursued at length that he  ventured  that  he
      was also afraid of extremist groups his family  had  some  involvement
      with in the local area. No further details were given.

  63.       Mr Miah argued there was an extensive family network and so  the
      appellant would be at risk all over Lebanon. The appellant's  evidence
      is that his family members  held  occupations  as  butchers  and  shop
      keepers. He was vague about  what  alignment  they  had  to  extremist
      groups but said this  was  common  in  his  area  as  these  were  the
      operating groups there. I have seen no evidence to  suggest  that  his
      family members have any influential connections or links  which  would
      enable them to know when the appellant would be in Lebanon or where he
      was. There is no  suggestion  that  this  "extensive  network"  exists
      outside his home area. Certainly, there was no claim that  any  family
      lived in Beirut or any other large cities. Nor was  it  explained  how
      they would be aware of his  return  or  whereabouts.  The  appellant's
      three return visits to Lebanon wholly undermine his claimed  fear.  If
      he felt so troubled by his fears that he had to leave the  country  in
      2006, it makes no sense at all that he  would  return  voluntarily  so
      many times and that he would not make an asylum claim until many years
      after entry.

  64.       The appellant was asked about his lifestyle in the UK. He stated
      that he did not go to gay bars and clubs and, when not at work, stayed
      at home and watched TV. When it was put to him that he had claimed  to
      frequent gay bars in his statement, he  appeared  surprised  but  then
      said he had been once or twice. He said he was not aware of such clubs
      and bars in Beirut but that in any event he would not go to them.

  65.       His involvement  with  social  media  is  equally  low  key  and
      discreet. The evidence shows he joined two Facebook meet up groups  in
      December 2014. I note that his evidence to Judge Callow  was  that  he
      used a false name on Facebook.

  66.       Part of the appellant's evidence is his recent  application  for
      leave on the basis of 10 years under the partner route.  Whilst  I  am
      not proposing to make any decision on whether he qualifies  for  this,
      and indeed Mr Miah did not ask me to, I was asked to  have  regard  to
      the appellant's long residence as part of the article  8  claim.  This
      application form contains information in support of that claim. I have
      therefore considered  it  with  care.  There  are,  however,  numerous
      inaccuracies with the information supplied. I do  not  know  if  these
      amount  to  deliberate   misrepresentation   by   the   appellant   or
      carelessness and incompetence by his representatives (as they had  all
      the evidence I now have and should have been aware of the  significant
      inconsistencies), but they are of concern and I set  them  out  below.
      Some matters have already been touched upon above.

  67.       The appellant stated on the form  (completed  in  October  2015)
      that he had never been refused asylum in the UK. He plainly has  been,
      on 8 May 2015. The information provided in that response is  therefore
      not true. He stated he  had  never  remained  in  the  UK  beyond  the
      validity of his visa but he has in March  2007  and  after  his  leave
      expired in September 2013. Whilst he had a pending appeal,  he  should
      have  acknowledged  the  period  of   overstay   and   explained   the
      circumstances. The appellant stated he met his  partner  in  2006  and
      their relationship commenced then but, as noted above, RA said in oral
      evidence that they met in 2008. He claimed to have been living at  the
      Ealing address since August 2015 but I have addressed  conflicts  with
      this evidence earlier in my determination. The wrong date is  provided
      for the date of the civil partnership. The appellant  states  that  he
      was last in Lebanon in March 2006 but by his own evidence  as  pointed
      out above he has been back there three times  since  then.  He  refers
      only to having siblings in Lebanon but in oral evidence  he  confirmed
      he also has parents and a large extended family of uncles,  aunts  and
      cousins.

  68.       In his August 2012 application form, the appellant stated RA was
      settled in the UK but the evidence available indicates that he was not
      granted ILR until 14 May 2014, almost two  years  later.  Nor  is  his
      claim in that application that RA was his "husband" for  more  than  9
      years truthful due to  the  break  down  of  their  relationship.  The
      respondent was entitled to have expressed a view that there  had  been
      an element of deception.

  69.        The  incorrect  information   supplied   only   adds   to   the
      unreliability of the appellant.

  70.       RA has also given contradictory evidence as set out above. I  do
      not find him to a reliable witness either.

  71.       I would note that I have no corroborative evidence on the  basis
      on which RA obtained his indefinite leave to remain although  that  is
      not directly relevant to this appeal or to my findings. I  mention  it
      for the sake of completeness as the appellant stated  he  obtained  it
      due to having completed  10  years  of  lawful  residence  here  after
      discretionary leave was granted, at least on one occasion due  to  the
      situation in Syria. I would note, however, that RA has been a frequent
      traveller to Syria  even  during  the  course  of  the  conflict.  His
      passport shows at least two recent visits to Syria and three trips  to
      Lebanon in 2012, 2014 and 2015 although he only gave evidence  of  the
      one in 2015.

  72.       I have had regard to the principles established  by  HJ  and  HT
      [2010] UKSC 31 and I  direct  myself  to  the  question  of  what  the
      appellant would actually do if returned  to  Lebanon.  The  first  two
      questions to be considered as part of the assessment by Tribunals have
      already been answered in the  affirmative;  that  is  to  say,  it  is
      accepted that the appellant is gay and that  if  he  lived  openly  in
      Lebanon he would be at real risk of persecution. The court held that:

           "... if the Tribunal concluded that  the  applicant  would  live
           discreetly and so avoid persecution, it must go on to ask itself
           why he would do so; if the Tribunal concluded that the applicant
           would choose to live discreetly simply because that was  how  he
           wished to live, or because of  social  pressures,  such  as  not
           wanting to distress his parents or embarrass  his  friends,  his
           application should be rejected; social pressures  of  that  kind
           did not amount to persecution and the Convention did  not  odder
           protection against  them;  if  the  Tribunal  concluded  that  a
           material reasons for the  applicant  living  discreetly  on  his
           return would be a fear of the persecution which would follow  if
           he were to live openly as  a  gay  man,  then...his  application
           should be accepted".

  73.       Keeping  these  principles  in  mind  and  having  assessed  the
      evidence as a whole, I reach the  following  conclusions.  These  deal
      with the main points the appellant has relied on  in  support  of  his
      appeal.

  74.       The appellant is gay. That is accepted by the respondent  and  I
      do not go behind that concession.

  75.       It was also accepted by the respondent that at the time the  two
      periods of  discretionary  leave  were  granted  in  August  2009  and
      September 2010, the appellant was in a genuine relationship with RA.

  76.       On other matters, I found the appellant and RA to be  unreliable
      witnesses.

  77.       I do not know when the relationship ended as the evidence is  so
      inconsistent but I find that it  broke  down  soon  after  the  second
      period of discretionary leave was granted.

  78.        I  do  not  accept  that  the  appellant  and  RA  continued  a
      relationship as a couple after they separated.

  79.       I find that there was no genuine desire on the  part  of  either
      the  appellant  or  RA  to  reconcile  their  differences  and  resume
      cohabitation.

  80.       I do not know if the appellant and RA have actually been  living
      together at all since some time in 2015 because the evidence has  been
      so inconsistent and the documentary evidence so  limited  but  I  find
      that if there is cohabitation, it is designed solely to facilitate the
      appeal.

  81.        I  do  not  know  whether  the  appellant  has  had  other  gay
      relationships in the UK. No questions were put to him about this.  The
      evidence does not however support promiscuity.

  82.       The appellant has always  led  a  quiet,  discreet  and  private
      lifestyle in the UK. I  do  not  accept  that  he  has  disclosed  his
      sexuality to his friends generally although it may be that  there  are
      some who are aware. I do not accept his work colleagues are all  aware
      of his sexuality either.


  83.       I do not accept that the appellant has been  threatened  by  his
      brother.

  84.       I do not accept that the  appellant  has  no  contact  with  any
      family members.

  85.       It may be that the appellant has not disclosed his sexuality  to
      his family. If that is so, I find that it  accords  with  the  way  in
      which he has been living his life in the UK.

  86.       The appellant does not frequent bars and clubs in the UK and  so
      would have no wish to do so in Lebanon.

  87.       I find that the appellant does not live openly as a gay  man  in
      the UK. He appears to be reluctant to reveal his sexuality even in the
      UK and I find that he chooses to live in  a  quiet  and  discreet  way
      because that is what he prefers.

  88.       I find that if returned to Lebanon he would continue to live  in
      the same quiet, private and discreet way. If  he  does  so,  then  any
      sexual encounters he may have would not be public knowledge and  would
      not cause him any difficulties. Given the fact that he has not entered
      into any long term relationships in the UK since the break up  of  the
      relationship with RA, it is not axiomatic that he would seek to do  so
      in Lebanon.

  89.       I do not find that he would encounter any difficulties with  the
      authorities or with fundamentalist groups either in his home  area  or
      elsewhere.

  90.       I find that should the appellant not wish to return home to  his
      family, he would be able  to  live  safely  in  Beirut  without  their
      knowledge should he so wish. I do not accept the claim that they would
      find him wherever he went.

  91.       These findings also impact upon the appellant's article 8 claim.
      Largely, that is reliant upon the claimed family/private life with  RA
      and the appellant's ten years of residence here. It is not part of the
      appellant's case that he meets the  requirements  of  the  rules  with
      respect to paragraph 276ADE or Appendix FM. Therefore I must  consider
      whether the circumstances are such as to engage article 8 outside  the
      rules.

  92.       Applying the Razgar  stages,  I  find  that  the  appellant  has
      established a private life here because he has been since 2006, albeit
      with absences, and has made friends and has been  working.  I  do  not
      accept that his relationship with RA amounts to family life because  I
      do not accept there is any ongoing  intimate  relationship  but  I  am
      prepared to accept that RA is a friend and that that friendship  forms
      part of the private life the appellant has established.

  93.       The next three questions can be answered in the  affirmative.  I
      now proceed to undertake a proportionality assessment.

  94.       Given my finding that  there  is  no  relationship,  other  than
      friendship, between the appellant and RA, the main part of his article
      8 claim falls away.

  95.       Little else  is  known  about  the  appellant's  life  here.  No
      questions were put to the appellant by Mr Miah  about  the  nature  of
      that life here. The witness statement does  not  provide  any  details
      either. There is no information as to  the  strength  of  any  of  the
      friendships formed or of any reason why  such  friendships  could  not
      continue from overseas.  I  have  seen  no  evidence  of  any  studies
      undertaken here although the appellant entered as a student. There  is
      no evidence  of  any  organisations  the  appellant  has  joined,  any
      activities undertaken, any interests developed or hobbies pursued that
      could not be continued in Lebanon. Plainly the appellant has  retained
      ties to his country of origin by his frequent visits and he has a very
      large family there.

  96.       Reliance was placed on his length of residence but that alone is
      not enough to establish a breach of article  8.  Indeed,  I  heard  no
      submissions from Mr Miah as to why removal would  be  disproportionate
      other than the passing  reliance  on  the  appellant's  residence.  No
      compelling or compassionate reasons have been  given  as  to  why  the
      appellant could not return and reintegrate into life in Lebanon and it
      was not argued that it would be unreasonable or harsh for  him  to  do
      so.

  97.       In view of the rejection of his asylum claim, and the absence of
      any other reason for why he could not be expected to leave the  UK,  I
      conclude that his circumstances do not outweigh the public interest in
      maintaining a consistent and effective policy of immigration  control.



  98.       No separate submissions were  made  on  humanitarian  protection
      grounds.

Decision

  99.      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was set aside.  I  remake
      the decision.



 100.       The appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds.

 101.       The appeal is dismissed on humanitarian protection grounds.

 102.       The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.


      Signed:











      Dr R Keki?
      Judge of the Upper Tribunal
      Date: 23 March 2016
