
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/44786/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 17th July 2014                               |On 5th August 2014         |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 TASIB RAJA
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Reyaz, of Rasools Law


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  I will refer to him as the Claimant.

 2. The Claimant is a male citizen of Pakistan born 25th December 1984  who
    on 15th May 2013 applied for a residence card as the family  member  of
    an EEA  national  exercising  treaty  rights  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    according to The Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006
    (the 2006 Regulations).  The application was made on the basis that the
    Claimant is married to Renata Zigova a national of the Czech  Republic,
    who is a qualified person under regulation 6 of the  2006  Regulations,
    as she is a worker in the United Kingdom.

 3. The application was refused by Notice  of  Immigration  Decision  dated
    13th October 2013 and a reasons for refusal letter dated  14th  October
    2013 was issued.  The Secretary of State was  not  satisfied  that  the
    Claimant's spouse (the Sponsor)  was  exercising  treaty  rights  as  a
    worker as claimed.  Insufficient evidence had been submitted  to  prove
    her employment.  It was therefore not accepted that the Sponsor  was  a
    qualified person as defined by regulation 6 of the 2006 Regulations.

 4. The Claimant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal, and  the  appeal  was
    heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Pickup on 26th February 2014.
     In paragraph 13 of the determination the judge described the  evidence
    given by the Claimant and Sponsor as  "frankly  appalling"  and  stated
    that they "gave inconsistent  and  incredible  evidence,  contradicting
    each other and themselves."

 5. However the judge was  satisfied  the  Sponsor  was  exercising  treaty
    rights, and on that basis allowed the appeal.

 6. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal.  In summary it
    was contended that the judge had failed to  give  adequate  reasons  or
    findings on a material matter, and had made unclear  and  contradictory
    findings.  In particular in paragraph  14  the  judge  found  that  the
    Sponsor was working and exercising her treaty rights, but at  paragraph
    16 had found that the Claimant had not discharged the burden  of  proof
    to show on the balance of probabilities that all  the  requirements  of
    the regulations have been met for the issue of a residence  card  under
    regulation 17.  It was contended that the judge had failed  to  provide
    consistent or cogent reasons for allowing the appeal.

 7. The Claimant submitted a response pursuant to rule 24 of  The  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 submitting that the determination
    disclosed no error of law, and the judge had made findings  which  were
    open to him on the evidence.  It was submitted that the word  "not"  in
    paragraph 16 was a typing error and should have been omitted.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 8. There had initially been a hearing before the Upper Tribunal on 6th May
    2014.  At that hearing the Tribunal granted an application made by  the
    Claimant to submit evidence that had not  been  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, that being a P60 form for  the  Sponsor,  for  the  tax  year
    ending 5th April  2014.   The  hearing  was  adjourned  to  enable  the
    Secretary of State to make enquiries into that document.

 9. There then followed  written  applications  by  both  sides  to  submit
    further  evidence.   However   at   the   hearing   before   me,   both
    representatives indicated that they did not wish to  proceed  with  the
    applications that had been made to admit further evidence.

10. Mr Harrison stated that he relied upon the grounds contained within the
    application for permission to appeal and had  no  more  submissions  to
    make.

11. Mr  Reyaz  relied  upon  the  rule  24  response  contending  that  the
    determination disclosed no material error.

My Conclusions and Reasons

12. I do not find that the judge erred in law such that the decision should
    be set aside.  In my view there is a typographical error  in  paragraph
    16 of the determination in  that  the  word  "not"   should  have  been
    omitted.

13. It is clear that the judge considered all  the  evidence  submitted  on
    behalf of the Claimant, and was not impressed with that evidence.   The
    judge set out details of oral evidence given at  paragraph  13  of  the
    determination, which he found was inconsistent and incredible.

14. However the judge then recorded at paragraph 14;

         "14. On the evidence, I was very dubious about the nature and terms
             of the Sponsor's work; I am far  from  satisfied  as  to  many
             aspects of the  evidence.   However,  I  have  to  assess  not
             whether the Sponsor was working or being  paid  lawfully,  but
             whether she was  in  fact  exercising  her  Treaty  rights  by
             working.  Despite my misgivings, I am satisfied on the balance
             of probabilities that she was working and therefore exercising
             her Treaty rights."

15. The judge went on in paragraph 15 to confirm that on  the  evidence  he
    had considered the Claimant was entitled to a residence card.  Although
    the judge's finding in paragraph 16 appears to  conflict  the  findings
    referred to above, I am satisfied that  this  can  be  explained  by  a
    typing error, as the judge goes on, following paragraph 16, to  confirm
    that the appeal is allowed,  and  to  confirm  because  the  appeal  is
    allowed a full award is made.

16. I therefore have no doubt that the judge intended to allow the appeal.

17. I do not find that the judge has failed to consider evidence,  nor  has
    he given weight to any immaterial matters.  The  judge  has  considered
    the evidence put before him, and although finding it unsatisfactory  in
    some aspects, found that the Claimant's  case  had  been  proved  on  a
    balance of probability, and the judge gave  adequate  reasons  for  his
    findings.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.  I dismiss the appeal of the  Secretary  of
State.



Anonymity

No order for anonymity was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There has  been
no  request  for  anonymity  and  the  Upper  Tribunal  makes  no  anonymity
direction.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             25th July 2014

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The fee award made by the First-tier Tribunal stands.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             25th July 2014



