
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA 44082 2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28 April 2014                              |On 25 June 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                           Clarice Tagoe-Reinhold
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Tetteh, Counsel instructed by Anderson Browne,
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana.  She appeals against a decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against a decision of the
    respondent refusing her application for leave to remain  as  a  Tier  1
    (Entrepreneur) under the points-based system.

 2. There is one point taken against her in the reasons for refusal.  It is
    that the appellant did not produce a document showing that  on  a  date
    falling within three months  immediately  prior  to  the  date  of  the
    application she was in fact registered with  Her  Majesty's  Revenue  &
    Customs as self-employed.

 3. According to the reasons for refusal the document was  dated  30  March
    2013 but the application was made on 28 August 2013, which  plainly  is
    more than three months later.  The First-tier Tribunal agreed with  the
    respondent's decision and dismissed the appeal.

 4. Permission to appeal  was  sought  on  a  variety  of  grounds  raising
    questions of interpretation and the  evidential  flexibility  rule  but
    although permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal it
    was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb who said as follows:

         "The grounds  identify  an  arguable  error  of  law  in  that  the
         application form arguably only required the  appellant  to  provide
         the bill falling immediately before the application was made  which
         she had done.  Whilst dated earlier than three  months  before  the
         application, it is arguable that it was evidence of  her  continued
         registration with HMRC at the time required by  the  Rule.   It  is
         arguable that the Rule does not require  that  the  bill  be  dated
         within the three month period."

 5. Mr Duffy made it plain in his submissions that it is the  Secretary  of
    State's position, as I believe is reflected in guidance notes, that the
    documents that must be  produced  are  dated  within  the  three  month
    period.  Mr Duffy could not show me anything in the Rules that required
    documents to be dated in that period.

 6. The whole scheme of the points-based system is, and I do not think this
    is controversial, extremely pedantic.  It is intended to remove as much
    discretion as is possible from the decision-maker  who  has  to  decide
    only if certain strictly defined criteria are met. We are told that  if
    they are met the application will succeed and if they are not  met  the
    application will fail. It  is,  no  doubt,  intended  to  simplify  the
    decision making process.

 7. The respondent clearly thinks that the criteria were not met but I have
    been unable to find any justification for that view in the Rules.

 8. Mr Duffy has been particularly helpful  and  has  properly  and  fairly
    drawn my attention  to  the  relevant  paragraph  of  the  rules.   The
    requirement is at subparagraph (iii)(1) of Table 4(d) of Appendix A. It
    is that the applicant:

         "was, on a date falling within the three months  immediately  prior
         to the date of application, registered with HM Revenue and  Customs
         as self-employed, ...".

 9. In other words, the applicant had to show was that she  was  registered
    at a point three months before the application was made. The  rules  do
    not state how she must show it. There are many examples in the Rules of
    documents having to be  dated  within  a  particular  period.  No  such
    requirement appears here. The Rule does not say that the applicant  has
    to produce a document dated within the three month period.

10. I was told in argument, and I accept, that the usual  arrangement  with
    HM Revenue and Customs  required  a  person  paying  tax  and  national
    insurance as a  self-employed  person  to  pay  bills  at  six  monthly
    intervals. It follows that it is entirely plausible that  he  appellant
    produced the most recent bill in her possession as independent proof of
    her registration.

11. Mr Duffy submitted that the appellant could have  asked  HM  Revenue  &
    Customs for a  more  recent  letter  confirming  she  was  still  self-
    employed.  Whether HM Revenue and Customs would have  been  obliged  to
    produce such a letter is a matter of conjecture. Perhaps they would but
    there was nothing in the Rules that requires such a letter even  though
    I do not want to discourage anyone  seeking  to  prove  that  they  are
    registered obtaining as Mr Duffy suggested.

12. The appellant produced a recent document which, coupled with  her  oral
    assertion that she was indeed self-employed, satisfies me that she  met
    the requirements of the Rule.  It is at least probable that she was, on
    a date within the  three  months  immediately  prior  the  application,
    registered with HM Revenue & Customs as self-employed.

13. I am not sure that it is necessary to say more but I do make the  point
    that it is exceedingly plausible that she remained  registered  because
    the whole purpose of her application was to remain as  a  self-employed
    person. It is very hard to imagine circumstances where a person  having
    introduced themselves to the  Revenue  would  cease  to  be  registered
    whilst an application was processed.  Even  if  the  business  was  not
    doing very well there was no obvious reason to deregister and so  there
    is nothing about the circumstances of a document dated a little  sooner
    than  the  application  period  of  three  months  to  make  it  appear
    suspicious or in any way unreliable.

14. It may be that the Secretary of State needs to consider  the  terms  of
    the Rules or the terms of the guidance but it does seem to  me,  having
    looked at the Rule carefully, that the interpretation that she  favours
    is not one actually required by her Rules,  and  the  Rules  have  made
    requirements which this applicant has met.

15. I have considerable sympathy for the First-tier Tribunal Judge, who was
    not assisted by the way the Secretary of  State,  I  am  sure  in  good
    faith, prepared her case, but I am  satisfied  his  interpretation  was
    wrong and on the correct interpretation of the Rules this appeal should
    have been allowed.

16. I therefore set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  I
    substitute the decision allowing the appeal for the reasons given.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 24 June 2014                   |







