
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-VP/V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/44524/2014
                                                               IA/44526/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 5 January 2016                    |On 18 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                              Asif Uddin Ahmed
                            Ayesha Tamanna Zebin
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr I Hossain, Legal Representative instructed by
                    London Law Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are nationals of Bangladesh,  having  been  born  on  14
    December 1987 and 2  June  1990,  respectively.   The  first  appellant
    arrived in the UK in October 2009 with leave as a Tier 4  Migrant,  and
    subsequently as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work)  Migrant  with  leave  valid
    until 30 August 2014.  The second appellant is  the  first  appellant's
    wife, and has leave in line with him.

 2. Applications were made to vary their leave to remain on 29 August 2014,
    the applications being made  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.   On  24
    October 2014 those applications were refused.  The appellants  appealed
    and their appeals came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Devittie  who
    dismissed the appeals.

 3. The basis of the application for leave to remain and of the appeal  was
    that the first appellant required a short period of  leave  whilst  his
    employer obtained a  Tier  2  sponsor  licence  and  a  certificate  of
    sponsorship in favour of the appellant.  The respondent concluded  that
    it was reasonable for the appellants to return to  Bangladesh  until  a
    point when the first appellant's employer was in a  position  to  offer
    the appellant a certificate of sponsorship ("CoS").

 4. It was said that there  was  no  guarantee  that  the  appellant  would
    receive a CoS allocation given that there was  no  certainty  that  his
    employer  would  be  successful  with  the  Tier  2  application.   The
    appellants had visited Bangladesh on several occasions whilst in the UK
    and as recently as about a year before the application for leave.

 5. It was further noted that  almost  two  months  had  passed  since  the
    application for further leave had been made, a period during which  the
    first appellant had suggested his employer's affairs would have been in
    order.  The first appellant therefore had had sufficient time  for  the
    Tier 2 sponsor licence and CoS to be concluded.

 6. In the case of both appellants it was  concluded  that  there  were  no
    exceptional  circumstances  indicating  that  a  grant  of  leave  with
    reference to Article 8 of the ECHR was appropriate.

 7. The grounds of appeal before me state that the  First-tier  Judge  "has
    failed to apply the practical condition  of  the  point  based  systems
    migrants who have been hugely affected by the  recent  changes  in  the
    Immigration rules and the hardship imposed on  the  Tier  2  sponsors."
    The grounds go on to state that the  first  appellant  had  invested  a
    large amount of money but "he had not have the opportunity to  get  the
    job" and "the time elapsed from the life of  Appellant  has  a  serious
    impact on his career, but the honourable IJ has  failed  to  understand
    the real circumstances."

 8. More coherently, the grounds continue with a complaint that the  First-
    tier Judge failed to consider paragraph 276ADE(vi), suggesting that the
    appellants "will have significant obstacle with the country to which he
    would have to go if required to leave  the  UK."   The  next  paragraph
    quotes section 86 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002
    ("the 2002 Act")", to the effect that the judge failed to consider  the
    Article 8 ground of appeal.

 9. It is lastly contended that the judge "never dealt with  the  principle
    of common law fairness, concept of Natural Justice, reasonableness  and
    the fairness".

10. In submissions Mr Hossain submitted that it was  not  proportionate  to
    require the appellants to return to apply  for  entry  clearance.   The
    second appellant is pregnant and expecting a baby next month.  Although
    it was initially suggested that the  fact  of  the  second  appellant's
    pregnancy was made known to the respondent, Mr Hossain seemed  then  to
    concede that this was not a matter drawn to the respondent's  attention
    or to the attention of the First-tier Tribunal.

11. It was then submitted that  the  case  solely  depended  on  Article  8
    outside the Immigration Rules, although it was not entirely clear as to
    whether the contention in the grounds to the Upper Tribunal in  respect
    of paragraph 276ADE was maintained.

12. I was referred to the  appellant's  skeleton  argument  which,  amongst
    other things, reiterates the second appellant's pregnancy, although  Mr
    Hossain was unable to explain how that information which was not before
    the First-tier Tribunal was relevant to whether the Tribunal  erred  in
    law.   The  skeleton  argument  also  raises  Article  3  of  the  ECHR
    suggesting that disruption to the second appellant's medical  treatment
    would cause significant harm to the unborn child.  Mr Hossain submitted
    that the second appellant was not now able to  travel  because  of  the
    advanced stage of her pregnancy.

13. Mr Wilding accepted that Article 8 was raised in the grounds of  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal.  However, he contended that  there  was  no
    case on Article  8  that  could  have  succeeded  because  nothing  was
    provided to support any Article 8 case.  There was nothing to  indicate
    that the appellants could not return to Bangladesh.   If  there  is  an
    error of law in the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  it  is  not
    material.  All  that  the  judge  could  have  been  expected  to  have
    concluded was that Article 8 was not made out.

14. So far as the  appellants'  skeleton  argument  is  concerned,  it  was
    submitted that most of it is irrelevant, for example in  terms  of  the
    fact that  the  second  appellant  is  now  pregnant.   If  the  second
    appellant is unfit to fly, the Secretary of State would not enforce her
    return.

    My conclusions

15. There is no complaint about the First-tier judge having  dismissed  the
    appeal with reference to paragraph 322(i) of the Rules, which  was  the
    basis of the application for leave to remain.

16. It is still not clear whether the contention is that the  judge  should
    have dealt with the appeal on the basis of the  Article  8  Immigration
    Rules,  i.e.  paragraph  276ADE(vi)  or  under  a  'pure'   Article   8
    assessment.  The grounds before the First-tier Tribunal make  it  clear
    that the Article 8 case is  outside  the  Rules,  whereas  the  grounds
    before the Upper Tribunal, and the skeleton argument,  raise  paragraph
    276ADE(vi).

17. Regardless of that, it is the case that there was before the First-tier
    Judge an Article 8 ground of appeal which needed to be determined  (see
    S.86(2) of the 2002 Act).

18. At [4] the judge stated that he was satisfied "that grounds  of  appeal
    do not implicate a human right question (sic)".  That suggests that the
    judge was aware that Article 8 was a matter raised in  the  grounds  of
    appeal.  There is no further explanation from the judge as to  why,  if
    that was his view, Article 8 was not engaged.

19. However, aside from suggesting that it was not reasonable  to  ask  the
    appellants to return to Bangladesh to obtain entry clearance, and  that
    the first appellant had relied on his employer's assurance of obtaining
    a Tier 2 licence, there is little if anything in  the  grounds  to  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  which  supports  an  Article  8  case.    Various
    authorities are quoted in the grounds but the only assertions  personal
    to the appellants are the reiteration of the basis of  the  application
    for leave to remain, the assertion that "the Appellant" has established
    a private life in the  UK  "through  his  studies,  works,  and  social
    networks", that it would not be in the interests of immigration control
    to remove the appellant "without giving him the opportunity to organise
    his career", and that "the life of the family formed by  the  Appellant
    cannot reasonably be expected to be enjoyed elsewhere if he [is] forced
    to leave the UK all [of] a sudden".

20. Furthermore,  there  was  no  actual  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal supporting any of those assertions, which in my judgement  are
    in any event weak assertions in support of an Article 8 case.

21. None of the evidence in relation to the  second  appellant's  pregnancy
    was before the First-tier Judge.  Indeed, at the time  of  the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal the second  appellant  would  only  have
    been about four weeks pregnant,  as  according  to  the  documents  put
    before me, her due date is 14 February 2016.

22. The First-tier  Judge  stating  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  do  not
    "implicate" a human rights question is in my judgement accurate  if  by
    that the judge meant that the appellants' case does not engage  Article
    8.  However, he was nevertheless required to explain why that  was  so,
    and in not doing so I am satisfied that he erred in law.   More  so  is
    there an error of law if what the judge said at [4] is interpreted as a
    lack of recognition of the Article 8 ground, being a  ground  that  did
    require to be determined.

23. However, not every error of law requires a decision to be set aside and
    this is just such an error of law.  There  was  no  positive  case  put
    before the First-tier Tribunal in terms of why the appellants could not
    leave  the  UK  and  apply  for  entry   clearance.    Their   personal
    circumstances as referred  to  in  the  grounds  did  not  advance  any
    rational basis for a potential conclusion in their favour in Article  8
    terms.  Furthermore, there was no actual evidence before the First-tier
    Tribunal which would suggest that they could have succeeded  under  the
    Article 8 Immigration Rules or under Article 8  proper.   The  evidence
    now relied on was not before the First-tier Judge, and even if  it  had
    been it could not have resulted  in  a  decision  in  their  favour  on
    Article 8 grounds.

24. The judge did not err in failing to conclude that there was an issue of
    common law fairness that arose in the appellants' application for leave
    to remain.  They applied for leave to remain  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules, the first appellant not being able to make  an  application  for
    leave to remain under Tier 2 because his employer did not have a Tier 2
    sponsor licence.  As the judge said at [4], the  appellants'  recourse,
    as the respondent had also pointed out, was to leave the  UK  and  make
    such an out of country application as  advised,  to  enable  the  first
    appellant to return to the UK with the assistance of his sponsor.

25. In the circumstances, I am satisfied  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision to dismiss the appeal is to stand, notwithstanding  the  error
    of law which I have identified.

    Decision

26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law.  However, its decision is not set  aside,  and
    the decision to dismiss the appeal stands.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek      11/02/16

