
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Nos: IA/44435/44437/44439/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                                |Determination promulgated  |
|on 22nd July 2014                               |on 25th July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                oSCAR NSUBUGA
                            ANNROSE EDITH NSUBUGA
                           esther nsubuga kukiriza
                                                                 Respondents

For the Appellants:    Mr J Vassiliou, of McGill & Co., Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs S Saddiq, Senior Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1.  The  parties  are  as  described  above,  but  in  the  rest  of  this
    determination are referred to as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellants put their case to the respondent and in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal solely on the  basis  of  the  best  interests  of  the  third
    appellant, as a child, outside  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  At paragraph 26 of his determination promulgated on 26 February
    2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Farrelly said that removal  would  be  a
    disruption to her education at a crucial time.  He was "driven  to  the
    conclusion" that it was in her best interest to remain in the  UK  with
    her parents.  He noted that although that was a primary  consideration,
    it did not necessarily mean that the appeals had to  succeed.   He  did
    not find other considerations to outweigh her interests.  He said  that
    view was "supplemented by the length of time the adults have been here,
    their lawful presence and their integration and their limited prospects
    in Uganda."

 3. I doubt whether the judge was entitled to find that the  prospects  for
    the adult appellants in Uganda as compared with the UK were limited  in
    any way which counted significantly in favour of allowing the  appeals.
    However, that was plainly not the decisive point, which  was  the  best
    interests of the third appellant alone  at  a  critical  stage  of  her
    education.

 4. Those grounds refer to the case law and submit at (e) that to remove of
    the family to Uganda might "present a degree of interim disruption, but
    this would be a reasonable outcome" and at (f) that  "the  decision  to
    refuse is not unreasonable".

 5. There was no difference between the parties on the  cases  and  on  the
    leading principles, although they derived opposite outcomes.   Nor  can
    there be any  doubt  that  the  judge  referred  himself  to  the  main
    authorities.

 6.  Mrs  Saddiq  referred  particularly  to   these   paragraphs   of   EV
    (Philippines) and others [2014] EWCA Civ 874:

         34.  In determining whether or not, in a case such as the  present,
             the need for immigration control outweighs the best  interests
             of the children, it is necessary  to  determine  the  relative
             strength of the factors which make it in their best  interests
             to remain here; and also to take account of any  factors  that
             point the other way.

          1. A decision as to what is in the  best  interests  of  children
             will depend on a number of factors such as (a) their age;  (b)
             the length of time that they have been here; (c) how long they
             have been in education; (c) what  stage  their  education  has
             reached; (d) to what extent they have  become  distanced  from
             the country to which it is proposed that they return; (e)  how
             renewable their connection with it may be; (f) to what  extent
             they will have linguistic, medical or other difficulties  in
             adapting to life in that country; and (g) the extent to  which
             the course proposed will interfere with their family  life  or
             their rights (if they have any) as British citizens.

          1. In a sense the tribunal is  concerned  with  how  emphatic  an
             answer falls to be given to the question: is it  in  the  best
             interests of the child to remain? The  longer  the  child  has
             been here, the more advanced (or critical) the  stage  of  his
             education, the looser his ties with the country  in  question,
             and the more deleterious the consequences of his  return,  the
             greater the weight that falls into one side of the scales.  If
             it is overwhelmingly in the child's  best  interests  that  he
             should not return, the need to  maintain  immigration  control
             may well not tip the balance. By contrast  if  it  is  in  the
             child's best interests to remain, but only  on  balance  (with
             some factors pointing the other way), the result may  be  the
             opposite.

 7. Mrs Saddiq submitted that there was nothing in this case of  sufficient
    strength in respect of the child's interests which tipped  the  balance
    away from maintaining the  Immigration  Rules  and  in  favour  of  the
    appellants.  The First-tier Tribunal did not correctly  appreciate  the
    weight to be given to immigration  control,  and  had  given  too  much
    importance to the desirability of the child  living  in  the  UK.   The
    child was well looked after by loving and caring  parents.   There  was
    nothing to suggest that her interests would be significantly damaged by
    moving to Uganda rather than remaining in the UK.  The judge failed  to
    consider the best interests of the child in the context of his  finding
    that but for that factor the appeals would fail.  His  decision  should
    be reversed.

 8. Mr Vassiliou submitted that the judge correctly took the starting point
    as being the best interests of children in remaining with both parents,
    but that was only a starting point.  The judge was entitled to conclude
    that her interests would be best served by remaining in the UK with her
    parents.  The case could be  distinguished  from  Zoumbas  because  the
    present appellants do  not  have  an  unedifying  immigration  history.
    Their past is entirely creditable.  The SSHD's grounds  were  wrong  in
    asserting that Zoumbas was an authority  that  the  judge  should  have
    found it not unreasonable for the family to return to Uganda.   He  had
    given the legal principles  in  that  case  full  regard.   Comparative
    educational provision comparatively in Uganda was only one of a  number
    of factors.  There was no material misdirection of law.  Even if  error
    were to be found, on the facts the decision should again be  remade  in
    the favour of the appellants.

 9. I indicated that the SSHD's appeal would not succeed.

10. The SSHD's criticism was best made by reference to  the  passage  cited
    above from EV. However, in my view the SSHD's grounds  and  submissions
    although framed in terms of error of  legal  approach,  are,  as  shown
    particularly at (e)  and  (f),  in  substance  that  this  decision  is
    perverse and could not have been arrived at by any judge  applying  the
    correct legal approach to  the  primary  (and  essentially  undisputed)
    facts.

11. This was not a case with a very  emphatic  answer  in  respect  of  the
    adverse effects on the child.  If her parents chose to move to  another
    country, taking her  with  them,  that  would  hardly  call  for  state
    intervention to prevent it.  That would be one possible test of whether
    decisions show  proper  consideration  of  a  child's  best  interests.
    Having said that, I am unable to find that no judge could properly have
    reached the proportionality assessment made  here.   The  case  was  at
    highest for the appellants a finely balanced one, and the  outcome  may
    appear to be generous, even surprisingly generous; but  the  respondent
    falls short of showing legal error, rather than disagreement  with  the
    judge's final striking of the balance.

12. The SSHD's appeal is dismissed.  The determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal shall stand.

13. No order for anonymity has been requested or made.

                           [pic]


                           24 July 2014
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
