
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44023/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24th November, 2016                        |On 14th December, 2016        |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Staunton, a Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms E Saunders of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department who I shall refer to as being, "the claimant".

2.   The respondent, SA, is male, a citizen of Turkey and was  born  on  9th
    September, 1975.

3.   The respondent arrived in the United Kingdom on 15th May, 1993 to  join
    his mother who had arrived in the United Kingdom  earlier  and  claimed
    asylum.  Her claim for asylum was subsequently  refused,  but  she  was
    granted exceptional leave to remain until 23rd April,  1994.   On  14th
    June, 1993, the respondent was granted exceptional leave to  remain  in
    line with his mother.  The respondent and his mother were  subsequently
    granted indefinite leave to remain in April, 2001.

4.   On 9th July, 2004 the respondent was convicted  of  importing  class  A
    drugs (heroin) and sentenced to fifteen years' imprisonment.  He became
    liable to automatic deportation.  On 27th October, 2011 the  respondent
    was  served  with  a  reasons  for  deportation  letter  and  a  signed
    deportation order.  The respondent  appealed,  claiming  that  he  fell
    within one of the exceptions to automatic deportation  and  his  appeal
    was allowed by the First-tier Tribunal under Article  3  grounds  in  a
    determination promulgated on 16th March, 2012.

5.   The claimant sought application for leave to appeal  that  decision  to
    the Upper Tribunal, but it was subsequently refused.

6.   On 17th March,  2014  the  respondent  was  served  with  a  notice  of
    intention to revoke his indefinite leave to remain.  The respondent had
    provided representations as to why his indefinite leave to remain ought
    not to be revoked.  Thereafter, the  claimant  decided  to  revoke  the
    respondent's indefinite  leave  to  remain,  in  a  letter  dated  14th
    October, 2014.

7.   The claimant accepted that the respondent's appeal against  deportation
    was allowed on human rights grounds and that he cannot be removed  from
    the United Kingdom.  However it was decided to  revoke  his  indefinite
    leave to remain, in view of the fact that  Section  76(1)  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 applied to the appellant.

8.   The respondent appealed and his appeal came before First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Ross at Hendon Magistrates' Court on 11th February, 2016.   Judge
    Ross considered two authorities relied on on behalf of the Secretary of
    State.  These were Ali (s.76 - "liable to deportation") Pakistan [2011]
    UKUT  250  (IAC)  and  R  (on  the  application  of   Fitzroy   George)
    (Respondent) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  (Applicant)
    [2014] UKSC 28.

9.   The judge concluded that the respondent's appeal had to be allowed  for
    reasons which were not raised by either party.  He concluded  that  the
    essential issue was whether the Secretary  of  State  was  entitled  to
    revoke the indefinite leave to remain under Section 76(1) of  the  2002
    Act.  Having examined the case law, he  found  that  the  case  of  Ali
    establishes that a person who is subject to automatic  deportation  can
    only become a person whose leave may be revoked under Section 76(1), if
    the Secretary of State has deemed his deportation to  be  conducive  to
    the public good.

10.  Subsequently, in R (on the application of George),  the  Supreme  Court
    decided  a  different  issue,  namely  whether  the  revocation  of   a
    deportation order revives a person's indefinite  leave  to  remain,  or
    whether the Secretary of State is at that stage free to consider afresh
    what leave should be granted.  In the case of George, he was  a  person
    whose deportation had been judged by  the  Secretary  of  State  to  be
    conducive to the  public  good.   The  judge  referred  to  and  quoted
    paragraph 13 of  the  Secretary  of  State's  reasons  letter  of  14th
    October, 2014 and the judge noted that while the  matters  set  out  in
    that paragraph were correct, the notice and the reasons for  revocation
    were problematical, because the Secretary of State had not herself  (or
    by a decision maker)  deemed  that  the  respondent's  deportation  was
    conducive to the public good.  Consequently, he found that the decision
    of the Secretary of State was  not  in  accordance  with  the  law  and
    allowed the respondent's appeal.

11.  The grounds of appeal suggest  that  the  judge  erred  by  failing  to
    distinguish between the current case and that of  Ali;  the  respondent
    being a foreign criminal within the meaning of Section 32  and  Section
    32(5) requiring the Secretary of State to  make  a  deportation  order.
    The exception in 33(2) applies to the respondent.  In Ali the Secretary
    of State having found the subject of that appeal to have been liable to
    deportation had not pursued deportation and therefore  as  accepted  by
    the Presenting Officer in that case the Secretary of State had  reached
    no such conclusion as to whether or not deportation  was  conducive  to
    the public good.  In the present case, it was the appellant's  European
    Convention rights which prevented his removal.

12.  The Presenting Officer accepted that the Secretary  of  State  had  not
    made a decision that the respondent's deportation was conducive to  the
    public good.  For the respondent, Ms Sanders submitted that  there  was
    no  distinction  between  the  case  of  Ali  and  this  case.    Here,
    deportation was automatic under Section 32 of the UK Borders Act  2007.
    In MK (deportation  -  foreign  criminal  -  public  interest)  Gambia;
    Secretary of State for the Home Department v MK [2010] UKUT  281  (IAC)
    the Upper Tribunal held that in the automatic deportation  context  the
    Secretary of State's  discretion  had  been  replaced  by  parliament's
    decision as to the public good.  In Ali the Upper Tribunal  found  that
    the definition of "liability to  deportation"  is  the  same  as  under
    Section 76 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and that
    the effect of the set of exemptions contained in Sections 32 and 33  of
    the UK Borders Act 2007 is that where a person caught by the  automatic
    deportation provisions cannot be deported  due  to  his  or  her  human
    rights, parliament  still  considers  his  or  her  deportation  to  be
    "conducive to the public good".

13.  The taking by the Secretary of State of her  own  decision  as  to  the
    public good, is a "crucial requirement"  before  Section  76  can  take
    effect.  At paragraph 23 the Tribunal said:-

         "Liability to deportation under Section 3(5)(a) arises only if  the
         Secretary of State deems that person's deportation to be  conducive
         to the public good.  The effect of Section 32(4) of the UK  Borders
         Act 2007 is that, by statute, his deportation is conducive  to  the
         public good; so that, if the Secretary of State does (also) deem it
         to be conducive to the public good, there can be no argument  about
         the basis for the Secretary of State's decision.  But,  as  we  see
         it, under Section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971, the decision
         of the Secretary of State (or an officer) is a crucial requirement.
          That paragraph cannot possibly be read as if  it  provided  merely
         that a person is  liable  to  deportation  if  his  deportation  is
         conducive to the public good".

14.  Mr Ali was not "liable to deportation" because the Secretary  of  State
    made no such decision that she deemed his deportation to  be  conducive
    to the public good.  The  decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  George
    involved a decision made under the Immigration Act  1971,  rather  than
    under the new automatic deportation regime.

15.  It was submitted on behalf of the claimant that there was no  effective
    difference for the purposes of the effect  of  the  relevant  statutory
    provisions between the situations in Ali and in the present  case.   It
    made no difference that in Ali the Secretary of State had  reached  the
    conclusion that she should not make a deportation order due to Mr Ali's
    Article 8 rights, whereas in the instant case  the  respondent  had  to
    take his case  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  ruling  that  his
    deportation would breach Article 3.   In  both  cases,  the  underlying
    decision that deportation would be conducive to the public interest was
    made by parliament, not by the  Secretary  of  State  and  parliament's
    decision is not displaced by either the decision of  the  Secretary  of
    State that an individual's deportation would breach his  or  her  human
    rights, or by  the  decision  of  the  Tribunal  that  an  individual's
    deportation would breach his or her human rights.

16.  The clear effect of Section 33(7) UK Borders  Act  is  that  the  human
    rights exception under Section 33(2)  does  not  displace  parliament's
    view of the public interest under Section 32(4), and the effect of  Ali
    must be that in both situations where a decision by  the  Secretary  of
    State that an individual's deportation would breach his  or  her  human
    rights, and the decision by a Tribunal that an individual's deportation
    would breach his or her human  rights,  the  Secretary  of  State  must
    explicitly decide that the deportation would  be  conducive  to  public
    interest, before reliance can be placed on Section 76.  The  effect  of
    Ali is to require the appellant to make her own explicit decision  that
    an individual's deportation is conducive to the public  good  in  every
    case in which she seeks to revoke an individual's indefinite  leave  to
    remain under Section 76 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002.  It is not possible to imply such a decision into the  making  of
    an automatic deportation order.  Section 117C of the 2002 Act is simply
    an expression of parliament's view of the public interest, and  has  no
    bearing on the obligation which parliament has placed on the  Secretary
    of State under Section 3(5) of the 1971 Act.

17.  Counsel also drew attention  to  the  fact  that  the  appellant's  own
    policy instruction requires her to explicitly notify  individuals  that
    she considers their deportation to be  conducive  to  the  public  good
    before she can apply Section 76 to them.  (See Revocation of Indefinite
    Leave Version 4.0, 19th October, 2005).

18.  I have concluded, therefore, that the decision of  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error of law and the decision shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Richard Chalkley
A judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and I have considered making a  fee  award  and
have decided to make a fee award of any fee which has been paid  or  may  be
payable (adjusted where full award not justified) for the following  reason.
 The decision of the Secretary of State for the Home Department was wrong.


Richard Chalkley
A judge of the Upper Tribunal.
