
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44733/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 12th August and 28th October 2015 |On 23rd November 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         MR RAJA MUHAMMAD NAZAM KHAN
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Unrepresented


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Grant  Hutchison  allowing  the  Claimant's
    appeal under the Immigration Rules and on  human  rights  grounds  with
    reference to Appendix FM.

 2. In a Refusal Letter dated 27  October  2014,  the  Secretary  of  State
    refused the Claimants' application in relation to his  application  for
    an extension of his leave as the spouse of Ms Sidra  Begum,  a  British
    citizen and present and settled person.  The  Appellant  simultaneously
    issued removal directions pursuant to section 47  of  the  Immigration,
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 setting removal for Pakistan. The  sole
    reason for refusal was that  the  Claimant  failed  to  meet  paragraph
    284(ix) of the Immigration Rules as the English language certificate he
    had provided (an "ESOL" certificate) from EMD  Qualifications  ("EMDQ")
    was not an English language test provider approved by the Secretary  of
    State for the purposes of leave to remain, as detailed in Appendix O to
    the Immigration Rules. The Appellant went on to  consider  Appendix  FM
    and private life under paragraph 276ADE(1) of  the  Immigration  Rules,
    however the refusal was maintained on those rules also.

 3.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated  its  decision   allowing   the
    Claimant's appeal against those decisions  on  16  February  2015.  The
    First-tier Tribunal allowed the Claimant's appeal under the Immigration
    Rules and on human rights grounds with reference to Appendix FM, due to
    the insurmountable obstacles that the couple would face if they were to
    relocate to Pakistan.

 4. The Appellant appealed  against  that  decision.  The  grounds  may  be
    summarised as a broad challenge of failing to give reasons or  adequate
    reasons for findings on a material matter,  namely  the  success  under
    Appendix FM EX.1(b). The Appellant was granted permission to appeal  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Lambert.

 5. I was not provided with a Rule 24 response from the  Claimant.  At  the
    first hearing on 12 August 2015, the Claimant was represented by  Mr  A
    Slatter of counsel. At the second  hearing  on  28  October  2015,  the
    Claimant was unrepresented but had sought the assistance  of  a  family
    friend, a Ms Khan, whom was permitted  to  act  as  a  McKenzie  friend
    (given that she had done so without any remuneration being promised  or
    given to her for her  role).  Consequently,  I  was  addressed  by  the
    Claimant whom made basic oral submissions on his own behalf. I asked Mr
    Khan if he was happy to  proceed  with  the  hearing  without  a  legal
    representative and he confirmed that he was content to do so.

 6. At the close of submissions, I indicated that I found that there was  a
    material error of law and set aside the decision, with the result  that
    the appeal would be allowed on an alternate basis. I  however  reserved
    my reasons, which I shall now give.

    Submissions

 7. From the outset, I openly express my thanks to Mr Walker  who  appeared
    on behalf of the Secretary of State and was of exemplary assistance  in
    ensuring the just disposal of the appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

 8. In essence, Mr Walker submitted  that  EMDQ  in  fact  appeared  to  be
    qualified providers, even though they were not  reflected  as  such  in
    Appendix O. It was highlighted by the  parties  that  Box  8.4  of  the
    Claimant's Form FLR(M) submitted with the application (see page  43  of
    that form) confirmed the position that the  provider  was  said  to  be
    approved by Ofqual. To assist  me  in  contextualising  the  Claimant's
    English speaking ability historically, Mr Walker produced a printout of
    the Home Office's spouse  pre-assessment  printout  from  its  database
    (marked VAF 1673667) which confirmed that at  the  time  of  his  entry
    clearance application the Claimant had produced an evidence that he had
    passed the Level A1  English  language  requirement  with  an  approved
    provider. This was the only document that the Home Office had  retained
    on its database and no further information was  available.  I  accepted
    this new evidence even though late served in the interests  of  justice
    in accordance with my case management powers under  rule  5(3)  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Procedure Rules 2008.

 9. Mr Khan also asked to provide new evidence in relation to  the  English
    language issue and given  that  there  should  be  equity  in  arms,  I
    permitted this evidence to be produced also. Mr Khan relied on a bundle
    containing 18 pages  (unfortunately  without  a  contents  page)  which
    included:

      i) evidence from the Home Office  website  concerning  how  to  "Prove
         knowledge of English for citizenship and settling",

     ii) evidence of "Changes to knowledge of language and life in the UK",

    iii) printouts concerning Gatehouse Awards Ltd,

     iv) printouts for EMD (Qualifications) Ltd,

      v) a copy of a previous letter from EMDQ of 25 June 2014 (already sent
         with the Claimant's application and which confirms  their  presence
         on the Ofqual register at the relevant time),

     vi) a letter from BSGS College concerning the  Claimant's  passing  the
         ESOL Skills for Life test at Level B1 of the CEFR, and

    vii) the Claimant's EMDQ Certificates through BSGS College for  5  April
         2014.

10.  Mr  Walker  continued  his  submissions  and  stated  that  from   the
    documentation produced, it appears that EMDQ was an approved  provider.
    He directed my attention to pages 14-15 of the  new  evidence  from  Mr
    Khan, which showed that EMDQ was Ofqual accredited. Mr Walker confirmed
    that EMDQ needed to be Ofqual accredited and did not  necessarily  need
    to appear as an  approved  test  provider  in  the  Appendices  to  the
    Immigration Rules. Mr Walker submitted that  the  Judge  was  right  to
    state that the college was not on Appendix O but was wrong to find that
    the college needed to be listed on Appendix O but  given  that  it  was
    accredited with Ofqual.

11. Mr Khan agreed with this submission and confirmed that he had completed
    his course with EMDQ. Mr Khan clarified  the  appearance  of  Gatehouse
    Ltd, a new test provider, amongst the evidence by confirming that  EMDQ
    Ltd transformed into Gatehouse Ltd and that Gatehouse Ltd is an  Ofqual
    accredited test provider. Therefore, he asked me to note that his  ESOL
    certificate should have been accepted.

12. Mr Walker then concluded his submissions by stating that it was  agreed
    that there was an error in law as the appeal should have  been  allowed
    under the Immigration Rules, however not on the basis of  Appendix  FM,
    but due to the ESOL requirement being met.




    Error of Law

13. The sole basis of refusal as  stated  above  is  the  failure  to  meet
    paragraph 284(ix) of the Immigration Rules. Paragraph  284  (ix)(a)  of
    the Immigration Rules (as at 27 October 2014) states as follows:

         'Requirements for an extension of  stay  as  the  spouse  or  civil
         partner of a person present and settled in the United Kingdom

         284. The requirements for an extension of stay  as  the  spouse  or
         civil partner of a person present and settled in the United Kingdom
         are that:

         (ix) (a) the applicant provides an original English  language  test
         certificate in speaking and listening from an English language test
         provider approved by the Secretary of  State  for  these  purposes,
         which clearly shows the  applicant's  name  and  the  qualification
         obtained (which must meet or exceed level A1 of the Common European
         Framework of Reference) unless:

             (i) the applicant is aged 65 or over at the time he makes  his
             application; or

             (ii) the applicant has a physical  or  mental  condition  that
             would prevent him from meeting the requirement; or;

             (iii) there are exceptional compassionate  circumstances  that
             would prevent the applicant from meeting the requirement'

14. The only relevant portion of that paragraph for the Claimant's purposes
    is the first paragraph within 284(ix)(a). The rule clearly requires the
    Claimant to produce  an  English  language  test  certificate  from  an
    English language test provider approved by the Secretary of  State  for
    these purposes.

15. Mr Walker accepts that the  English  language  provider,  EMDQ,  is  an
    approved provider. This acceptance appears to stem from the  fact  that
    the excerpt from the Home Office's website states that a  qualification
    will be accepted for settlement and  naturalisation  purposes,  if  the
    qualification is:

         "...listed as an ESOL qualification on the  Register  of  Regulated
         Qualifications and have been taken in England,  Wales  or  Northern
         Ireland.      The       register       is       available       at:
         http://register.ofqual.gov.uk/2"

16. It is not disputed that EMQD was such a provider nor that  its  current
    incarnation as Gatehouse Ltd is also a provider registered with Ofqual.
    This is indeed confirmed by the evidence that Mr Khan produced which Mr
    Walker drew to my attention. I accept Mr Walker's submission that  EMDQ
    only needed to be an Ofqual-accredited provider and did not necessarily
    need to appear as an approved test provider in Appendix O,  or  any  of
    the other Appendices to the Immigration  Rules.  This  is  because  the
    website publicises that Ofqual registered test providers  are  approved
    by the Secretary of State. This approval is not reflected  in  Appendix
    O, however, if the public policy statements of  the  Appellant  on  her
    website are more relaxed than the Rules, it is only fair and just  that
    those policy statements are honoured by her.

17. For my part, I find it is troubling that Appendix O describes itself as
    a "List of English language tests that have been approved by  the  Home
    Office for English language requirements for limited leave to enter  or
    remain under the Immigration Rules". That description clearly does  not
    explicitly purport to provide a comprehensive  list  of  approved  test
    providers, but only goes  towards  approved  tests  or  qualifications.
    Nonetheless, given my findings above, I do not need  to  delve  further
    into this topic.

18. In conclusion, although I was not addressed on the matter explicitly, I
    find that there was a material error of law in the Determination by the
    First-tier Tribunal;  however,  not  based  upon  its  Article  8  ECHR
    assessment (which to my mind is immune  from  criticism),  but  on  the
    basis that the Tribunal materially erred in failing  to  find  that  an
    English language test by an approved  provider  had  been  provided.  I
    should say that this finding is in no way the fault of  the  First-tier
    Judge given that the judge was making this decision on the  papers  and
    did not have the benefit of the submissions  from  Mr  Walker  for  the
    Secretary of State as I have had. Therefore, the decision is set aside.



    Remaking the Decision

19. The standard of proof is the civil standard and that of the balance  of
    probability. It is for a party that makes any  assertion  to  discharge
    the burden of proof in establishing their assertion,  for  example,  in
    relation to the reliability of documentation. I have considered all the
    evidence in the appeal,  including  the  appellant's  and  respondent's
    bundles. I heard submissions from both parties which  are  set  out  in
    full in my record of proceedings.

20. In remaking the decision, I therefore only need  consider  whether  the
    Claimant had provided "an original English language test certificate in
    speaking and listening from an English language test provider  approved
    by the Secretary of State for these purposes, which clearly  shows  the
    applicant's name and the qualification obtained  (which  must  meet  or
    exceed level A1 of the Common European Framework of Reference)".

21. I find that the Claimant had produced such an original English language
    test certificate from EMDQ, an English language test provider that  was
    implicitly approved by the Secretary of State because the provider  was
    itself approved and registered with Ofqual,  which  is  a  status  that
    renders that provider  as  approved  according  to  the  Home  Office's
    publicised policy statements on her website.

22. It is common ground before me that the Claimant meets paragraph 284(ix)
    of the Immigration Rules. In light of that agreement  and  my  findings
    and analysis of the evidence above, I find that the  Claimant  provided
    an appropriate original  English  language  test  certificate  from  an
    English language test provider approved by the Secretary of State.  The
    appeal therefore falls  to  succeed  under  the  Immigration  Rules.  I
    therefore, do not propose to deal with Article 8 ECHR nor  Appendix  FM
    nor paragraph 276ADE.

23. For the above reasons I set aside the judge's decision and  remake  the
    decision allowing the appeal under the immigration rules.

    Decision

24. I allow the Appellant's appeal against  the  Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse further leave to remain as the spouse of a present  and  settled
    person.

    Fee Award

25. The First-tier Tribunal did not make a fee award and I also do not  see
    fit to make such an award given that new evidence was presented  before
    me at this appeal which was not before the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini

