
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44644/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 21 August 2014                             |On 28 August 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                           DESIGNATED JUDGE MURRAY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MS PAMELA UYO OKOCHU
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No-one


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of State,  however,
    for convenience I shall now refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria  born  on  20  April  1984.   She
    appealed against the decision of the respondent dated 10  October  2013
    refusing her application to vary her leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant and for  a   Biometric  Residence
    Permit.  Her appeal was heard by Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Campbell and Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Suchak  as  a
    panel, on 30 April 2014.  The appeal was dismissed in  respect  of  the
    Immigration  Rules  but  allowed  on  human   rights   grounds   in   a
    determination promulgated on 30 May 2014.

 3. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  McClure  on  25
    June 2014.  The grounds of application assert that it was accepted that
    the appellant did not meet the requirements of the Rules and  the  sole
    basis for allowing the appeal was to enable her to await or  learn  the
    outcome of a Post Graduate Diploma qualification.   The  grounds  state
    that the panel erred in allowing the appeal on  Article  8  grounds  as
    Article 8 is not engaged for educational purposes only  (Patel  v  SSHD
    [2013]  UKSC72).   The  permission  states  that  the  panel  has   not
    identified the circumstances warranting the consideration of this  case
    outside the Rules.   It  goes  on  to  state  that  the  panel,  whilst
    referring to the said case of Patel has  not  identified  why,  on  the
    facts as presented, there was a need for the appellant to remain in the
    country to ascertain the outcome of her application  for  the  required
    qualification.  She did not have the required qualification at the time
    of the decision and the fact that  she  was  awaiting  a  qualification
    before being able to apply in accordance with the  Rules,  is  arguably
    not such as to warrant consideration under Article 8.

The Hearing

 4. Neither the appellant nor her representative appeared for  the  hearing
    of this appeal.

 5. The Presenting Officer submitted that she is relying on the grounds  of
    application and asked me to find that there is material error of law in
    the determination.

Determination

 6. It is  clear  that  the  application  cannot  meet  the  terms  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 7. The judge has not  referred  to  a  good  reason  for  considering  the
    application outside the Rules.

 8. Article 8 is not engaged for educational purposes only and that is  why
    this application was allowed.

                                  DECISION

 9. I  find  that  there  is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the  judge's
    determination.

10. The judge's decision relating to the Immigration Rules shall stand.

11. I set aside his decision relating to Article 8.

12. The appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules  and  on  Article  8
    issues is dismissed.


Signed                                  Date


Designated Judge Murray
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
