
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/44935/2014
                                                IA/44939/2014, IA/44943/2014
                                                             & IA/44936/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 April 2018                               |On 23 April 2018              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                            M A (first appellant)
                          mr E E (second appellant)
                         miss A O (third appellant)
                         miss J E (fourth appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal with  permission  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent made on 21  October  2014  refusing  them  leave  to  remain
    pursuant to paragraph 276ADE of the  Immigration  Rules  and  on  human
    rights grounds.

 2. The appeals have a complicated history.  The appeals were  first  heard
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Rothwell in a decision promulgated in 2015
    and who dismissed them for the reasons set out in her  decision  of  27
    July 2015.  Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was then granted
    and the matter than came before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana on 17
    March 2016.  In a decision dated 28 July 2016 she upheld  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal.  Permission  to  appeal  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal was granted.

 3. In a decision of that court by consent and for the reasons set  out  in
    the statement of reasons appended to the order  of  25  July  2017  the
    parties agreed amongst other things  that  in  light  of  the  guidance
    provided by the Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan) and others [2016] EWCA
    Civ 705 that the Deputy Judge, that is Judge Chana, had  not  correctly
    considered the issue of reasonableness.  That is to say that there  had
    been insufficient consideration of the significant weight that ought to
    be given to the fact that the child in this case, the third  appellant,
    had been here in excess of ten years.

 4. For the reasons set out in my decision promulgated on 16 February 2018,
    I found that the decision of Judge Rothwell did involve the  making  of
    an error of law and set it aside.  I also gave directions as to how the
    matter was to be remade.  A copy of that decision is  annexed  to  this
    decision.

 5. When the matter came before me the  appellants  were  not  represented.
    The first appellant explained that she had  only  been  told  two  days
    earlier of the hearing and she did not have funds to pay  for  Counsel.
    I arranged for enquiries to be made of the appellants' solicitors which
    resulted in two letters being sent by email.  It is evident from  these
    that the solicitors had sought to obtain instructions  and  funds  from
    the appellants but that these had not been forthcoming.

 6. In considering whether to adjourn the matter I bore  in  mind  that  it
    appears that the Tribunal had not served the  hearing  notices  at  the
    appellants' current address but equally it appears that  this  had  not
    been notified to the Tribunal  either  by  the  appellants  or  by  her
    solicitors.  The letters from the solicitor  indicate  that  they  made
    several efforts to contact the appellant about the hearing date and  it
    is to say the least surprising that  none  of  these  were  successful.
    When questioned about whether she had received a copy of  the  decision
    of mine of 16 February she was unable to assist and  could  provide  no
    proper explanation as to why, although she knew it had  been  due,  she
    did not go to her solicitors'  lawyers  if  as  appeared  she  was  not
    getting letters from them.

 7. I considered that there  was  no  prospect  of  the  applicant  getting
    representation from Malik Law Chambers nor, given that she  is  without
    funds, any prospect of future representation, and  on  that  basis  and
    given what had occurred on the previous occasion  and  the  history  of
    this appeal, I was satisfied that I could proceed justly  to  determine
    the appeal without the need to adjourn it.

 8. I heard evidence from the appellants having asked them in line with  my
    prior directions to address anything that had changed since the  matter
    was before the First-tier Tribunal in 2015.  The  first  appellant  was
    able to tell me only that her daughter was about to do  her  GCSEs  and
    that they had been forced to move  accommodation  in  London  owing  to
    violence perpetrated on their earlier accommodation.

 9. The first appellant said that she could not return to  Nigeria  as  she
    had nothing there, no ties, no accommodation and no  means  of  living.
    She was not anymore in contact with her brother or other relatives.

10. The third appellant said that she did  not  know  anything  other  than
    living in the United Kingdom and had  not  had  any  contact  with  her
    father since  he  had  brought  her  cousins  (the  second  and  fourth
    appellants) to the United Kingdom in 2012.  I  asked  if  she  had  any
    contact by telephone or any other electronic means and  she  said  that
    she had no contact details for him.

11. The second and fourth appellants confirmed that their life had been  in
    Nigeria difficult in that they had had no free time and had been forced
    to do household chores and had not been given enough food to eat.   The
    second appellant confirmed that she was at  school  and  was  about  to
    start her GCSEs.

12. Mr Walker adopted the refusal letter but accepted that in the  case  of
    the third appellant the situation had now changed in that she had spent
    some thirteen years in the  United  Kingdom,  very  nearly  double  the
    figure  which  was  seen  to  be  a  significant  factor  in  paragraph
    276ADE(iv).

13. In making my decision I have taken into account the evidence I heard as
    well as the evidence set  out  in  detail  in  the  decision  of  Judge
    Rothwell at paragraphs [6] to [17].

14. In reaching conclusions I bear in mind that the starting point must  be
    the best interests of the children  assessed  without  at  this  stage,
    considerations of their parents' actions.

    The Law

15. In assessing the article 8 claims, I have regard to section  s117A  and
    117B of the 2002 Act which provides as follows:

         Section 117A

         (1)  This Part applies where a court or  tribunal  is  required  to
         determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

             (a)  breaches a person's right  to  respect  for  private  and
             family life under Article 8, and

             (b)  as a result would be unlawful  under  section  6  of  the
             Human Rights Act 1998.

         (2)  In considering the public  interest  question,  the  court  or
         tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

             (a)  in all cases, to the  considerations  listed  in  section
             117B, and

             (b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals,
             to the considerations listed in section 117C.

         (3)  In subsection (2), "the public interest  question"  means  the
         question of whether  an  interference  with  a  person's  right  to
         respect for private and family  life  is  justified  under  Article
         8(2).

         Section 117B:

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
         public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         financially independent, because such persons-

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to-

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
         precarious.

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom.

             "qualifying child" is defined in section 117D:

             "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age  of  18
             and who-

             (a)  is a British citizen, or

             (b)  has lived in the United Kingdom for a  continuous  period
             of seven years or more;

16. The relevant paragraph of the Immigration Rules is  paragraph  276  ADE
    (1):

         276. ADE (1) The requirements to be met by an applicant  for  leave
         to remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at  the
         date of application, the applicant:

             (i)  does not fall for refusal under any  of  the  grounds  in
             Section S-LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. in Appendix FM;
             and

             (ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain  on  the
             grounds of private life in the UK; and

             ...

             (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has  lived  continuously
             in the UK for at least 7  years  (discounting  any  period  of
             imprisonment) and it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the
             applicant to leave the UK; or

17. It is necessary to consider what was held in MA (Pakistan)  at  [40]  0
    [47]:

         "40. It may be said that the wider approach can be justified  along
         the following lines. It will  generally  be  in  the  child's  best
         interests to live with his or her parents and siblings as part of a
         family. That is usually a given especially  for  younger  children,
         absent domestic abuse or  some  other  reasons  for  believing  the
         parents to be unsuitable. The approach of the  Secretary  of  State
         means that  the  stronger  the  public  interest  in  removing  the
         parents, the more reasonable it will be  to  expect  the  child  to
         leave. But it seems to  me  that  this  involves  focusing  on  the
         position of the family as a whole. In cases where  the  seven  year
         rule has not been satisfied, that is plainly what has to  be  done.
         As McCloskey J observed in PD and others v Secretary of  State  for
         the Home Department [2016] UKUT 108 (IAC) it  would  be  absurd  to
         consider the child's position entirely  independently  of,  and  in
         isolation from, the position of the parents given that the  child's
         best interests will usually require that he or she lives as part of
         the family unit. But the focus on the family does not  sit  happily
         with the language of section 117B(6). Had  Parliament  intended  to
         require considerations bearing upon  the  conduct  and  immigration
         history of the applicant parent to be taken into  consideration,  I
         would have expected it to say so expressly, not for the  matter  to
         have to be inferred from a  test  which  in  terms  focuses  on  an
         assessment of what is reasonable for the child. This does not in my
         view mean that the wider public interests have been ignored; it  is
         simply that Parliament has determined that  where  the  seven  year
         rule is satisfied and the other conditions in the section have been
         met,  those  potentially  conflicting  public  interests  will  not
         suffice to justify refusal of leave if, focusing on the position of
         the child, it is not reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
         UK. When section 117A(2)(a) refers  to  the  need  for  courts  and
         tribunals to take into account  the  considerations  identified  in
         section 117B in all cases, that would not  in  my  view  have  been
         intended to include specific circumstances where Parliament must be
         taken to have had regard to those matters.

         ...

         42.  I do not  believe  that  this  principle  does  undermine  the
         Secretary of State's argument. As Lord Justice Laws pointed out  in
         In the matter of LC, CB (a child) and JB (a child) [2014] EWCA  Civ
         1693 para.15, it is not blaming the child to say that  the  conduct
         of the parents should weigh in the scales when the  general  public
         interest in effective immigration control is  under  consideration.
         The principle that the sins of the fathers should  not  be  visited
         upon the children is not  intended  to  lessen  the  importance  of
         immigration control or to restrict what the court can consider when
         having regard to that matter. So if the wider  construction  relied
         upon by  the  Secretary  of  State  is  otherwise  justified,  this
         principle does not in my view undermine it.

         43.  But for the decision of the court of Appeal in MM (Uganda),  I
         would have been inclined to the  view  that  section  117C(5)  also
         supported the appellants' analysis. The language of "unduly  harsh"
         used in that subsection is not the test applied in article 8 cases,
         and so the argument that the term is used as a  shorthand  for  the
         usual proportionality exercise cannot run. I would have focused  on
         the position of the child alone, as the Upper Tribunal did in MAB.

         44.  I do not find this a surprising conclusion.  It  seems  to  me
         that there are powerful reasons why, having regard in particular to
         the need to treat the best interests of  the  child  as  a  primary
         consideration, it may be thought that once they have been in the UK
         for seven years, or are otherwise citizens of the UK,  they  should
         be allowed to stay and have their position legitimised if it  would
         not be reasonable to expect them to leave, even though  the  effect
         is that their possibly undeserving families can remain with them. I
         do not accept that this amounts to  a  reintroduction  of  the  old
         DP5/96 policy. As the Court of Appeal  observed  in  NF  (Ghana)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] EWCA Civ 906, the
         starting point under that policy was that a child with seven years'
         residence could be refused leave  to  remain  only  in  exceptional
         circumstances.  The  current  provision  falls  short  of  such   a
         presumption, and  of  course  the  position  with  respect  to  the
         children of foreign criminals is even tougher.

         45.  However, the approach I favour is inconsistent with  the  very
         recent decision of the Court of Appeal in  MM  (Uganda)  where  the
         court came down firmly in favour of the approach urged upon  us  by
         Ms Giovannetti, and I do not think that we ought to depart from it.
         In my judgment, if the court should have regard to the  conduct  of
         the applicant and any other matters relevant to the public interest
         when applying the "unduly harsh" concept under section 117C(5),  so
         should it when considering the  question  of  reasonableness  under
         section 117B(6). I recognise that the provisions  in  section  117C
         are directed towards the particular considerations which have to be
         borne in mind in the case of foreign criminals, and it is true that
         the court placed some weight on section 117C(2) which  states  that
         the more serious the  offence,  the  greater  is  the  interest  in
         deportation of the prisoner. But the critical point is that section
         117C(5) is in substance a free-standing provision in the  same  way
         as section 117B(6), and even so the court in MM (Uganda) held  that
         wider public interest considerations must  be  taken  into  account
         when applying the "unduly harsh" criterion. It seems to me that  it
         must be equally so with respect to the reasonableness criterion  in
         section 117B(6). It would not be appropriate  to  distinguish  that
         decision simply because I have reservations whether it is  correct.
         Accordingly, in line with the approach in that case, I will analyse
         the appeals on the basis that the Secretary of  State's  submission
         on this point is correct and that the only significance of  section
         117B(6) is that where the seven year rule is  satisfied,  it  is  a
         factor of some weight leaning in favour of leave  to  remain  being
         granted."

18. I deal first with the position of the third appellant.   I  accept  the
    evidence before me, which was not challenged,  that  there  is  now  no
    contact between her and her parents.  In any event  it  can  only  have
    been intermittent and it is not in dispute  that  she  has  lived  here
    since the age of 9 months having arrived in 2005 almost thirteen  years
    ago.

19. In considering the level of contact that the third appellant  has  with
    her parents in  Nigeria,  I  note  Judge  Rothwell  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was concerned as to the first appellant's  evidence  that  her
    parents do not contact her but I have  heard  additional  evidence  and
    that was not challenged  by  the  respondent.   In  the  circumstances,
    viewing the evidence as  a  whole  I  am  satisfied  on  a  balance  of
    probability that in effect there has been no real contact  between  the
    third appellant and her parents in Nigeria.

20. I note at this juncture that there had been, since the  matter  was  in
    the First-tier Tribunal, a  consideration  by  the  respondent  as  the
    competent authority as to whether the third appellant was a  victim  of
    trafficking.  Whilst the  consideration  was  that  she  was  not,  the
    conclusion was that she had come to the United Kingdom with her aunt in
    2005 as her parents could  not  care  for  her  and  in  light  of  the
    consideration that the  relationship  between  her  and  her  aunt  was
    genuine, it was considered that she did not fulfil  the  definition  of
    human trafficking.

21. I do note with some concern that there  has  been  confusion  over  the
    names of both the first and third appellant as  is  identified  in  the
    conclusive grounds decision but it was not pressed on me that I  should
    not accept the account given by the first and third  appellants  as  to
    when they arrived in the United Kingdom.  In any event,  even  had  she
    arrived  in  2006,  the  third  appellant  has  still  lived  here  for
    substantially all her life.

22. I bear in mind also that in this case the other two children have  been
    here less than five years and equally their best interests must also be
    taken into account.

23. Equally, I bear in mind that as in MA (Pakistan) and in particular  the
    cases of NS, AR and CW within that, not all the  children  are  in  the
    same position.  The circumstances of  the  children  are  still  to  be
    considered in assessing the reasonableness  as  set  out  in  paragraph
    276ADE(iv) and includes the circumstances of the family as a whole.

24. I consider, as a starting point, that  the  strength  of  private  life
    established by the third appellant must be stronger given the length of
    time she has spent here.  As is  established  in  MA  (Pakistan),  once
    seven years had been reached that is a significant factor to  be  taken
    into account.  I am satisfied also that the longer that  that  a  child
    has lived here and particularly where, as here, the appellant  has  had
    her entirety of her education here and having no ties  to  her  natural
    parents, it is fair to say that she knows nothing other  than  life  in
    the United  Kingdom.   I  consider  that  significant  weight  must  be
    attached to her private life in these  circumstances,  weight  that  is
    greater than a child who had lived here only seven years.

25. With regard to the younger two children, they have spent a  significant
    period of their lives.  Further, these are  important  years  of  their
    life covering the ages between, in the case of the second  appellant  8
    and 13, and in the case of the fourth appellant, 10 and 15 nearly 16.

26. I accept the evidence that they were  abused  by  their  parents,  even
    though that was not accepted by Judge Rothwell.  I received  additional
    evidence which was as to how they had to live in Nigeria which was  not
    challenged by the respondent.

27. Whilst their situation in the United Kingdom is precarious in that they
    are in social housing, they are in school and appear to be  progressing
    well.

28. I accept that they have little to return to in  Nigeria  and  that  the
    first appellant has now few ties to the country of her birth.  I accept
    that it would be difficult for her to re-establish herself but that  it
    would not be impossible.  She lived there before and has  family  there
    and I do not consider that it could be said in her case that there  are
    very insurmountable obstacles to her integration  again  into  life  in
    Nigeria.  It does not necessarily follow that because  the  second  and
    fourth appellants were abused by their uncle, that this would  continue
    to be the situation were they to return with their mother albeit that I
    accept the situation would now be precarious in terms of  inability  to
    access accommodation and means of livelihood.

29. I consider, viewing the evidence as a  whole  and  in  light  of  these
    observations, that it would be in the  children's  best  interests  for
    them to remain in the United  Kingdom  where  they  have  a  degree  of
    stability, are being educated and have some degree of support.

30. I bear in mind also that the second to fourth appellants cannot be held
    responsible for the fact that they are in  the  United  Kingdom  living
    without leave.  That is entirely as a result  of  the  actions  of  the
    first appellant who has never had leave to  be  here,  has  used  false
    documents to enter and to remain here and has worked unlawfully.  It is
    difficult not to conclude that  she  has  contrived  through  dishonest
    means to remain in the United Kingdom and to have her children and  the
    third appellant  who  is  in  fact  her  informally  adopted  daughter,
    educated at the expense of the United Kingdom.  She did so in the  full
    knowledge that she had no right to be here.

31. As noted above it is in the  children's  best  interests  for  them  to
    remain here, there are significant factors to be borne  in  mind  which
    militate against them being allowed to do so.

32. First, the first, second and fourth appellants do not fall  within  the
    provisions of the Immigration Rules.  Second, and bearing in  mind  the
    factors set out in Section 117B of the 2002 Act.

33. There is thus the maintenance of effective immigration controls in this
    case which is significantly a factor militating against the appellants.
     Whilst I accept that all appellants speak English  that  is  a  matter
    which is  neutral  and  it  counts  against  them  that  they  are  not
    financially independent.  Further, I accept that little  weight  should
    be given to the private life of the first appellant given that her life
    has been here whilst precarious at all times (note to self: insert from
    last case where this is a problem with children) but equally I note the
    effect of paragraph 117B(6).

34. I accept that in this case  the  first  appellant  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with the  third  appellant  who  is  a
    qualifying child,  albeit  that  the  relationship  is  not  biological
    parentage, the first appellant is effectively the parent of  the  third
    appellant, having cared for her for almost all of her life.

35. I also bear in mind what was held at paragraphs [40] and [44]  to  [45]
    of MA (Pakistan). It is, however, also necessary to consider paragraphs
    [47].

         "47. Even if we were applying the narrow reasonableness test  where
         the focus is on the child alone, it would not  in  my  view  follow
         that leave must be granted whenever the child's best interests  are
         in favour of remaining. I reject Mr Gill's submission that the best
         interests  assessment  automatically  resolves  the  reasonableness
         question. If Parliament had wanted the child's  best  interests  to
         dictate the outcome of the leave application, it  would  have  said
         so. The concept of "best interests" is after all a well established
         one. Even where the child's best interests  are  to  stay,  it  may
         still be not unreasonable to require the child to leave. That  will
         depend upon a careful analysis of the  nature  and  extent  of  the
         links in the UK and in the country where it is proposed  he  should
         return. What could not be considered, however, would be the conduct
         and immigration history of the parents.

         ..."

36. In this case, there are a  significant  number  of  factors  which  are
    different from that in MA,  albeit  that  this  is  a  case  where,  in
    reality, the case turns on the reasonableness of  expecting  the  third
    appellant to leave the United Kingdom.

37. I bear in mind that neither  the  first.  second  or  third  appellants
    currently meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

38. For the reasons set out above, I am satisfied that the appellants  have
    a family life in the United Kingdom, and that  on  the  facts  of  this
    case,  that  would  be  disrupted  by  removal  to   Nigeria.      That
    interference is in accordance with law.

39. I am satisfied also that all four appellants have  established  private
    lives in the United Kingdom. In  the  case  of  the  second  to  fourth
    appellants, this was developed while they were children, and having had
    regard to Rhuppiah and MA (Pakistan), given that this  was  established
    while under the control of their mother/aunt. I am not  satisfied  that
    it was established while their  situation  was  precarious,  given  the
    absence of any mental element. I do, however, note  that  the  mother's
    status was precarious.  The private lives  of  the  second  and  fourth
    appellants has  considerably  less  content  than  that  of  the  third
    appellant.

40. There is I find significant weight  to  be  attached  to  the  need  to
    maintain Immigration control; that is particularly so where,  as  here,
    the first, second and third appellants do not meet the requirements  of
    the Rules.

41. In summary therefore the points in favour  of  the  appellants  are  as
    follows:-

      1) it is in the best interests of the children to be allowed to remain
         here;

      2) the third appellant has spent all her life here  bar  nine  months,
         that is a significant factor to be borne in mind;

      3) the family have nothing to return to in Nigeria by way  of  support
         or family and to the third appellant, and to a  lesser  extent  the
         second and fourth appellants, they would be going to a country with
         which they are not familiar.

42. Militating against them are the following:-

      1) the serious and significant breaches of immigration law perpetrated
         by the first appellant;

      2) second the family are dependent on public funds;

      3) little weight can be attached  to  the  first  appellant's  private
         life.

43. Viewing the circumstances as a whole I consider that on the  particular
    facts of this case, given the length of time spent here  by  the  third
    appellant that there are not good cogent reasons why  albeit  attaching
    significant weight as enjoined by  parliament  to  the  maintenance  of
    immigration control such that it would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    third appellant to leave the United Kingdom.  On that basis, her appeal
    falls to be  allowed  under  the  Immigration  Rules.   She  meets  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

44. Viewing the family as a whole, I consider given the analysis above that
    it would be unreasonable to expect the third appellant to remain in the
    United Kingdom without her mother and that it would be disproportionate
    in the terms of fairness to require the family to go to Nigeria.

Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. I allow the appeal of the third appellant under the Immigration Rules.

 3. I remake the decision by allowing the appeals on human rights grounds

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 20 April 2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


                        ANNEX - ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/44935/2014
                                                IA/44939/2014, IA/44936/2014
                                                             & IA/44943/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 January 2018                            |                              |
|Extempore                                     |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                            M A - First appellant
                            E E- second appellant
                            A O - third appellant
                           J E - fourth appellant
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Not present and not represented
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Rothwell promulgated on 27 July  2015.   Permission
    to appeal against that decision was granted by  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Archer and the matter then  came  before  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Chana sitting at Field House on 17 March  2016.   In  a  decision
    dated  28  July  2016  she  upheld  Judge  Rothwell's  decision.    The
    appellants did however applied  for  and  were  granted  permission  to
    appeal to the Court of Appeal.

 2. In a decision of that court by in effect consent and  for  the  reasons
    set out in the statement of reasons appended to the order  of  25  July
    2017 the parties agreed amongst other  things  that  in  light  of  the
    guidance provided by the Court of Appeal  in  MA  (Pakistan)  that  the
    Deputy Judge, that is Judge Chana, had  not  correctly  considered  the
    issue  of  reasonableness.   That  is  to  say  that  there  had   been
    insufficient consideration of the significant weight that ought  to  be
    given to the fact that the child in this case, the third appellant, had
    been here in excess of ten years.

 3. It is important to set out in this case some factors which are  unusual
    The first appellant is the mother of the second and  fourth  appellants
    but she is the aunt of the third appellant.  The  first  appellant  has
    been present in the United Kingdom since entering on a visit visa in  a
    false name on  25  January  2005  and  was  accompanied  by  the  third
    appellant who was at that point barely  nine  months  old.   The  third
    appellant and indeed the first appellant have remained here  since  and
    in 2012 were joined by  the  second  and  fourth  appellant  who  again
    entered as visitors and remained unlawfully.  The first  appellant  was
    encountered working illegally during  an  enforcement  visit  and  only
    later, in September 2014, applied for leave to remain for  her  on  the
    basis of the children.

 4.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  considered  the   position  of   the
    appellants when they appeared before her and being asked to  do  so  by
    Counsel considered the position of each of  the  appellants  separately
    starting with consideration of the position  of  the  third  appellant.
    She noted at [26] that the third appellant was the niece  and  not  the
    daughter.  She accepted that she had been here for ten years  and  knew
    only life in the United Kingdom but found that her parents  in  Nigeria
    did have some contact with them.  How  much  contact  is  not  entirely
    clear and the judge found at [29] that the first  appellant's  evidence
    on this point was exaggerated and different information had been given.



 5. The judge found at [31] that it would be reasonable to expect the third
    appellant to return to Nigeria to be with her parents  having  directed
    herself that it was in the  child's  best  interests  to  be  with  her
    parents.  The judge also directed herself  at  [33]  in  light  of  the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal in AM (Malawi) [2015] UKUT  260  and  in
    connection with Section 117D(6)  and  paragraph  276ADE  (1)(iv).   The
    judge  found  that  in  the  circumstances  of  the  case  it  was  not
    unreasonable to expect her to return to Nigeria.

 6. The judge then dealt with the first appellant including  if  there  was
    family life between her and the other appellants at  [37]  but  finding
    having had regard to Section 117B of the 2002 Act and bearing  in  mind
    the weight to be attached to effective immigration control that  taking
    all the factors into account it would be reasonable to  expect  her  to
    return to Nigeria and any interference with her private and family life
    was proportionate.  She made similar findings in respect of the  second
    and fourth appellants noting that unlike the third appellant  they  had
    spent a relatively short time in  the  United  Kingdom  having  arrived
    there only in 2012, at that point it was around about three years.

 7. The  grounds  of  appeal  are  in  respect  of  ground  (a)  misplaced.
    Paragraph EX.1 simply could not apply in these  circumstances.   It  is
    not a freestanding provision and none of  the  parties  have  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.  The second  ground  is  that  the  judge
    failed to take the best interests of the appellant's children and niece
    as a primary consideration, relying on the decision in Azimi-Moayed and
    submitting that it was wrong to assume that the third appellant's  best
    interests would be to return to Nigeria to be with  her  parents  given
    the length of separation and the significant weight  and  consideration
    of the disruption of the child's  life  should  have  been  taken  into
    account.  The third ground is that it would be in the best interests of
    the children to remain in the United Kingdom as they are  in  full-time
    education and have established their way of life here.

 8. Dealing with the second ground I consider that there is  merit  in  the
    observation that there is a want of reasoning in respect  of  the  best
    interests of the third appellant.  The lengthy separation  between  the
    third appellant and her parents of some ten years  with  little  or  no
    physical contact is  I  consider  an  important  consideration.   There
    appears to have been little or no evidence about the situation  of  the
    third appellant's family, that is her biological parents,  and  whether
    they were able to look after her.  Second, in that consideration  there
    also ought to have been consideration of as it put in MA (Pakistan) the
    significant weight to be attached to the fact  that  she  had  by  this
    point spent well in excess of seven  years  in  this  country.   Indeed
    given that she arrived here at the age of 9 months it is  difficult  to
    see that she would have knowledge of anywhere  other  than  the  United
    Kingdom and her only real contact with a parental figure  is  with  the
    first appellant.  There appears also to have been little  consideration
    of her position with regards to her schooling and that by the time  she
    reached 10 years she has begun to develop a private life.

 9. Accordingly I am satisfied that this ground of appeal is  made  out  in
    light of the decision in MA (Pakistan) which of course  post-dates  the
    decision of Judge Rothwell.  MA (Pakistan) clarified the law and it  is
    understandable that in the circumstances Judge Rothwell took  the  view
    that she did albeit one which has now been amended and clarified by the
    Court of Appeal.

10. With regard to the third ground of appeal I do  not  consider  that  it
    would have made  out.   Nonetheless  because  I  have  found  that  the
    findings in respect of the third appellant have  to  be  set  aside  it
    would be difficult given that the family has to be viewed as a whole to
    do anything other than set aside the decision as a whole and for  these
    reasons I do so.

11. Turning then to how this decision should now be dealt with  given  that
    it has been set aside I note that nearly three years has elapsed  since
    the decision was made.  I note also that the appellants have chosen not
    to attend today.  Neither are they represented.   There  is  however  a
    letter on file from the representatives Malik & Malik  indicating  that
    their view is that the matter should  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and that the appellants are unable to fund representation here
    today.  That in my view was not  a  satisfactory  explanation  for  the
    failure of the appellants to attend in person although  enquiries  made
    by the court staff with Malik & Malik indicate that the appellants were
    told that it was unnecessary for them to attend.   That  is  manifestly
    incorrect.  They could and should have attended and whilst there  is  a
    submission from Malik & Malik that the matter should be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal no additional evidence is  produced  nor  is  there
    anything said which identifies any matters which would need to be taken
    into account were the matters to be revisited in the First-tier.

12. I am however mindful that three of the four appellants here are minors.
     I am mindful also that the third appellant is not the natural child of
    the first appellant and has lived in the United Kingdom for very nearly
    thirteen years; in fact nearly all of her life.  I consider that in the
    circumstances it would be in the interest of justice  to  proceed  with
    the hearing, and to adjourn the remaking of the decision to  a  further
    dated. This should not however be  seen  as  any  endorsement  by  this
    Tribunal of the manifestly incorrect and prima facie  negligent  advice
    which the appellants' representatives appear to have given to her.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.  The remaking of the decision  will  proceed
    in the Upper Tribunal in accordance with the following directions.

    Directions

 2. The appeals will be relisted for hearing before the Upper Tribunal  for
    it to consider any new material adduced by the appellants.

 3. Any new material must be served on the Upper Tribunal and on the  other
    party at least 10 working days before the hearing.

 4. The Upper Tribunal will  consider  again  the  best  interests  of  the
    children involved and will reach a new decision on whether  removal  is
    proportionate.

 5. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 12 February 2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
