
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/44412/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination issued                 |
|On 11 December 2015                  |On 28 January 2016                   |


                                   Before

                      Mr C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                       & UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                MAHDI TOUATI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Brown, of Drummond Miller, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Algeria, appeals against a determination by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Mozolowski,  dismissing  his  appeal  against
    refusal of a residence card following his marriage in Edinburgh  on  10
    March 2014 to a citizen of Poland.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted on the grounds that  the  judge  might
    have erred by basing her conclusion on the appellant having  failed  to
    discharge the burden of proof upon him, in light  of  Papajorgi  [2012]
    UKUT 00038.

 3. In Agho [2015] EWCA Civ 1198, published on 26 November 2015,  Underhill
    LJ, with whom the two other members of the Court agreed,  explained  as
    follows:

         "PRELIMINARY: THE BURDEN AND STANDARD OF PROOF

         11.      I should start by stating what the position is  about  the
             burden and standard of proof in a case where the Secretary  of
             State or an Entry Clearance Officer  ("ECO")  alleges  that  a
             marriage is  a  marriage  of  convenience.  That  question  is
             carefully reviewed by the UT in the Papajorgji case to which I
             have already referred. In that case the  ECO  had  refused  an
             application for entry clearance on the basis of marriage to an
             EEA national on the ground that all that she had  produced  in
             support of the application was her marriage certificate and  a
             copy of her husband's Greek passport and that she  had  failed
             to produce "any documentary evidence of your marriage, such as
             photographs  of  your  wedding  or  your  life   together   or
             agreements in joint names such as a bank account or a  tenancy
             agreement". The UT's determination falls into two parts.

         12.      At paras. 24-32 the UT holds that the ECO's  approach  was
             wrong. As it put it at para. 27 of its determination

                  "...  [T]here  is  no  burden  on  the  claimant   in   an
                  application for a family permit to establish that she  was
                  not a party  to  a  marriage  of  convenience  unless  the
                  circumstances known to the decision-maker give  reasonable
                  ground for suspecting that this was the case. Absent  such
                  a basis for suspicion the application  should  be  granted
                  without more on production of the  documents  set  out  in
                  article 10 of the Directive. Where there is such suspicion
                  the matter requires further investigation and the claimant
                  should be invited to respond to the basis of suspicion  by
                  producing evidential material to dispel it."

             It goes on to say  that  a  failure  to  provide  evidence  in
             support of the genuineness of the marriage will  only  justify
             an adverse inference if such documents have been asked for. At
             para. 32 it emphasises that the evidential burden  of  showing
             that there are reasonable grounds for suspecting a marriage of
             convenience lies on the decision-maker.

         13.      Thus far, the UT was concerned with  the  approach  to  be
             followed by the ECO. At paras. 33-38 it goes on to discuss the
             burden of proof  in  proceedings  in  the  Tribunals.  It  was
             concerned about a possible reading of an earlier decision - IS
             (Marriages of Convenience) Serbia [2008] UKAIT  31  -  to  the
             effect that "once evidence of reasonable  suspicion  has  been
             raised,  there  is  a  legal  burden  on  the   applicant   to
             demonstrate that it is more probable than not the marriage  is
             not  one  of  convenience"  (see  para.  33).   It   expressed
             considerable reservations about such an approach, and although
             it said that the issue did not fall for decision it went on at
             paras. 34-37 to  explain  why  it  was  strongly  inclined  to
             believe that it was wrong in principle.  Mr  Gullick  took  no
             issue with the reasoning in those paragraphs, but it  is  fair
             to say that the grounds of appeal did not turn on the issue of
             the burden of proof and it does not fall for  decision  before
             us any more than it did before the UT in Papajorgji. In  those
             circumstances I will not attempt to summarise the  passage  in
             detail. What it comes down to is that as a matter of principle
             a spouse establishes a prima facie case that he or  she  is  a
             family member of an EEA national  by  providing  the  marriage
             certificate and the spouse's passport; that the  legal  burden
             is on the Secretary of State to show that  any  marriage  thus
             proved is a marriage of convenience; and that that  burden  is
             not discharged merely by showing  "reasonable  suspicion".  Of
             course in the usual way the evidential burden may shift to the
             applicant by proof of facts which justify the  inference  that
             the marriage is not genuine, and the facts giving rise to  the
             inference may include  a  failure  to  answer  a  request  for
             documentary proof of the genuineness  of  the  marriage  where
             grounds for suspicion have been raised. Although,  as  I  say,
             the point was not argued before us, that approach seems to  me
             to be correct - as does the UT's statement that  the  standard
             of proof must be the civil standard, as explained by the House
             of Lords in Re B (Children) [2008] UKHL 35, [2009] 1 AC 11.

         14. The UT in Papajorgji concluded, at para. 39:

                  "In summary, our understanding is that, where the issue is
                  raised in an appeal,  the  question  for  the  judge  will
                  therefore  be  'in  the  light  of  the  totality  of  the
                  information before me, including  the  assessment  of  the
                  claimant's answers and  any  information  provided,  am  I
                  satisfied that it is more probable  than  not  this  is  a
                  marriage of convenience ?'

             Consistently  with  the  prior  discussion,  that  formulation
             clearly places the burden of proof on the Secretary  of  State
             (or ECO)."

 4. Mr Brown's submissions concentrated on persuading  us  that  the  judge
    went wrong in examining the evidence about the relationship  since  the
    date of the marriage, because it had to be shown that it was not one of
    convenience only at the date it  was  contracted.   We  do  not  agree.
    Where an appellant says that the relationship  has  remained  the  same
    throughout, it would be wholly artificial to examine the position  only
    at the date of the ceremony and treat as irrelevant any deficiencies in
    the evidence after that date.  If an  appellant's  evidence  about  the
    relationship since the ceremony is found unreliable, that may  bear  on
    the relationship at  that  date.   That  is  quite  different  from  an
    appellant who says that the marriage was not one  of  convenience,  but
    has since broken down.

 5. We also observe that if an appellant were to produce a  certificate  of
    marriage and nothing further, then although the burden does not  shift,
    the SSHD might not have to do very much to discharge it.

 6. Where, as in this case, there has been substantive evidence  from  both
    sides a decision which misstates the burden cannot  stand.   The  judge
    erred at paragraph 53 where she found that "on  balance  the  appellant
    has not demonstrated that he is in  a  genuine  relationship  with  the
    sponsor" and again at paragraph 56 where she was not satisfied that  he
    had shown that his marriage was "not one of convenience".

 7. We note that the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal aimed to  show
    that the judge went wrong not  only  about  the  burden  of  proof  but
    because a high standard, above the balance of  probabilities,  applies.
    That point was not mentioned before us but we record for  avoidance  of
    future doubt that it is not a good one, in light of the citation  above
    and of Scottish Ministers v Stirton and Anderson 2014 SC 218  at  pages
    251-252.

 8. We express no view on the eventual outcome on any particular point,  or
    in general, but we  record  some  matters  which  arose  in  course  of
    submission and will be apt for attention at the rehearing in the First-
    tier Tribunal.  The appellant should produce evidence of payment of the
    rent on the flat said to have been occupied  by  the  parties,  and  by
    whom; explain why although originally council  tax  demands  appear  to
    have been in two names, a demand for an unpaid balance is addressed  to
    the appellant only (page 105 of his inventory  of  productions  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal);  and explain the history of  his  employment  and
    pay for the month of October 2014, when he appears to  have  been  paid
    the same as in subsequent months, although his employment  is  said  to
    begin only with the trial shift early on 15  October,  leading  to  his
    absence from the flat at the time of the immigration visit  (pages  108
    and 161 - 163).  It was agreed that he was to be  directed  to  produce
    his bank statements from the date of the marriage, showing the  history
    of transactions and the address to which those  statements  were  sent.
    Those statements are to be sent to the First-tier Tribunal  and  copied
    to the respondent within one month from the date this determination  is
    issued.

 9. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. No  findings
    are to stand.  Under section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act  and  Practice
    Statement 7.2 the nature and extent of judicial fact finding  necessary
    for the decision to be remade is such that it is appropriate  to  remit
    the case to the First-tier Tribunal.  The member(s) of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal chosen to  reconsider  the  case  are  not  to  include  Judge
    Mozolowski.

10. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




           [pic]
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


           18 December 2015


