
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44872/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower,          |Determination Promulgated            |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 17 June 2015                      |On 6 July 2015                       |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ROBERTSON


                                   Between

                           THADDEUS MARK MARSHALL
                        ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Bunting, Counsel, instructed by Dassur,
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Claim History

 1. The Appellant, who is a citizen of Jamaica, applied for leave to remain
    in the UK on the basis of his private and family  life  with  Ms  Berdy
    Thompson, a British citizen, and her children, who were aged 9 and  13,
    from a previous  relationship.  His  application  was  refused  by  the
    Respondent and his appeal against that decision was dismissed by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Thomas, who heard the appeal on 22 January 2015 and
    her decision was promulgated on 20 February 2015.

 2. In the grounds of application, it is submitted that:

          a. In assessing whether it was  disproportionate  to  remove  the
             Appellant from the UK, the Judge overstated  the  significance
             of  the  Appellant's  immigration  history,  and   failed   to
             distinguish between the Appellant  and  the  appellant  in  LC
             China [2014] EWCA Civ 1340, in which it was  held  not  to  be
             disproportionate for the appellant to be deported even  though
             he was the biological father of the  children.  However,  that
             was a deportation case and the Appellant's  case  was  one  of
             administrative removal. It was submitted that the Judge placed
             too little weight on the interests of the children relative to
             the immigration history of the Appellant and failed to  assess
             the factors relating to  proportionality  correctly  (grounds,
             paras 12 - 13, 15, 18 and 20);

          b. There was no recognition by the Judge of  the  fact  that  the
             Appellant was under 18 when he entered the UK and  whilst  the
             Appellant and Ms Thompson embarked on their relationship  when
             he had no status in the UK and little weight could be given to
             that private life, the children "were obviously not  party  to
             the evasion of immigration control". It is submitted that  the
             Judge erred in  giving  little  weight  to  the  private  life
             between the Appellant and the children (grounds, para 15);

          c. When considering whether  alternative  arrangements  could  be
             made in relation to practicalities if the  Appellant  were  to
             leave the UK, the Judge placed too little  'emphasis'  on  the
             emotional support that the children obtain from the  Appellant
             (grounds, para 16).

 3. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Simpson on the basis that "having found that (the Appellant)  has
    an established family life with his partner's children it  is  arguable
    that the impact of A's removal on their physical and emotional  welfare
    has not been adequately considered,  and  that  whilst  the  Judge  was
    entitled to give little weight to (the Appellant's) private life as  an
    overstayer, he has not given sufficient weight to A's family life  with
    those children. Finally, given the Judge's emphasis on the fact that  A
    is not their natural father, it is arguable that  the  Judge  ought  to
    have made a finding as to whether the children have contact with  their
    biological father or whether A is, in reality, their father figure."

Submissions

 4. Whilst the grounds of appeal before the Judge were widely drawn, it  is
    clear from the submissions recorded in the decision at  [15]  that  the
    focus of the hearing was an appeal under Article 8 ECHR only. The Judge
    records the Respondent's case at [10 - 13] and at  [19]  confirms  that
    the Appellant does not meet the provisions of  the  Immigration  Rules;
    she states that "The Appellant does not seek to argue  otherwise,"  and
    finds that the Respondent's decision under  the  Immigration  Rules  is
    lawful. Mr Bunting submitted at the outset that he wished  to  withdraw
    the concession made on behalf  of  the  Appellant  that  he  could  not
    succeed under the Immigration Rules because once the  Judge  had  found
    that there was a genuine relationship between  the  Appellant  and  the
    Sponsor, then the Appellant could potentially have succeeded under  the
    Immigration Rules because he was an overstayer.  However,  a  Judge  is
    entitled to rely on a concession made during the hearing and she cannot
    be said to have erred in law in relying on that  concession.  There  is
    nothing within the decision to suggest that it was  argued  that  there
    was sufficient evidence before the Judge  for  her  to  find  that  the
    definition of partner within Gen.1.2 was met.  In view of the fact that
    a concession was made, it was  too  late  to  withdraw  the  concession
    before the Upper Tribunal in order to attempt to establish an error  of
    law.

 5. In the grounds of application at para 13  there  is  reference  to  the
    Judge 'overstating the significance  of'  the  Appellant's  immigration
    history, and at para 16 to the Judge 'placing too little  emphasis  on'
    the emotional support that the children obtain from the Appellant.   Mr
    Bunting was asked if what in fact was  being  submitted  was  that  the
    Judge weight that the Judge placed on these factors in  the  assessment
    of proportionality should have been different.  He  confirmed  that  it
    was, stating that in fact what was being submitted  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant  was  that  the  Judge  had  erred  in  her   assessment   of
    proportionality.

 6. Mr Bunting essentially relied on the grounds  of  application  and  the
    written submissions on behalf of the  Appellant,  submitting  that  the
    point was a narrow one and related to the decision on  proportionality,
    which he accepted was for the Judge and one  on  which  there  is  wide
    latitude. However, he submitted that the  decision  on  proportionality
    was unsustainable because, having emphasised at [25] and [29] that  the
    Appellant was not their biological father, the Judge failed to  make  a
    finding as to whether the Sponsor's children had any contact with their
    biological father and whether the Appellant was their de facto  father.
    He further submitted that the Judge had failed to engage with the  fact
    that they were a family unit and whilst acknowledging  that  he  had  a
    'role within their lives' at [25] she failed to assess what  that  role
    was, which included the emotional and practical support that he offered
    them which enabled the Sponsor to work; she focussed on the Appellant's
    poor immigration history, when he was in fact a minor when he became an
    overstayer, and she did not look at all the factors in  the  assessment
    of proportionality. He submitted that  these  issues  were  capable  of
    making a material difference to  the  outcome  of  the  proportionality
    exercise.

 7. When asked about what evidence that was before the  Judge,  Mr  Bunting
    stated that there were witness statements from the  Appellant  and  the
    Sponsor and a letter from the school.

 8. Mr Mills relied on the Rule 24 response, submitting that the matter  of
    weight to be attached to particular evidence was for  the  Judge,  that
    the Judge had considered all relevant factors, that  her  decision  was
    not irrational and that no  errors  of  law  were  disclosed.  She  had
    specifically referred to the role the Appellant played in the lives  of
    the children at [25], stating that  this "...includes caring for  their
    main needs when their mother is at work, and taking and  fetching  them
    from school." He submitted that when asked to  point  to  the  evidence
    before the Judge, there was nothing in the  bundle,  not  even  in  the
    letter from the school to suggest that the Appellant was the only carer
    for the children, and there was  no  comment  on  the  quality  of  the
    relationship from the school. The evidence supported what the Judge had
    recorded at [25].  He  further  submitted  that  the  Judge  had  given
    appropriate weight to the relationship between the  Appellant  and  the
    children, that she had reached a rational conclusion.  He  argued  that
    one way to look at it is to consider that a biological father  who  had
    overstayed could be proportionately removed if the  best  interests  of
    the children could be maintained by the mother.

 9. Mr Mills submitted that in the further written  submissions  made,  the
    Appellant's representatives sought  to  submit  that  the  Respondent's
    decision under s 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
    2009 "appears to have been based on an incorrect factual  premise  that
    there was no  evidence  that  the  Appellant  has  involvement  in  the
    children's lives or that they are emotionally dependent on  him,  which
    was not accepted by the IJ" and that therefore, under MK (section 55  -
    Tribunal options) Sierra Leone [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC) , the Respondent's
    decision was unlawful. However, he submitted, the Respondent's decision
    was predicated on there being no subsisting  relationship  between  the
    Appellant and the children and the Respondent therefore did not need to
    consider s 55 on the basis that there  was  a  subsisting  relationship
    between them. Furthermore, this argument was not put to the Judge.  She
    reached a different conclusion from the Respondent and went on to  make
    the s 55 assessment and did so to a legally sufficient standard.

10. In reply, Mr Bunting essentially relied on  his  previous  submissions,
    but made the point that if the fact that  the  Appellant  was  not  the
    biological father of the children was not relevant, why did  the  Judge
    refer to it if she did not give weight to  it  in  the  proportionality
    exercise? He submitted that it had been incorrectly factored  into  the
    proportionality exercise. The Judge had stated  that  she  gave  little
    weight to the relationship that was formed when the  Appellant  was  an
    overstayer under s 117B; this may be true of the  relationship  between
    the Appellant and his partner but not the Appellant and the children.

11. Both representatives agreed that if I found that there was  a  material
    error of law in the decision of the Judge, I could go on to remake  the
    decision on the basis of the evidence that was before me.

 Decision and reasons

12. The Judge found that the  Appellant  had  an  established  private  and
    family life with Ms Thompson and her children  which  deserved  respect
    [23], that the Appellant is not their real (i.e. biological) father but
    she accepts that he has a role in their lives which includes caring for
    their main needs when their mother is at work and taking  and  fetching
    them from school, that "Whilst the Appellant's  removal  is  likely  to
    cause disruption to their lives, there is no evidence to  suggest  that
    they would suffer physical or emotional harm as a  result"  [25],  that
    the  Appellant's  poor  immigration  history  was  without   reasonable
    explanation [26], that he is not subject to deportation, that  she  can
    give little weight to his life with Ms Thompson under s 117B [28], that
    Ms Thompson and the children have a choice as to where they  will  live
    [29]. Balancing the relevant factors, she decided that the  Appellant's
    right to private and family life did not outweigh the  public  interest
    in immigration control.

13. In relation  to  the  grounds,  as  a  general  observation,  there  is
    reference to the weight attached (paras 15 and 18 of  the  grounds)  by
    the Judge to evidence, the "emphasis on"  particular  evidence  by  the
    Judge (grounds para 16) and the Judge overstating the "significance of"
    particular evidence. These all amount to no more than a submission that
    the Judge should have attached more  or  less  weight  to  the  factors
    within the proportionality assessment. However, weight is a matter  for
    the Judge; as provided by FK (Kenya) [2010] EWCA Civ 1302, at para  23.
    There is nothing before me to substantiate the ground  that  the  Judge
    erred in law in the weight she attributed to the evidence.

14. Taking firstly the terms in which permission to appeal was granted,  it
    is difficult to see  how  it  can  be  argued  that  the  physical  and
    emotional  impact  of  the  removal  of  the  Appellant  had  not  been
    adequately considered when there appeared to be no evidence before  the
    Judge that they are likely to suffer physical or emotional  harm.  When
    the Judge referred to the Appellant "caring for their main  needs  when
    their mother is at work", it can be inferred that she was not referring
    merely to their physical needs, particularly as in the written  further
    submissions at para 13 it  appears  to  be  accepted  that  the  Judge,
    contrary to the conclusions of  the  Respondent,  had  found  that  the
    Appellant was involved in  the  children's  lives  and  that  they  are
    emotionally dependent on him. In finding that  there  was  family  life
    between the Appellant and his partner and the children at [23], it  can
    be inferred that she accepts there is physical  and  emotional  support
    between them. There is therefore no arguable merit in  the  grounds  at
    paragraph 15.

15. In the grounds of application, at paragraph 15, it is stated  that  the
    Judge should have given weight to the Appellant's private life with the
    children, even if she gave little weight  to  the  Appellant's  private
    life. However, when the whole of [28] is considered, it is  clear  that
    the Judge states that it  is  the  relationship  with  the  Appellant's
    partner to which she can give little weight (pursuant to s 117B(4)(b)).
    The Judge considered  proportionality  (applying  Article  8  directly)
    simply because she found that the interest of the  Appellant's  partner
    and children had not been adequately considered under the Rules.  There
    was no real dispute as to the facts and it can  be  inferred  that  she
    accepted that he was a part of their lives (as  stated  at  [25]);  she
    therefore did give weight to both private  and  family  life  with  the
    children, noting  "clearly  if  possible,  it  is  favourable  for  the
    Appellant to remain in  their  lives".  The  Judge  accepted  that  the
    Appellant had a relationship with the children.  It  is  therefore  not
    arguable that she did not give weight to his private  and  family  life
    with the children.

16. In the grounds of application, at paras 10 - 14, it is  submitted  that
    the Judge considered the main issues in  the  appeal  to  be  the  poor
    immigration history  of  the  Appellant  and  the  children,  that  she
    overemphasised his poor immigration history and, having emphasised that
    the Appellant was not the biological father of the children, she should
    have made a finding as to whether they see their biological  father  or
    whether the Appellant is, in reality, their father figure. However, the
    Judge clearly recorded the evidence before  her.  She  states  at  [5],
    "Both children  call  him  'Dad'.  They  have  no  contact  with  their
    biological father." This evidence was not challenged by the  Respondent
    at the hearing and not rejected by the Judge and  it  can  be  inferred
    from [25] of the decision that she was mindful of it when  she  reached
    her conclusions as to the best interests of the children. The fact that
    she has referred to the Appellant not  being  their  biological  father
    twice (at [25] and [28]), does not undermine her finding that there  is
    family life between them. This ground therefore lacks arguable merit.

17. As to the Judge having overstated  the  relevance  of  the  Appellant's
    immigration history (failing to recognise that he was a minor  when  he
    entered the UK), and failing to distinguish  LC  (China)  because  that
    concerned a deportation case, I find that the Judge was aware that  the
    Appellant was a minor when he entered the UK, and it is accepted in the
    grounds of appeal that he was 17 years of age  on  entry.  However,  he
    then became an adult shortly thereafter and still failed to  regularise
    his stay. There is nothing within the decision  that  establishes  that
    the Judge was confused as to the age he was  when  he  entered;  during
    most of the period that he was an overstayer, he was over 18. There  is
    also nothing within the decision which establishes that the  Judge  was
    confused as to the basis on which the Appellant was being removed;  she
    was aware that he was  not  being  deported  [28].  This  ground  lacks
    arguable merit and no material errors of law are disclosed.

18. As to the further written submissions in relation to s 55, the  correct
    position is as submitted by Mr Mills;  where  the  Respondent,  on  the
    evidence before her, finds that there  is  no  subsisting  relationship
    between an appellant and his claimed partner and  her  minor  children,
    the s 55 exercise will necessarily be brief. Where the Judge  finds  on
    appeal that there is family life, this does not render the Respondent's
    decision unlawful when it was made and it is for the Judge to  consider
    the best interests of the children as  part  of  the  assessment  under
    Article 8 ECHR. The submission that the Respondent's decision  was  not
    lawful for failure to properly consider s 55 was not put to the  Judge.
    Having found that there was family life between the Appellant  and  his
    partner and children, the Judge considered the best  interests  of  the
    children on the basis of the evidence  before  her  at  [25],  and  her
    decision is not irrational or perverse and no arguable material  errors
    of law are disclosed.

19. The Judge made findings of fact that were open to her on  the  evidence
    before her; her findings are not perverse or irrational.  As  to  where
    the balance is to be drawn in a proportionality  exercise,  this  is  a
    matter for the Judge. It  has  not  been  established  that  the  Judge
    materially erred in law in reaching her decision and  the  grounds  are
    simply a disagreement with her findings.

Decision

20. The determination of Judge Thomas contains no material  errors  of  law
    and the decision therefore must stand.

21. The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.

22. There was no application for an anonymity order before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal or before me. In the circumstances of  this  case,  I  see  no
    reason to direct anonymity.



Signed   Date

M Robertson
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

In light of my decision, I have considered  whether  to  make  a  fee  award
under  Rule  9(1)(a)(costs)  of  the   Asylum   and   Immigration   Tribunal
(Procedure) Rules 2005 and section 12(4) (a) of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
Enforcement Act 2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011). As  the  Appellant's  appeal  has  been
dismissed, I confirm the fee award of Judge Hamilton.



Signed   Dated

M Robertson
Sitting as Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

