
[pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44128/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20th January 2016                 |On 19th February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                              Mrs Sindija Soja
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs E Lagunja (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge M A Khan, promulgated on 7th July 2015, following  a  hearing  at
    Hatton Cross on 19th  June  2015.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of Mrs Sindija Soja.  The  Appellant  subsequently
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Latvia and  was  born  on  22nd  February
    1982.  She appealed against the decision of the Respondent Secretary of
    State dated 29th October 2014,  rejecting  the  application  of  Wemimi
    Olatubosun Onasanya for a residence card as confirmation of  his  right
    of residence as the Sponsor  of  an  EEA  national,  exercising  treaty
    rights  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  relevant  legal  position   is
    Regulation 26 of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The question before the judge was whether the Appellant was  exercising
    treaty rights and was in a  genuine  marriage  with  Mr  Onasanya,  the
    national of Nigeria.  The judge first observed at the outset that, "the
    Appellant was not in attendance at the  hearing,  she  is  not  legally
    represented" (see paragraph 2).  However,  during  the  course  of  the
    determination, the judge then  stated  that,  "the  Appellant  and  her
    husband were in attendance at the hearing and therefore  their  witness
    statements  remain  unchallenged  by  way  of  cross-examination   ..."
    (paragraph 26).  None of this follows at all because even if there were
    witness statements for them, the fact that they were in attendance, did
    not preclude cross-examination by  the  Presenting  Officer,  whom  the
    judge had found to be present at the hearing.

 4. The point of more immediate concern, however, is that this statement is
    contrary to what was said at the outset of paragraph 2, namely that the
    Appellant was not in attendance.  A further concern, however,  was  the
    judge's statement again at the outset (see paragraph 3) that,

         "The Notice of Appeal was served on the  Appellant  1/6/2015.   She
         has not attended the hearing.  The Appellant has  not  provided  an
         explanation as to her reasons for non-attendance.  The Respondent's
         representative submits that  the  hearing  of  this  appeal  should
         proceed in the absence of the Appellant..."

Grounds of Application

 5.  The  grounds  of  appeal  state  that  the  Appellant  and  his  legal
    representatives were not  on  notice  for  the  hearing  and  that  the
    decision was sent to the previous representatives of the applicant, and
    the decision was then sent to the old address, with the Appellant  only
    becoming aware of the decision  on  21st  October  2015  when  the  old
    address was visited.

 6. On 9th November  2015,  permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  Judge
    Ransley, in what appears to have been a careful enquiry  by  the  judge
    into the circumstances of the Appellant.  He observed  that  the  court
    file shows that the notice of 19th June 2015 hearing was issued by  the
    AIT to the Appellant and to a former representative,  Kalam  Solicitors
    on 1st June 2015.  Judge Ransley also  observes  that  the  court  file
    contains an appeal bundle filed by Victory Solicitors on behalf of  the
    Appellant on 13th May 2015, and received by the AIT on 14th  May  2015.
    It is not clear why the AIT's computer record was not  amended  between
    14th May  2014  and  1st  June  2015  to  reflect  the  change  of  the
    Appellant's legal representative.

 7. On 24th November 2015, a Rule 24 response was entered by the  Secretary
    of State to the effect that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had  recorded
    that, "the Notice of Appeal was served on the  Appellant  on  1st  June
    2015, she has not attended the hearing; the Appellant has not  provided
    an explanation as to the reasons for her non-attendance".

The Hearing

 8. At the hearing before me on 20th June 2016, Mrs Lagunja,  appearing  as
    Counsel on behalf of the Appellant, submitted that she  had  all  along
    been instructed as Counsel in this  appeal,  and  was  awaiting  to  be
    instructed by her solicitors to attend the court hearing  in  order  to
    appear at the Appellant's appeal.  In January 2015 a notice of  hearing
    was received but this was for 18th May 2015.  Then in February 2015 the
    Appellant instructed Victory  Solicitors  and  left  Kalam  Solicitors.
    Victory Solicitors then sent the bundle for 18th May 2015 hearing.

 9. However, on the afternoon of 15th May 2015, the Tribunal called Victory
    Solicitors and told them that the hearing had been adjourned  for  18th
    May 2015.  Thereafter problems ensued.  At some stage  after  1st  June
    2015 notices were allegedly sent out  by  the  Tribunal  but  were  not
    received by  Victory  Solicitors.   Nor,  were  they  received  by  the
    Appellant at her address.  This will  not  be  surprising,  given  that
    normally, when  solicitors  are  instructed,  notices  go  out  to  the
    solicitors.  These notices informed the parties that the new  date  for
    the hearing was 19th June 2015.

10. Neither the Appellant nor Victory Solicitors received this notice.  The
    hearing came and went.  At that hearing Judge M A Khan appears to  have
    wrongly concluded that  notice  was  sent  to  the  Appellant  and  her
    solicitors.  In such  a  case,  Rule  28  of  the  Procedure  Rules  is
    relevant.  This states that,

         "If a party fails to attend the hearing the  Tribunal  may  proceed
         with the hearing if the Tribunal

         (a)  is satisfied that the party has been notified of  the  hearing
             or that reasonable steps have been taken to notify  the  party
             of the hearing; and

         (b)  considers that it is in the interests of  justice  to  proceed
             with the hearing."

    Mrs Lagunja  submitted  that  neither  of  these  conditions  could  be
    satisfied.

11. For his part, Mr Tufan submitted that it did appear that Judge  Ransley
    had investigated the position fairly thoroughly and had concluded  that
    notice is not set out properly by the Tribunal to  Victory  Solicitors.
    In fact, Judge Ransley makes it clear that the  notice  was  issued  to
    former representatives, Kalam Solicitors on 1st June 2015.  This  would
    not have been done.

Error of Law

12. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.  This is a case where Rule 28 applies.  The parties failed  to
    attend the hearing.  The Tribunal could not have  been  satisfied  that
    reasonable steps have been taken to notify the party of the hearing and
    could not have been satisfied that it  was  in  the  interests  of  the
    justice to proceed.  All the evidence suggests that Victory  Solicitors
    were not informed, as the proper legal representatives at that point in
    time, and neither, for  that  matter,  was  notification  sent  to  the
    Appellant herself.  In these circumstances, Practice  Statement  7.2(a)
    applies and the Appellant has been deprived of a right to  a  full  and
    fair hearing.  The proper course of action is to remit this matter back
    to the First-tier Tribunal, to be determined  by  a  judge  other  than
    Judge M A Khan at the first available opportunity.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law such that it  falls  to  be  set  aside.   I  set  aside  the
decision of the original judge.  I allow this appeal to the extent  that  it
is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  by  a  judge  other
than Judge M A Khan at Hatton Cross  at  the  first  available  opportunity.
Notices should be sent out to both the Appellant and her representatives  at
the proper address in the appropriate manner so as to ensure that  there  is
attendance by all the parties concerned.

No anonymity order made.


Signed   Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    13th February 2016

