
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44518/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th October, 2015                 |On 6th November 2015                 |
|Given extempore                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               NANDINEE TOOLSY
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jarvis, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms. S Townshend of Counsel instructed by Harris
                    Kumar Caleechum


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant in  this  appeal  is  the  Secretary  of  State  and  the
    respondent is Mrs Nandinee Toolsy.  To avoid confusion I  am  going  to
    refer to the Secretary of State "the claimant".  The  respondent  is  a
    citizen of Mauritius born  on  28th  October,  1971  and  she  appealed
    against the decision of the claimant, taken  on  14th  November,  2014,
    cancelling her leave and entry clearance to  the United  Kingdom  as  a
    spouse  or  partner  under  paragraph  321A(1)  and  321A(2)   of   the
    Immigration Rules.

2.   At Heathrow, on her return from holiday with her husband after  a  long
    and tiring flight, the respondent was  interviewed  by  an  Immigration
    Officer, as a result of which he purported to cancel  her  leave.   The
    notice is dated 14th November 2014 and says:

         "You were given notice of leave to remain in the United Kingdom  as
         a spouse partner on 28th February 2013  but  I  am  satisfied  that
         false representations were employed for the  purpose  of  obtaining
         the leave and that there has been a change of circumstances in your
         case since the leave was granted that it  should  be  cancelled.  I
         therefore  cancel  your  continuing  leave.   If  your  leave   was
         conferred by entry clearance this will  also  have  the  effect  of
         cancelling your entry clearance.

         The  Home  Office  have  now  identified  that   you   made   false
         representations in that application for the  purpose  of  obtaining
         leave to remain.

         In  your  application  you  submitted  a  TOEIC  certificate   from
         Educational Testing Service ETS.

         ETS has a record of your speaking test.  Using  voice  verification
         software ETS is able to detect where a single person is undertaking
         multiple tests.  ETS undertook a check of your test  and  confirmed
         to the Secretary of State for the Home Department  that  there  was
         significant  evidence  to  conclude  that  your   certificate   was
         fraudulently obtained.

         Your scores from the test taken on 29th September, 2012  at  London
         College of Media and Technology have now been cancelled by ETS.

         On the basis of the information provided to  it  by  ETS  the  Home
         Office is satisfied that there is substantial evidence to  conclude
         that your certificate was fraudulently obtained.  In the  light  of
         this information I am accordingly satisfied that you have  utilised
         deception to gain leave to remain in the UK.

         Had the Home Office been aware of these facts when considering your
         application on 28th February, 2013 you would not have been  granted
         leave as a spouse partner as you would have failed to meet the full
         requirements for entry and in addition you would have fallen to  be
         refused  under  the  general  grounds  for  refusal,   specifically
         paragraph 320(7A) of the Immigration Rules HC 395 as amended.

         I am satisfied that you have  used  false  documents  in  order  to
         obtain your leave to remain and I therefore cancel that leave under
         paragraph 321A(2) of the Immigration Rules HC 395 as  amended.   In
         addition the employment  of  deception  amounts  to  a  significant
         change in your circumstances and I also cancel your leave to remain
         under paragraph 321A(1) 9f the Immigration Rules HC 395 as amended.

         For the above reasons I am also satisfied that you  used  deception
         in this application. This means that any  future  applications  for
         entry clearance or leave to enter the UK you make will  be  refused
         under paragraph 320(7B) Immigration Rules  (unless  it  will  be  a
         breach of your rights under  the  Human  Rights  Act  1998  or  the
         Refugee Convention) for a period of one year starting on  the  date
         on which you are removed from the UK following this refusal."

3.   It can be seen, therefore, that the consequences of the actions of  the
    Immigration  Officer  on  14th  November,  2014,   have   very   serous
    consequences for this respondent.

4.   The respondent appealed that decision  and  her  appeal  was  heard  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Trevaskis at Newport on 1st April, 2015.   He
    heard oral evidence from the respondent and from her partner.  He noted
    the provisions of paragraph 321A(1)  and  321A(2)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and at paragraph 25 of the determination said this:

         "I have had the benefit of hearing the [respondent] and her partner
         give evidence; I take account of the  fact  that  the  [respondent]
         speaks and understands English very well and that she has lived  in
         the United Kingdom for over ten years, has studied to a high  level
         in English and has worked in an occupation where  communication  in
         English is important.  I also note that she has passed the life the
         UK test, and the associated English language test, which  is  to  a
         higher standard than the test which is the subject matter  of  this
         appeal."

5.   At paragraph 26 of the determination he then said

         "There has been no direct evidence presented to me which  satisfies
         me that the English language test taken by the [respondent]  on  19
         September 2012 was taken by  anyone  other  than  the  [respondent]
         herself.  The decision to invalidate her test appears to have  been
         taken for no reason related to the test itself, but rather  related
         to the centre at which the test  was  taken,  and  the  statistical
         incidence  of  tests  at  that  centre  which   were   demonstrably
         fraudulent. It is clear from the  statements  relied  upon  by  the
         [claimant] that the  action  taken  against  ETS  was  against  the
         background of public disclosure in the  media,  which  was  acutely
         embarrassing to the [claimant]; the BBC information was first  made
         known to the [claimant] in early January 2014, and the analysis  of
         over 10,000 test results was provided to the [claimant] by 24 March
         2014, at a time when ETS was bidding to be  reselected  as  a  test
         provider for the [claimant]; this scenario leads me to suspect that
         not every test result was individually scrutinised, and  many  were
         reclassified for reasons not based upon the  circumstances  of  the
         test itself; I find that the test taken by  this  [respondent]  was
         one of those which was  invalidated  by  association,  and  not  by
         reason of any specific impropriety in the test itself."

6.   He went on to say that he was not satisfied that there  are  reasonable
    grounds for believing that the respondent obtained her leave  by  means
    of fraud, nor that there had been such a change  in  her  circumstances
    that her leave should be cancelled.  He, therefore, allowed her  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules.

7.   The claimant, dissatisfied with that decision, obtained  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal and in doing so relied on these grounds:

         "1.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  has  failed  entirely  to  provide
             adequate reasons for finding that:

                  "There has been no direct evidence presented to  me  which
                  satisfies me that the English language test taken  by  the
                  appellant on 19th September 2012 was taken by anyone other
                  than the [respondent] herself."

          2. The  Immigration  Officer  provided  at  appeal  a  bundle  of
             documents in support of the allegation in respect of paragraph
             321A of the Immigration  Rules  including  witness  statements
             from Mr Peter Millington and Miss Rebecca Pollock Collings and
             an email document from ETS Task  Force  dated  10th  September
             2014.  The witness statements from  Mr  Peter  Millington  and
             Miss Rebecca Pollock Collings clearly provide that  tests  are
             categorised as "invalid" where ETS are certain that  there  is
             evidence of proxy taking or impersonation-

                  "ETS described  that  any  test  categories  as  cancelled
                  (which later became known as invalid) had the  same  voice
                  for multiple test takes.  On questioning they advised that
                  they were certain that there was evidence of proxy  taking
                  or impersonation in those cases."  [At  paragraph  28  the
                  witness statement from Miss Rebecca Collings]

                  "Following comprehensive investigations ETS  provided  the
                  Home Office with lists of candidates  which  test  results
                  showed 'substantial  evidence  of  invalidity'.  The  Home
                  Office was provided with the  background  to  the  process
                  used by ETS to reach that conclusion." [At paragraph 6 the
                  witness statement of Mr Peter  Millington]  and  "Where  a
                  match has been  identified their approach is to invalidate
                  the test result as set out in  the  witness  statement  of
                  Miss Rebecca Collings ETS has  informed  the  Home  Office
                  that there was evidence of invalidity in those cases." [At
                  paragraph  46  the   witness   statement   of   Mr   Peter
                  Millington].

         3.   Taking account of this evidence it is clear that in  order  to
             be categorised as 'invalid' on the spreadsheet provided to the
             Home Office the case has  to  have  gone  through  a  computer
             programme analysing speech  and  then  two  independent  voice
             analysts. If all three are in agreement that a proxy has  been
             used then the test would be characterised  as  'invalid'.  The
             spreadsheet identifies the [respondent] by  name  and  records
             that the test was taken on 29th September, 2012 was invalid.

         4.   In the light of the evidence it is clear that  the  First-tier
             Tribunal has erred in its finding that it was "not  satisfied"
             that there are  reasonable  grounds  for  believing  that  the
             [respondent] obtained her leave to remain by means of fraud or
             that there has been such a change in  her  circumstances  that
             leave should be cancelled.

         5.   Had the First-tier Tribunal properly taken the  evidence  into
             account the First-tier Tribunal would have found that this  is
             exactly what the documents assert and evidence;

         6.   It is clear from the evidence that where ETS  invalidates  the
             test results as in the instant case, this is because there  is
             evidence of proxy taking  or  impersonation.   The  First-tier
             Tribunal has failed entirely to provide adequate  reasons  for
             its finding to the contrary.

         7.    In  considering  the  appeal  and  allowing  it  sunder   the
             Immigration Rules the respondent notes that the Judge  of  the
             First-tier Tribunal has materially erred in law such that  the
             decision should be set aside."

8.    I  am  very  grateful  to  Mr  Jarvis  and  Miss  Townsend  for  their
    submissions to me.

9.   Criticising paragraph 26 of  the  determination,  Mr  Jarvis  suggested
    that the judge attempted to deal with the evidence of fraud,  but  has,
    at paragraph 2,6 demonstrated a misunderstanding of the evidence before
    him.  ETS used software and this  software  identifies  the  voices  of
    candidates.  Where  it  was  suspected  that  fraud  has  taken  place,
    analysts then examined the tapes as well.  Appendix E of the  documents
    before the judge shows  that  the  respondent's  certificate  had  been
    fraudulently obtained by her.

10.  Referring to paragraph 24 of the Peter Millington statement, Mr  Jarvis
    said that the Secretary of State cannot  show  that  this  respondent's
    test result was wrong.  It can only show the approach taken by ETS  and
    the Secretary of State.   The  Home  Office  are  able  to  distinguish
    between the invalidity of results which came as a consequence  of  them
    having been taken the test at a centre  where  numerous  other  results
    have been invalidated and those where the invalid result comes  from  a
    finding by ETS that there has been substantial evidence of invalidity.

11.  This respondent was treated as someone who has used deception.

12.  ETS itself was satisfied that deception  was  used.  The  Secretary  of
    State is not in a position to produce evidence to Immigration Judge and
    is not in a position to produce evidence to the Tribunal today, but  is
    satisfied that such evidence exists.

13.  I find this very unsatisfactory.  I am left feeling very  uneasy  about
    the judge's determination.   The  judge,  I  believe,  demonstrates  at
    paragraph 26  of  the  determination  that  he  has  misunderstood  the
    evidence before him.  He has clearly been influenced by his view of the
    respondent's ability to speak and understand English.  He is also wrong
    when he says that "this scenario leads me to  suspect  that  not  every
    test result was individually scrutinised and many were reclassified for
    reasons not based upon the circumstances of  the  test  itself."   That
    clearly demonstrates a misunderstanding of the evidence before him.  It
    may well be that having examined the evidence carefully  another  First
    Tier Tribunal Judge may very well come to the same conclusion, but  for
    First Tier Tribunal Judge Trevaskis to say that,  "no  direct  evidence
    has been presented to [him] which  satisfies  [him]  that  the  English
    Language test taken by the [respondent]  on  19th  September  2012  was
    taken by anyone other than by the [respondent] herself" does display  a
    misunderstanding of the evidence.

14.  It has not been pleaded by the Secretary of State that she was in  fact
    entitled to make the decision she did  under  321A(i).  The  change  of
    circumstances being the cancellation by ETS  of  the  English  language
    certificate.  As I say, that is not something that had been pleaded and
    cannot, therefore be relied upon by the respondent.

15.  Counsel has very properly and  helpfully  drawn  my  attention  to  the
    decision of the President in judicial review proceedings  in  Gazi  IJR
    [2015] UKUT 00327 and also to comments made by Lord Justice Beatson  in
    the appeal of Amit Sood [2015] EWCA Civ 831.  Mr Jarvis was not able to
    explain why the appellant was not invited to undertake a retest and the
    reasons are not readily apparent.

16.  I have concluded that this determination should be set aside  and  that
    the appeal should be reheard  afresh  by  another  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge at Newport.  No interpreter  is  required.   3  hours  should  be
    allowed for the hearing

Notice of Decision

The determination is set aside.  The appeal is remitted to  the  First  Tier
Tribunal for hearing afresh before a judge other than  First  Tier  Tribunal
Judge Trevakis.


Richard Chalkley

Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

