
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44281/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 November 2015                  |On 25 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                        MRS Sohiniben Niravbhai barot
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance by or on behalf of appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, HOPO


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of India born on 25  October  1985.   On  27
    October 2014 she applied for entry clearance  to  enter  the  UK  as  a
    visitor to visit her husband, Mr Niravbhai Baharatkumar  Barot.   Entry
    clearance was subsequently granted from Mumbai  on  10  November  2014,
    valid until 10 May 2015.

2.   On 15 November 2014 leave to enter was refused and entry clearance  was
    cancelled.  This was on the basis  that  either  false  representations
    were employed or material facts were not disclosed for the purposes  of
    obtaining entry clearance, or there  was  a  change  of  circumstances.
    Home Office records demonstrated that the sponsor had no valid leave to
    remain in the UK and was expected to be removed.

3.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Lloyd  proceeded  with  the  hearing  in  the
    absence of the appellant  or  her  representative.   He  dismissed  the
    appeal

4.   Permission to appeal the judge's decision was given  on  the  following
    basis.

         "The substance of the grounds relate to a procedural  irregularity.
         The hearing took place on 23 February 2015.  I read  the  file  and
         the appellant's representatives Marks and Marks Solicitors went  on
         record on 24 November 2014.  However the correspondence on the file
         records that in answer to a further letter from the said solicitors
         on 5 December, a letter was sent to them stating that  the  records
         would be updated to show them as acting and stating that they would
         be notified of the hearing 'in  due  course'.   The  date  of  that
         letter was 13 January 2015.  The notice of  hearing  was  sent  the
         following day on 14 January 2015 to the previous  solicitors  which
         lent some support to the account given in the grounds that the file
         was not updated until 30 January 2015.  However there is  a  notice
         on file which was sent to the  solicitors  ten  days  later  on  23
         January 2015 for the hearing.  There is no reason to  believe  that
         the solicitors would assert that they had not received the notice.

         On the basis of the above I consider it is arguable that there  may
         have been a procedural irregularity and this is particularly so  as
         the appellant was detained but there was no evidence that there was
         ever any consideration given to her production, even if she was not
         to be represented.   However  in  view  of  the  lack  of  evidence
         attached to the grounds, the appellant's  representatives  will  be
         expected to  provide  evidence  from  their  files  concerning  the
         assertions made in the  grounds  as  to  the  non-service  and  the
         preparation  they  had  done  on  the  appellant's  basis  for  the
         hearing."

5.   On 11 November 2015 a fax was received from Marks and Marks  Solicitors
    informing the  Upper  Tribunal  that  they  had  been  unable  to  take
    instructions from Mrs Barot in relation to today's hearing.  They  were
    specifically asked by the Tribunal to clarify whether as a result  they
    were no longer representing Mrs Barot and there has  been  no  response
    from Marks and Marks.  In any event, they failed to attend the hearing.



6.   Although the appellant was in immigration  detention  when  her  appeal
    came before the judge on 23 February 2015, notice  of  today's  hearing
    was sent to her at 3 [ - ], which suggests that  the  appellant  is  no
    longer held in immigration detention.  She failed to appear at  today's
    hearing.  I had no explanation for her non-appearance.

7.   The sole issue in this case is procedural irregularity,  in  that,  did
    the judge act fairly in proceeding with the hearing in her  absence  of
    the appellant.  As her current solicitors Marks and Marks have not  had
    instructions from her and did not appear  at  the  hearing,  I  had  no
    evidence from them as to whether or not they received  the  notice  for
    the hearing on 23 February 2015 which was sent to them  on  23  January
    2015.  It was claimed that the appellant did not  receive  notification
    of the hearing when she was at the detention centre.  The appellant did
    not attend today's hearing to confirm this claim.

8.   In the absence of evidence to confirm that there was indeed  procedural
    irregularity, I find that the judge did not err in  law  in  proceeding
    with  the  hearing  in  the  absence   of   the   appellant   and   her
    representatives.

9.   The judge's decision shall stand.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

