
IAC-AH-sar-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44857/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 1 July 2014                                  |On 13 January 2015         |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             GRACE CARANI TOWLE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms C Warren, instructed by Howells, Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent, Grace Carani Towle, was born on 6 March 1971 and  is  a
    citizen of the Philippines.  I shall hereafter refer to  the  appellant
    as the respondent and to the  respondent  as  the  appellant  (as  they
    appeared respectively before the First-tier Tribunal).

 2. The appellant had applied for a residence card  as  confirmation  of  a
    right to reside in the United Kingdom but her application  was  refused
    on 11 October 2013.  The appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Hindson) which, in a determination promulgated on 18 March 2014,
    allowed  the  appeal.   The  Secretary  of  State  now  appeals,   with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 3. The appellant is the widow of the late Mr Patrick  Towle  who  died  in
    August 2013.  The appellant had worked in Cyprus as a housekeeper  from
    about 2009 and it was there that she met Mr Towle who was visiting  the
    island at the time.   They  married  in  August  2011.   The  appellant
    continued to work in Cyprus and Mr Towle moved there  where  he  had  a
    number of jobs as a self-employed painter and decorator.   In  November
    2012, he returned for medical treatment to the United Kingdom  and  the
    appellant was granted a family permit  to  enter  the  country  as  his
    spouse.

 4. The appellant's application fell to be considered under the Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006, Regulation 10:


         10.  (1) In these Regulations, "family member who has retained  the
         right of residence" means, subject to paragraph (8), a  person  who
         satisfies the conditions in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).

            (2)   A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if-

                (a) he was a family member of a qualified person when the
                qualified person died;

                (b) he resided in the United Kingdom in accordance with
                these Regulations for at least the year immediately before
                the death of the qualified person; and

                (c) he satisfies the condition in paragraph (6).

            (3)   A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if-

                (a) he is the direct descendant of-

                   (i) a qualified person who has died;

                   (ii) a person who ceased to be a qualified person on
                   ceasing to reside in the United Kingdom; or

                   (iii) the person who was the spouse or civil partner of
                   the qualified person mentioned in sub-paragraph (i) when
                   he died or is the spouse or civil partner of the person
                   mentioned in sub-paragraph (ii); and

                (b) he was attending an educational course in the United
                Kingdom immediately before the qualified person died or
                ceased to be a qualified person and continues to attend such
                a course.

            (4)   A person satisfies the conditions in  this  paragraph  if
            the person is the parent with actual custody  of  a  child  who
            satisfies the condition in paragraph (3).

            (5)   A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if-

                (a) he ceased to be a family member of a qualified person on
                the termination of the marriage or civil partnership of the
                qualified person;

                (b) he was residing in the United Kingdom in accordance with
                these Regulations at the date of the termination;

                (c) he satisfies the condition in paragraph (6); and

                (d) either-

                   (i) prior to the initiation of the proceedings for the
                   termination of the marriage or the civil partnership the
                   marriage or civil partnership had lasted for at least
                   three years and the parties to the marriage or civil
                   partnership had resided in the United Kingdom for at
                   least one year during its duration;

                   (ii) the former spouse or civil partner of the qualified
                   person has custody of a child of the qualified person;

                   (iii) the former spouse or civil partner of the qualified
                   person has the right of access to a child of the
                   qualified person under the age of 18 and a court has
                   ordered that such access must take place in the United
                   Kingdom; or

                   (iv) the continued right of residence in the United
                   Kingdom of the person is warranted by particularly
                   difficult circumstances, such as he or another family
                   member having been a victim of domestic violence while
                   the marriage or civil partnership was subsisting.

            (6)   The condition in this paragraph is that the person-

                (a) is not an EEA national but would, if he were an EEA
                national, be a worker, a self-employed person or a self-
                sufficient person under regulation 6; or

                (b) is the family member of a person who falls within
                paragraph (a).

            (7)   In this regulation, "educational course" means  a  course
            within the scope of Article 12 of Council Regulation (EEC)  No.
            1612/68 on freedom of movement for workers (1).

            (8)   A person  with  a  permanent  right  of  residence  under
            regulation 15 shall not become a family member who has retained
            the right of residence on  the  death  or  departure  from  the
            United Kingdom of the qualified person or  the  termination  of
            the marriage or civil partnership, as the case may  be,  and  a
            family member who has retained the  right  of  residence  shall
            cease to have that status on acquiring  a  permanent  right  of
            residence under regulation 15.




 5. At [20], Judge Hindson noted:

         The EEA national is now deceased and the appellant must  show  that
         she has retained a right  of  residence  in  accordance  with  that
         Regulation  [Regulation  10].   In  issue  is  the  requirement  in
         10(2)(b) that [the appellant]  must  have  resided  in  the  UK  in
         accordance with these Regulations for at least the year immediately
         before the death of her [husband].  The appellant and  her  husband
         returned to the UK in November 2012 and [he] died in  August  2013.
         This requirement is therefore not satisfied.

 6. Later, at [25], the judge dealt with a submission  put  to  him  by  Ms
    Warren  (who  also  appeared  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal).   The
    difficulty for the appellant was that  she  had  not  remained  in  the
    United Kingdom with her husband for at least  one  year  prior  to  his
    death; they had lived together  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  about  9
    months.  The judge wrote:

         ... I am prepared to accept that the appellant is able to  rely  on
         the cumulative period that she had spent with her husband in Cyprus
         and in the UK when determining whether the  requirement  of  twelve
         months contained in Regulation 10(2)(b) is met.  Consequently, this
         provision is satisfied and the appeal is allowed.

 7. The grounds of appeal complain that the judge has been inconsistent  in
    finding both that  10(2)(b)  was  met  and  was  not  met.   They  also
    challenge the judge's adoption of Ms Warren's submission (regarding the
    cumulative period of time required  to  amount  to  twelve  months,  as
    required by the Regulations) without reference to any authority.

 8. Dealing with that latter point first, it is, of course, not necessarily
    an error of law if the judge makes a ruling which is right in  law  but
    is novel, never having been considered before.   The  issue  raised  in
    this case would appear to fall into that category.

 9. Secondly, there is, on the face of the determination, no inconsistency.
     The judge has accepted that, on the plain wording of  the  Regulation,
    the appellant is unable to show  that  she  had  lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom with her husband for more than twelve months.  The point  which
    he accepted is that she was able to aggregate time spent in Cyprus  and
    in the United Kingdom in order to satisfy the twelve month requirement.

10. The grounds, therefore, do not, in my opinion, succeed  in  undermining
    the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   Furthermore,  I
    find that the judge was right to find that the appellant should succeed
    in her appeal.  I say that for the following reasons.

11. The judge was  referred  to  the  Court  of  Justice  of  the  European
    Communities judgment of July 1992 in Surinder  Singh  (Case  C-370/90).
    The court concluded that, in answer to the question referred to  it  by
    the High Court of England and Wales,

         The abolition of restrictions on movements and residence within the
         Community for nationals of Member States in regard to establishment
         and the provision of services, are properly construed, requiring  a
         Member State to grant leave to enter and reside in its territory to
         the spouse, of whatever nationality, of a national  of  that  State
         who has gone, with that spouse, to another Member State in order to
         work there as an employed person as envisaged by Article 48 of  the
         Treaty and returns to establish himself or herself as envisaged  by
         Article 52 of the Treaty in the State of  which  he  or  she  is  a
         national.  A spouse must enjoy at least the same rights as would be
         granted to him or her under Community law  if  his  or  her  spouse
         entered and resided in another Member State.

12. I have no difficulty accepting the judge's  finding  [at  19]  that  Mr
    Towle  had  returned  to  the  United  Kingdom,  the  country  of   his
    nationality, in order to work here notwithstanding the  fact  that  the
    particular timing of his return lay  in  his  need  to  obtain  medical
    treatment.  The judge was right to hold that the principles of Surinder
    Singh, intended to combat prejudicial treatment in the operation of  EU
    law, were properly invoked.  Indeed, there arises from the  appellant's
    particular circumstances another issue which was not raised before  the
    judge but which also appears to give rise to discrimination.   Had  the
    appellant entered the United Kingdom as the wife of Mr Towle under  the
    Immigration Rules and had Mr Towle then died,  it  is  clear  that  the
    operation of Appendix FM of HC 395 would have put  her  into  a  better
    position than she now finds herself.  Paragraph FM E-BPILR sets out the
    requirements for a bereaved partner or  spouse  to  acquire  indefinite
    leave to remain.  E-BPILR1.3 provides  that,  "a  person  who  was  the
    applicant's partner at the time of the last grant of limited leave as a
    partner must have died" whilst the surviving  partner  must  show  that
    there was a genuine and subsisting relationship  at  the  time  of  her
    partner's death; in the present  case,  that  latter  circumstance  was
    clearly accepted  by  the  Presenting  Officer  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Only any unspent convictions of the deceased  partner  might
    limit the leave (30 months) of the surviving  partner.   Significantly,
    there is, in the Immigration Rules, no requirement (as appears in  both
    the Directive and in the 2006 Regulations) for the surviving spouse  to
    have spent a minimum period of at least twelve months living  with  the
    deceased partner in the host Member State.

13. In the light of the operation both of the 2006 Regulations and Appendix
    FM, I hold that for the appellant to be denied the right to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom because she had failed to complete twelve months  of
    residence here  with  the  late  Mr  Towle  amounts  to  discrimination
    contrary to the principles of Surinder Singh.  Accordingly, the  appeal
    of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

NOTICE OF DECISION

14.  This appeal is dismissed.



Signed        Date 1 July 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
