
[pic]


Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/44629/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 20 November 2015                  |On 25 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                             MRS ADAMAKA NWOLOKO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And




               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent







Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Uzoechina, solicitor, Patterson & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr P Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer



                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


    1. The appellant appeals a decision promulgated  on  27  April  2015  of
       First-tier Tribunal Judge M Robertson, hereinafter referred to as the
       FTTJ. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Fisher on 7 July 2015.

Background

    2. The appellant applied for a residence card  as  confirmation  of  her
       right to reside in the  United  Kingdom  as  the  spouse  of  an  EEA
       national, on 29 December 2011. Her appeal against that  decision  was
       allowed to the extent that FTTJ Hanes  found  that  the  respondent's
       decision was not in accordance with the law and thereby remitted  the
       matter for the Secretary of State's reconsideration on that basis. On
       15 May 2013, the appellant and her spouse were interviewed in respect
       of the residence card application. The decision of  FTTJ  Hanes  was,
       subsequently, upheld by the Upper Tribunal.

    3. The appellant's application was refused (following reconsideration by
       the Secretary of State) on 13 August 2013, on the basis of what  were
       said to be inconsistencies within the  appellant's  evidence  at  her
       earlier appeal as well as the marriage  interview.  Consequently,  it
       was not accepted that she was in  a  genuine  relationship  with  her
       spouse.

    4. The appeal was then heard by FTTJ Hawden-Beal who dismissed it  under
       the 2006 Regulations in a determination promulgated on 4  June  2014.
       However, that decision was set aside, in its  entirety,  following  a
       hearing at the Upper Tribunal which took place on 7 October 2014.

    5. When this matter came before FTTJ M Robertson, a request was made  on
       the appellant's behalf for the respondent to produce form  ICV  4605.
       The FTTJ did not accept that the respondent relied on  this  form  in
       reaching her decision and decided it  would  not  be  unfair  to  the
       appellant to proceed  to  hear  her  appeal  without  this  evidence.
       Thereafter the FTTJ heard oral evidence from the  appellant  and  her
       spouse as well as submissions from both representatives.

    6. The FTTJ had regard to the findings of the  previous  judges;  issues
       arising from the marriage interview as well as her impression of  the
       evidence before her and  concluded  that  the  marriage  was  one  of
       convenience.

Error of law

    7. The grounds of application, submitted out  of  time,  criticised  the
       decision of the FTTJ in seven respects, summarised here. Firstly,  it
       was argued that the decision to refuse disclosure of  form  ICV  4605
       was procedurally unfair, Miah  (Interviewer's  comments;  disclosure:
       fairness) [2014] UKUT 515 applied. Secondly, it  was  said  that  the
       FTTJ failed to take account of the 105 consistent  answers  given  in
       interview or to assess earlier adverse comments of  FTTJ's  (some  of
       which had been set aside) in an unbiased way. Thirdly, the FTTJ erred
       in her assessment of whether Community  law  was  abused  by  placing
       undue weight on the absence of photographic  evidence.  Fourthly,  it
       was argued that the FTTJ had shifted the burden of proof, in relation
       to the marriage of convenience issue, onto the appellant.

    8. Fifthly, the FTTJ had made a number of  material  factual  errors  in
       relation to the evidence and submissions before her. Sixthly, it  was
       said that the FTTJ failed to  treat  the  appellant's  evidence  with
       impartiality. Lastly, the grounds argued that the FTTJ failed to take
       into consideration the earlier witness statements  of  the  appellant
       and sponsor alongside the previous determinations.

    9. Time  was  extended  "in  view  of  the  strength  of  the  grounds."
       Permission was granted in relation to the first ground in particular,
       however all grounds raised were considered to be arguable.

   10. The Secretary of State's Rule 24 response dated 17  July  2015,  made
       the following statement; "The respondent does not consider  that  the
       determination is sustainable given the failure to disclose  the  full
       interview transcript. The judge did not follow Miah..."

   11. In terms of the disposal of the  appeal,  the  respondent  considered
       "that it would be appropriate that the  matter  be  remitted  to  the
       Secretary of State to  serve  a  full  interview  transcript  and  to
       provide any amended refusal letter to take account of any or all  the
       issues arising from the interview. "

The Hearing

  As a preliminary issue, Mr Whitwell confirmed from the  outset  that  the
       respondent accepted that the FTTJ had made a procedural error,  which
       infected the entirety of the  findings.  He  invited  me  to  find  a
       material error of law and remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal
       for a further rehearing. When I drew Mr Whitwell's attention  to  the
       third paragraph of the Rule 24 response, he indicated that he was now
       in a position to serve the missing material. He handed form ICD  4604
       to Mr Uzoechina and me. I asked Mr Whitwell if he had form  ICD  4605
       in his file, which was the subject of the procedural issues  in  this
       case, however he did not. Consequently, Mr Whitwell  stated  that  he
       would not seek to go  behind  his  colleague's  suggestion  that  the
       matter ought to be remitted to the Secretary of State.


   12. For the appellant, Mr Uzoechina argued that the matter has to be sent
       for a fresh hearing and that it was not  open  to  me  to  remit  the
       matter to the respondent. He did  not  develop  the  last  point.  He
       stressed that the  key  issue  was  that  the  respondent  failed  to
       disclose her evidence. He asked that the appeal be remitted to Hatton
       Cross rather than Birmingham IAC.

   13. I accept the respondent's rightly made concession that the FTTJ  fell
       into  procedural  error  in  refusing  to   grant   the   appellant's
       application for the respondent to be required to  disclose  form  ICD
       4605 and that this amounted to a material error of law rendering  the
       decision and reasons unsafe in their entirety.

   14. In Miah, headnote (iii) refers to  the  respondent's  decision-making
       process including a process where the  comments  of  an  interviewing
       officer are conveyed to the decision maker. Headnote 9(iv) stipulates
       that form ICD4605, the document, which enshrines those comments "must
       be disclosed as a matter of course. An appellant's right  to  a  fair
       hearing dictates this course."

   15. Form ICD 4605 was not disclosed to the appellant; she  was  denied  a
       further opportunity to obtain disclosure of  that  document  and  the
       FTTJ  proceeded  to  find  against  her  without  reference  to  this
       document. The lack of disclosure of the form in question, leads me to
       the conclusion that the appellant had been  subjected  to  an  unfair
       decision making process, in that she was not fully aware of the  case
       against her.  Accordingly,  the  respondent's  decision  was  not  in
       accordance with the law. The FTTJ fell into procedural  error,  which
       in this case amounts to a material error of law.

   16. I took into consideration, the fact that the appellant has had  three
       hearings in relation to her application for a residence card and even
       at the hearing before me there was no disclosure of form ICD 4605.  I
       therefore  proceeded  to  remake  the  decision   by   allowing   the
       appellant's appeal to the limited  extent  that  the  matter  remains
       outstanding before the Secretary of  State  in  order  for  a  lawful
       decision  to  be  made,  in  which  Form  ICD  4605  is  taken   into
       consideration and disclosed should the decision to refuse a residence
       card be maintained.

Decision

    1) I am satisfied that the FTTJ erred in law in refusing the appellant's
       application for disclosure of form ICD 4605.

    2) The respondent's decision was vitiated by procedural  unfairness  and
       thus, was not in accordance with the law,

    3) I therefore allow the appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  to  the  limited
       extent that;

        a) the decision of the judge to dismiss the  appeal  is  set  aside
           with no findings preserved.

        b) I substitute a fresh decision to allow  the  appellant's  appeal
           against the refusal of his application for a residence  card  to
           the limited  extent  that  it  remains  outstanding  before  the
           Secretary of State for  her  to  consider  all  the  information
           before her including that contained in ICD 4605.

    4) In reaching that conclusion I have had regard to Mr Uzoechima's
       submission that I should simply remit the appeal to the First-tier
       Tribunal, despite the fact that form ICD 4605 remains undisclosed.

No application for anonymity was made and I could see no reason to make
such a direction.


Signed      Date: 22 November 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

