


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44613/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Crown Court          |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 18 March 2016                         |On 1 April 2016                   |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between


                                 amar sohail
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Khan, instructed by Parkview Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on 2  February  1989.  He
      has been given permission to appeal against the determination  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal dismissing his  appeal  against  the  respondent's
      decision of 21 October 2014 to refuse to issue him  with  a  residence
      card as the extended family  member  of  an  EEA  national  under  the
      Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  ("the  EEA
      Regulations").

   2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 16 February 2011 as a Tier
      4 (General) Student Migrant and was granted leave until 22 April 2014.
      He made an application for an  EEA  residence  card  as  the  extended
      family member of his maternal uncle, a Portuguese national  exercising
      treaty rights in the UK.

   3. His application was refused on 21 October 2014 on the grounds that  he
      had not provided evidence in the form of original  birth  certificates
      demonstrating that he was related  as  claimed  to  the  EEA  national
      sponsor. For the same  reasons  it  was  considered  that  he  had  no
      entitlement to rely on the EEA Regulations and thus no right of appeal
      under the Regulations.

   4. The appellant nevertheless  appealed  against  the  decision  and  the
      Tribunal decided that the appeal could proceed.

   5. At a hearing on 28 April 2015, First-tier Tribunal Judge  Simpson  had
      before her documentary evidence including birth certificates and heard
      from the appellant and his uncle, the EEA sponsor.  She  recorded  the
      following claimed facts: that the sponsor was the appellant's mother's
      brother; that the appellant had lived with his parents and siblings in
      Faisalabad before coming to the UK and that the family was  relatively
      poor; that the appellant's  uncle  had  always  supported  the  family
      financially; that the sponsor had lived in Pakistan until 2000 when he
      migrated  to  Portugal  and  continued  to  financially   assist   the
      appellant's  family;  that  the  sponsor  financially  supported   the
      appellant's studies in Pakistan; that the appellant came to the UK  in
      February 2011 to study and that his uncle, who  was  still  living  in
      Portugal, continued to  support  him  financially;  that  the  sponsor
      became a Portuguese national in January 2014;  and  that  the  sponsor
      came to the UK in February 2014 and the appellant lived with him  from
      the summer of 2014.

   6. Judge Simpson was not satisfied  that  the  appellant  was  dependent,
      financially or otherwise, on his uncle prior to coming to  the  UK  in
      February 2011 and gave reasons for so concluding. Furthermore, she was
      not  satisfied  that  the  appellant's   circumstances   fell   within
      Regulation 8 of the EEA Regulations as he  was  not  accompanying  his
      uncle when he came to the UK in February 2011 and he was  not  joining
      him here. She considered that between February 2011 and  January  2014
      any dependency there may have been did not meet  the  requirements  of
      Regulation 8. Whilst the judge accepted that  the  appellant  and  his
      uncle were related  as  claimed,  that  the  appellant  was  presently
      dependent upon his uncle and was a member of his household,  and  that
      the sponsor was an EEA national exercising treaty rights  in  the  UK,
      she did not accept that the appellant was dependent on his uncle prior
      to coming to the UK or that he  was  joining  his  uncle  in  the  UK.
      Accordingly  she  was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  met   the
      requirements of regulation 8(2) and she dismissed the appeal.

   7. Permission to appeal that decision was sought by the appellant on  the
      grounds that the question of financial dependency had not been a  live
      issue in the appeal  as  it  had  not  been  a  reason  given  by  the
      respondent for refusing the  application,  and  that  accordingly  the
      appellant ought not to have been penalised for providing only  limited
      documentary evidence in that regard; and further that  the  judge  had
      failed to give adequate reasons for rejecting the oral evidence of the
      witnesses as to the financial dependence. The grounds asserted further
      that the judge had misdirected herself in relation  to  Regulations  7
      and 8 of the EEA Regulations in requiring that the EEA national had to
      travel with the appellant to the UK or already be in the UK; and  that
      the judge had failed to engage with the appellant's Article 8 claim.

   8. Permission was granted on 8 January 2016 on  the  ground  relating  to
      Article 8, although not excluding the other grounds.

   9. The respondent's rule 24 response relied on the case of Amirteymour  &
      Ors (EEA appeals; human rights) [2015]  UKUT  466  in  regard  to  the
      ground relating to Article 8 and on the case of Moneke and others (EEA
      - OFMs) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 341 in  regard  to  the  sponsor's  status
      prior to coming to the UK.

  10. Ms Khan pursued the grounds of appeal before me, submitting that there
      had been procedural  unfairness  in  the  judge  finding  against  the
      appellant on grounds of financial dependency when that had not been  a
      matter relied upon by  the  respondent  in  refusing  the  appellant's
      application. I asked Ms Khan how that was material  in  light  of  the
      decisions in Amirteymour and Moneke. Ms Khan accepted that those cases
      properly set out the law but she said that it was not for her  to  say
      how the appellant could succeed despite the decisions in those  cases.
      She was instructed to pursue the appeal on the basis of  the  evidence
      demonstrating financial dependence.


  11. Ms Johnstone submitted that the judge was required to consider whether
      the appellant could meet the  requirements  of  the  EEA  Regulations,
      whether or not the  refusal  letter  raised  the  issue  of  financial
      dependence, and he clearly could not.

Consideration and findings

  12.  I advised the parties that I found no error of  law  in  the  judge's
      decision and I give my reasons accordingly.

  13. Whether or not the issue of financial dependency had  been  raised  in
      the respondent's refusal,  the  judge  was  nevertheless  required  to
      consider whether the appellant could meet the requirements of the  EEA
      Regulations. There had been no concessions made by the  respondent  in
      refusing the application and clearly the judge  had  to  consider  all
      relevant matters.


  14. The respondent properly relies on [40(ii)] of the decision  in  Moneke
      which states as follows:


      "In either case the dependency or membership of the household must  be
      on a person who  is  an  EEA  national  at  the  material  time.  Thus
      dependency or membership of a  household  that  preceded  the  sponsor
      becoming an EEA national would not be sufficient. It is necessary  for
      the pre entry dependency to be on the EEA national and  not  a  person
      who subsequently became an EEA national. Thus if a  sponsor  has  been
      financially supporting OFMs who live abroad for many years  before  he
      became  an EEA national, but there  was  no  such  support  after  the
      sponsor acquired EEA  nationality,  there  would  be  no  evidence  of
      dependency on an EEA national."

  15. The evidence before the judge was that the appellant came to the UK in
      February 2011. His  uncle,  the  named  EEA  sponsor,  became  an  EEA
      national in January 2014. In accordance with the decision  in  Moneke,
      the appellant could only rely upon dependency on his  uncle,  for  the
      purposes of meeting the definition of  extended  family  member  under
      the EEA Regulations, from the time his uncle became an  EEA  national,
      namely in January 2014. Accordingly, as the judge  observed  at  [18],
      between February 2011 and January 2014 any dependency by the appellant
      on his  uncle  would  not  meet  the  requirements  of  Regulation  8.
      Therefore the appellant was unable to demonstrate any dependency  upon
      an EEA national prior to coming to the  UK  and  could  not  meet  the
      criteria in Regulation 8 to establish that he was the extended  family
      member of an EEA national.

  16. Clearly the appellant could not succeed in his application  under  the
      EEA Regulations  and  whether  or  not  he  had  further  evidence  of
      financial dependence that he could have submitted is  immaterial.  The
      judge properly dismissed the appeal on the grounds relating to the EEA
      Regulations.


  17. Likewise the appellant could not succeed  on  his  grounds  of  appeal
      under Article 8 and indeed permission ought not to have  been  granted
      on that basis, in light of the principles set out in Amirteymour.  The
      appellant had not made a human rights claim and there was  no  section
      120 notice. Accordingly he was not able to bring a  challenge  to  the
      respondent's decision on such grounds before the  judge  who  properly
      found that to be the case.

DECISION

  18. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to dismiss the appeal stands.









Signed

Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:
