
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/44426/2014
                                                               IA/44445/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 6 November 2015                  |On: 2 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between
                                   Ms O U
                                   Mr R M
                       (anonymity directionS not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                THE SECETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     no appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The first appellant is a citizen of Nigeria.  The  first  appellant  is
    born on 30 April 1986. The second appellant is a national  of  Portugal
    born on 4 February 1983.  They  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    against the decisions of the respondent dated 23 October 2014 to refuse
    the  first  appellant's  application  for  registration  certificate  a
    Registration Certificate as confirmation of his right to reside in  the
    United Kingdom under the EEA Regulations on the basis that his marriage
    is one of convenience.

 2.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  in   a
    determination dated 12 June 2015.  Permission to appeal was granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  PJM  Hollingworth  in  a  decision  dated  4
    September 2015, stating that it is arguable that the  Judge  fell  into
    error in not granting the appellant  an  adjournment  set  against  the
    facts available to the Judge as referred to in the decision.

 3. Thus the appeal came before me.

The findings of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The First-tier Tribunal refused to give the appellant an adjournment on
    the following basis which I summarise. The appellant  had  sent  a  fax
    dated 1 June 2015 at 12:35 PM, from a private fax machine stating  that
    she will not be able to attend the hearing as she was ill and no  other
    explanation was given. On the day of the hearing,  a  further  fax  was
    sent at 9:46 AM by the first appellant in which she said that  she  was
    admitted to hospital around 2 AM and was still in  pain  and  had  been
    told to rest for the  next  couple  of  days  having  been  given  more
    medication and that a follow-up scan had  to  be  done.  The  appellant
    asked for her date  to  be  extended.  Attached  to  the  fax  for  the
    adjournment there was a GP extract printout from her  medical  records.
    This extract stated that the appellant went to her GP on 1  June  2015,
    stating that she had missed her  monthly  cycle  and  that  she  needed
    antibiotics as there was "something left inside". The extract  went  on
    further to state that the first appellant had  pain  on  and  off,  had
    apparently vomited four times and had some dysuria  on  passing  urine.
    Her bowels opened and she was not constipated and had no diarrhoea. She
    has had an ultrasound with her previous GP which was  fine  aside  from
    known PCOS (polycystic ovary syndrome).  The  appellant  had  a  little
    blood around in her stool and has a history of piles.

 5.  The  medical  report  continued,  the  first  appellant's  examination
    included her temperature, blood pressure, blood sugar, using blood test
    and all was found to be normal. In light of her reporting severe  pain,
    the GP noted that "the patient was keen for A&E not an empirical review
    in GP". The GP agreed to an A&E assessment".

 6. The Judge stated "I considered the application for an adjournment  from
    the first appellant having regard to  the  Procedure  Rules  before  me
    including Rule 2 and Rule 28. I did  not  accept  the  request  for  an
    adjournment. I found that the first appellant's initial  fax  sent  the
    day before on 1 June 2015 at 11:35 PM stating that she was "ill"  which
    must be, presumably after seeing her GP, and was not going  to  attend,
    as indicating the appellant had no intention of attending  her  hearing
    on 2 June 2015,  come  what  may.  I  do  not  accept  the  appellant's
    explanation that she was too unwell to attend. Her examination  at  her
    GP was all normal and she has not provided me with any details of  what
    the hospital said. I find the first appellant's insistence on going  to
    A&E was part and parcel of her determination to show that she  remained
    too unwell to attend. The appellant did not reveal what medication  she
    was given and why having taken medication, the day before  and  by  the
    hospital, she was unfit to attend. There was nothing from the  hospital
    or GP, before me, confirming that she needed to rest. I do  not  accept
    the appellant was so unwell or tired that she was unfit to  attend  her
    hearing. I find the account given is  part  and  parcel  of  the  first
    appellant's intent not to attend her hearing. I do not accept,  if  she
    went to A&E after her GP visit, the previous morning that she was  kept
    in hospital and then released or not seen until 2 AM."

 7. The Judge continued at paragraph 12 "that  the  first  appellant  never
    intended to attend his hearing was reiterated by her failure to send  a
    representative, despite one being on record in  the  past.  The  second
    appellant did not attend either and there is no reason,  why  he  could
    not have attended to inform the Tribunal of what was exactly wrong with
    his wife."

The grounds of appeal

 8.  The  appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  state  the  following  which  I
    summarise. The Judge  had  by  not  allowing  the  application  for  an
    adjournment as she was medically unfit to attend court. "I  made  every
    effort in spite of how I was feeling to contact the  court  and  notify
    them of my circumstances".

 9. At paragraph 10 of the determination "the Judge wrongly assumes that  I
    was not discharged from A&E around 2 AM as I had stated in  my  letter.
    The Judge did not say why he did not accept this. The fact is, that  is
    exactly what happened. My condition was serious enough  for  me  to  be
    admitted to the A&E department of Lewisham  Hospital,  after  they  did
    some tests and observations. I was put on a drip and I had finished the
    treatment before was discharged around 2 AM. The Judge also stated that
    I had no intention of coming to court, and do not accept my explanation
    that I was too unwell to attend court. This assumption by the Judge was
    wrong and is directly at odds with the medical  evidence  that  I  have
    presented.... It was procedurally unfair for the Judge to continue with
    my appeal in my absence. I had provided as much information as I  could
    regarding my medical condition at the time. The Judge placed  too  much
    weight on the fact that I did not have a representative. I had informed
    the Tribunal that I intended to come to court on my own. The fact  that
    no papers were filled on my behalf is because my representative stopped
    acting for me after the appeal was lodged.  The  appeal  was  not  only
    based on the decision to refuse my EEA application but also  against  a
    decision to remove me. Due to my illness I should have been  granted  a
    short adjournment."

The hearing

10. There was no appearance for both appellant at the hearing. I  satisfied
    myself that they had been properly served and have proceeded to make my
    decision in their absence.

Decision as to whether there is a material error of law in the
determination

11. The first appellant complains that she ought to have  been  granted  an
    adjournment because she could not attend the hearing because of her ill-
    health. Therefore the issue raised by the appellant in her  grounds  of
    appeal is procedural fairness by not accepting her account that she was
    too unwell to attend.

12. Even if the first appellant could not attend the hearing of the  First-
    tier Tribunal, the grounds of appeal do not say why  her  husband,  the
    second appellant, did not attend the hearing. Therefore this appeal for
    an adjournment was only in respect of the first appellant.

13. The Judge in a very detailed way explained why he refused to grant  the
    appellant an adjournment. He did not accept the appellant's explanation
    and gave good reasons in paragraph 11 - 16 of his determination. He was
    entitled to not accept  the  appellant's  explanation  given  that  the
    evidence before him made it clear that the appellant herself  suggested
    that she needs to attend A&E. The Judge noted the GP's remarks that the
    "patient was keen for A&E and not an  empirical  review  in  GP".  This
    clearly indicated to the Judge that it was the appellant  who  insisted
    on going to the A&E.

14. The Judge also found that her symptoms were not objectively  justified.
    The Judge took into account her examination report which  included  her
    temperature, blood pressure, blood sugar, blood  test  which  were  all
    found to be normal. The Judge said that there was  no  evidence  as  to
    what happened at the hospital.

15. The Judge was entitled to find that the appellant having contacted  the
    Tribunal the day before the hearing at 12:35 PM said that she would not
    be attending because she was "ill". This demonstrated to the Judge that
    as of 1 June 2015, the appellant had no intention of  attending  having
    alerted the Tribunal that she was not going to attend.  The  Judge  was
    entitled to find that the appellant had no intention of  attending  the
    hearing and that her purported medical condition was contrived in order
    to be granted an adjournment.

16. The Judge considered the overriding objective carefully and  said  that
    the appellant has not provided any documents which were not before  the
    previous determination of  Judge  Herwald  who  heard  the  appellant's
    appeal on 2 May 2014  on  the  papers  and  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal. He stated that the appellants were therefore aware of  all  the
    issues in this appeal and the need to provide evidence especially since
    the refusal letter was virtually identical as the one before.

17. The Judge went on to say that the appellant had  the  assistance  of  a
    representative at the time of lodging the grounds of  appeal  so  would
    have been informed of the need to  provide  supporting  evidence  as  a
    rebuttal to what was stated by the respondent. The Judge was  satisfied
    and indeed was entitled to  do  so  given  the  appellants  failure  to
    provide documents demonstrated that the appellants  never  intended  to
    take their refusal seriously.

18. The judge was entitled to find that the  appellants  were  wasting  the
    Tribunal's time and resources on an appeal which they were not keen  to
    pursue. The Judge warned  himself  that  there  is  a  need  to  ensure
    fairness when deciding adjournments and to seek flexibility  and  avoid
    formality. However the Judge rightly remain  satisfied  that  he  could
    proceed to deal with this case fairly and justly and that  any  further
    delay should be avoided having regard to the resources of the  Tribunal
    and the issues in this case which  have  already  been  refused,  in  a
    previous determination in October 2014 and there is no further evidence
    that has been sent to support the appeal.

19. At the hearing before me, the appellants did not  attend  the  Tribunal
    and no communication was sent to the Tribunal for why  they  could  not
    attend. The appellants did not attend the hearing before the First-tier
    Tribunal and asked that their appeal be heard on the papers.  They  did
    not attend the subsequent  hearing  of  the  hearing  before  me.  This
    demonstrates to me that the Judge was correct when  he  said  that  the
    appellants have no real appetite to pursue their appeals.

20. The Judge then considered the appellant's appeal and although  he  does
    not specifically referred to the case of Devasleen that  he  took  into
    account that the starting point for his determination is  the  previous
    determination in which the appellant's appeal is were dismissed on  the
    same facts as those before  him.  He  stated  that  there  was  no  new
    evidence for him to consider but  even  so  the  Judge  considered  the
    appellant's appeal and found that the appellant's marriage was  one  of
    convenience.

21. The Judge stated at paragraph 38  that  he  has  had  regard  to  Judge
    Herwald's decision who found that the second appellant on the  evidence
    before him  was  not  a  qualified  person  exercising  treaty  rights.
    Accordingly the appeal of the first appellant failed as she was  not  a
    family member. The Judge  found  the  statement  from  the  immigration
    officer to be persuasive and taken with the other  evidence,  he  found
    that the appellants' marriage was one of convenience.

22. The Judge noted that the  same  bank  statements,  utility  bills  were
    provided with the application. These are  provided  to  show  that  the
    appellants are living together which the previous Judge did not accept.
    He also did not accept the family photographs which was  also  provided
    to  Judge  Herwald.  He  was  also  satisfied  that  these  are  staged
    photographs for the purpose of assisting the application.

23. The Judge found that he was satisfied  that  fraudulent  attempts  have
    been made to assist the first appellant to obtain a right of  residence
    in the United Kingdom by engaging in  a  marriage  of  convenience.  He
    found that the second appellant's behaviour was an abuse of  the  right
    to reside conferred upon him. He said  that  Community  Law  cannot  be
    relied upon for fraudulent or abusive ends. He was satisfied  that  the
    second appellant's conduct was  such  that  the  respondent  is  wholly
    entitled to deny him the benefit of the provisions of Community Law  on
    which he relies to remain in this country.  He  found  that  there  are
    substantial grounds for the respondent intervening and there is  public
    policy grounds for removing the second appellant on the basis that  his
    personal conduct engaging  in  this  sort  of  behaviour  represents  a
    genuine and serious threat to the fundamental interests of society.  He
    has  clearly  taken  advantage  of  the  opportunity  afforded  to  him
    remaining here by engaging in  fraudulent  behaviour  thereby  enabling
    others to obtain a right to reside, when they have no such right in the
    first place. He was satisfied that there are good public policy grounds
    in the respondents  intervening.  The  Judge  was  satisfied  that  the
    appellants have against in the marriage of convenience and  the  second
    appellant has abused the right to reside conferred upon him. The  Judge
    correctly found that Article 8 is not engaged.

24. The  upshot  is  that  there  is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination of the Judge in respect of procedural fairness by failing
    to grant and adjournment. The Judge's decision on the  evidence  before
    him, is sound and cannot be faulted. I therefore uphold the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination.

25. The appellants did not seek to  rely  on  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.

DECISION

Appeals dismissed for both appellants pursuant to the Immigration Rules.


Signed by

                                              This 25th day of November 2015
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Mrs S Chana


