
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44190/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 14 July 2015                      |On 25 August 2015                     |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                           DEPUTY JUDGE DRABU CBE


                                   Between

                              MR HARINDER SINGH
                        ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Balroop  of  Counsel  instructed  by  Malik  Law
                    Chambers, Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Ms Fujiwala, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant is a citizen of India. He was refused leave  to  remain
       by the respondent as the partner of British citizen and as father  of
       their British born  child.  First  Tier  Judge  Horvath  upheld  that
       decision for reasons given in his  determination  promulgated  on  19
       December 2014.  First Tier Tribunal  Judge  refused  the  appellant's
       application for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  20
       February 2015 coming to the conclusion that "the Judge had given full
       consideration to the best interests of the child  and  to  Article  8
       issues, coming to the findings open to him. The Zambrano  point  does
       not appear to have been raised by the Appellant's  representative  at
       the hearing (paras 10 and 12) so it cannot be a error of law  not  to
       have dealt with  it."  The  appellant  renewed  his  application  for
       permission to appeal before the Upper Tribunal. The  application  was
       considered and granted by  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Saini  for
       reasons given in the decision on 1 June 2015. The  Judge  said,  "The
       grounds before me are  a  prolix  and  sporadic  elaboration  on  the
       previous  grounds.  Having   read   those   grounds   alongside   the
       determination with great care, I find there is just sufficient in the
       grounds at paragraphs 10, 14-15 and  20  collectively  to  warrant  a
       grant of permission."

    2. At the hearing of the appeal, the Counsel for the  appellant  applied
       to amend the grounds upon which he wished to argue. After hearing the
       parties I allowed the amendments  and  the  amendments  made  to  the
       grounds are on the file.

    3. The Counsel argued that the assessment of the  requirement  regarding
       insurmountable obstacles made by the First Tier Judge  was  based  on
       speculation and conjecture drawing  attention  to  the  part  of  the
       determination where it said, "the appellant's partner must have  some
       awareness of Indian culture ... through  her  parents".  The  Counsel
       pointed out that this matter was not put  to  the  appellant  at  the
       hearing as there was no Presenting Officer present and findings  made
       on speculation and conjecture, argued Counsel  are  impermissible  as
       was held by the Court of Appeal in HK vs. SSHD [2006].

    4. The Counsel also submitted that in the assessment  of  paragraph  276
       ADE, the First Tier Tribunal Judge had failed to carry out a balanced
       assessment of the appellant's circumstances. He said  that  in  Nagre
       [2013] EWHC 720 it was held, "adults who do retain some ties to their
       own country of origin, but the ties developed in  the  UK  manifestly
       outweigh those ties".

    5. Further said the Counsel that the First Tier Judge had as is  evident
       from paragraph 37 of the determination focussed  exclusively  on  the
       appellant's circumstances in India and had not taken account  of  the
       circumstances of his British wife and the child as well as his length
       of residence.

    6. He also argued that the  "child  of  the  appellant  is  British  and
       therefore EC national".  He went on to say that whilst the First Tier
       Judge had taken account of this point he had not done so  "properly."
       He submitted that with reference to  paragraph  49,  the  First  Tier
       Judge was "wrong" to start off with the  appellant's  overstay.  With
       reference to the contents of paragraph 39 of the determination it was
       evident, according to Mr Balroop that the Judge  had  not  found  the
       full relevant facts. The parents of the appellant's spouse were  born
       in the UK. as was the spouse. The Counsel said  the  purpose  of  the
       visits made by the spouse's father to India was  not  known  and  yet
       these had been given weight. The Counsel asked that the determination
       be set aside as being in  material  error  of  law  and  that  it  be
       directed to be re-heard by the First Tier Tribunal.

    7. In response Ms Fujiwala argued that the amended grounds were simply a
       re-formulation of grounds that had already been considered and  found
       to be wanting in merit. She argued that there was nothing wrong  with
       the findings made by the First Tier Judge. The  suggestion  that  the
       findings of the Judge were based on conjecture was totally  wrong  as
       all the material findings were based on hard evidence.  She  took  me
       through the contents of paragraphs 37 and 38 to reinforce the  point.
       She reminded me that the wife and the child were not being  asked  to
       leave the United Kingdom. With  reference  to  paragraph  49  of  the
       determination age of the child, Ms Fujiwala, argued was  relevant  as
       was the fact that the child could stay in the UK with her mother. She
       drew my attention to paragraphs 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56 and 57 of  the
       determination and argued that Judge Horvath had carried  out  a  full
       and proper balancing exercise  of  private  and  public  interest  in
       deciding the case. The conclusions reached were correct on facts  and
       in law, said Ms  Fujiwala.  His  consideration  of  the  claim  under
       Article 8 was also in accord with the facts and the relevant law. She
       asked that the decision of Judge  Horvath  be  left  undisturbed,  as
       there was no material error of law in the determination.

  8. Having given careful consideration to all the grounds in  the  context
       of the determination of Judge Horvath,  and  the  arguments  advanced
       before me, I agree with Ms Fujiwala that the determination  of  Judge
       Horvath does not disclose any error of law. I  have  paid  particular
       attention to grounds 10, 14, 15 and 20 in the light of  the  decision
       of Deputy Judge who found that  "there  is  just  sufficient  in  the
       grounds to warrant a grant of permission." I am  afraid,  with  great
       respect, I do not share that view. The grounds have no merit and  are
       misconceived both collectively and otherwise. The contention that the
       best interests of the child have  not  been  properly  considered  is
       obviously bereft of real foundation as can be seen from the  relevant
       parts of the determination. The findings made by  Judge  Horvath  are
       evidence based and properly  reasoned.  The  Judge  has  applied  the
       correct legal tests as set out in the relevant jurisprudence and  the
       decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore sustained.


K Drabu CBE
Date:     21 August 2015
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

