
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/44367/2014
                                                               IA/44370/2014
                                                               IA/44371/2014
                                                               IA/44378/2014
                                                               IA/44380/2014
                                                               IA/44383/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On the 23rd November 2015            |On 17th December 2015                 |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before:

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY


                                  Between:

                                   (1) NYA
                                   (2) BH
                                   (3) KSA
                                   (4) KEA
                                   (5) FA
                                   (6) LJ
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:    Miss Atcha (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant [NYA] had applied for Leave to  Remain  in  the  United
       Kingdom on the basis of his family and private life under Appendix FM
       of the Immigration Rules, but his  application  had  originally  been
       refused by the Respondent in a decision dated the 23rd October  2014.
       The other Appellants are dependents of [NYA],  and  were  treated  as
       dependents on his claim.

    2. [NYA] sought to appeal against the Respondent's  decision,  and  that
       appeal came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Lagunju  on  the  25th
       February 2015, with a decision promulgated on the 24th April 2014  in
       which he allowed the appeal on  Article  8  grounds  outside  of  the
       Immigration Rules in respect of the First Appellant, [NYA] and his  5
       dependents. The Respondent sought to  appeal  that  decision  to  the
       Upper Tribunal, and the Error of Law  hearing  was  heard  by  Deputy
       Judge of the Upper Tribunal Symes on the 16th October 2015.

    3. Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Symes found that the  Respondent's
       grounds of appeal against the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  decision
       were made out and the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Lagunju
       was  fairly  scant  in  its  reasoning  and   that   there   was   no
       acknowledgement that two of the children were aged 7  years  old  and
       that the children's interest was essentially treated as a trump card,
       without sufficient regard to  the  adverse  immigration  history  and
       precarious situation of both parents. It was further found  that  the
       First-tier Tribunal had relied upon findings that  the  children  had
       "friends, education and activities here" to contrast  with  what  the
       First-tier Tribunal Judge  found  would  be  "upheaval  and  possible
       negative effects [following] removal to an entirely different culture
       and country" which was said to be motivated by wholly  oral  evidence
       and unrecorded in the written decision. Deputy  Judge  of  the  Upper
       Tribunal Symes therefore simply gave directions  that  the  Appellant
       may produce further witness statements of  documentary  evidence  and
       the  Respondent  may  produce  further  documentary  evidence,   such
       material to be provided within 14 days.

    4. It was on that basis that the case came before me today.  Miss  Atcha
       on behalf of the First Appellant and his dependents informed me  that
       she had faxed through to the Tribunal last week a further  bundle  of
       documents for use at the hearing,  being  in  excess  of  140  pages.
       Although this largely replicated the  bundle  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge, it now was said that it also contained a  significant
       amount of further evidence.  However,  sadly,  that  bundle  had  not
       reached the file before me, although it  had  been  served  upon  and
       received by the Respondent.

    5. Mr Bramble on behalf of the Respondent indicated that the expectation
       had been that the case would have been retained by  Deputy  Judge  of
       the Upper Tribunal Symes, although I noted and  pointed  out  to  the
       parties that Judge Symes had indicated that the case could  be  heard
       by any Judge in his note on the file. However, Mr  Bramble  indicated
       that at the time when the case had been discussed before Judge Symes,
       at that stage he was not aware what he was  going  to  write  in  his
       error of law decision and that the decision by Judge Symes  was  very
       brief and had not mentioned within it what further approach should be
       taken, although there had been discussions about this at the original
       hearing. However, Mr Bramble accepted given  the  findings  in  Judge
       Symes' decision regarding the reasoning of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge been very scant and the findings regarding the children  having
       friends, education and activities  here,  such  as  to  outweigh  the
       public interest in removal and the upheaval and  negative  effectives
       of removal, that as Judge Symes indicated  that  these  findings  had
       been made wholly based upon oral evidence unrecorded in  the  written
       decision, that in effect a complete  rehearing,  de  novo,  would  be
       required in order to determine the proportionality issue  in  respect
       of Article 8 and it would be appropriate in  such  circumstances,  as
       the case was now proceeding before a different Judge, for the case to
       be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  de  novo  hearing
       rather than for me to conduct a substantive rehearing of the  Article
       8 issue in the Upper Tribunal.

    6. Miss Atcha on behalf of the Appellant and his dependents  agreed  and
       argued that in order to give a fair hearing and a de novo hearing  in
       the First-tier Tribunal was now required given the findings of Deputy
       Upper Tribunal Judge Symes and that the case should be remitted  back
       to the First-tier Tribunal.

    7. I agree with that submission and find that it is in the interests  of
       justice in this case for the case to be remitted back to  the  First-
       tier Tribunal to be reheard de novo before any Judge other than First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Lagunju. Given Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes'
       findings regarding the lack of reasoning and there were findings made
       upon oral evidence which was unrecorded in the  written  decision,  I
       agree that it would be necessary to conduct a complete new hearing of
       the appeal  which  would  involve  considerable  fact-finding  and  a
       reassessment of the credibility of the Appellant and  his  dependents
       and the effect that removal would have upon them.

    8. This is not a case where there can be  preserved  findings  of  fact,
       given the brief decision of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes in  the
       original Upper Tribunal decision. It would not be in the interests of
       justice to seek to rehear the case  in  its  entirety  in  the  Upper
       Tribunal, as any appeal from such findings  that  I  make  would  lie
       solely to the Court of Appeal, rather than an  appeal  to  the  Upper
       Tribunal, were the decision made at the First-tier level.  It  is  in
       the interest of justice that the appeal be remitted back to the First-
       tier Tribunal where the appeal of the Appellant  and  his  dependants
       can be properly determined afresh and a de novo hearing undertaken in
       respect of all issues, at First-tier Tribunal level.

    9. Further, given that the bundle which Miss Atcha says that  she  faxed
       through on the 18th November 2015 has not reached the  file,  I  have
       directed the Appellant to file a further copy of the bundle sought to
       be relied upon no later than 14 days before  the  date  of  any  case
       management hearing or substantive hearing, whichever is the  earlier,
       at the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

A material error of law having been found in the decision  by  Deputy  Judge
of the Upper Tribunal  Symes  on  the  16th  October  2015,  the  appeal  is
remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing de novo.

The Appellant to refile the further bundle of documents and statements  said
to have been faxed to the Tribunal on the 18th November 2015, within 7  days
of any case management hearing or further substantive hearing at the  First-
tier Tribunal, whichever date is the earlier.


Signed      Dated 23rd November 2015
[pic]
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal McGinty

